The Exposition of the Nature of the Vahana (Vehicle)

Sanaka and others said:

Please tell us about the true nature of the vehicle of Brahmanaspati.

Ganaka said:

The Lord who is composed of the four Brahmans is called Gunesha. This universe of four kinds is known to be composed of the Unmanifest Brahman. The power composed of the Unmanifest Brahman sustains the fourth state. The Self itself is the supporter of the sense of ego in the four states. That is known as Satsaura, and it itself is established in the fourth. That which holds the state of equilibrium between the body and the self is called Sama. Vishnu, composed of the Equable Brahman, is considered the Lord of worldly transactions. And the Lord, conditioned by Maya, is the ruler of the other three. And Shiva is declared to be the sustainer of the fourth state. This Guneshvara, the fourth, is the very union of all four.

He is called the Unmanifest, the bearer of the collective form. He is spoken of in the Vedas as the Unmanifest, the one who has all forms. He who is proclaimed as the Inner Ruler of all is Gunesha, possessed of a manifest form. Residing in the hearts of all embodied beings, he is the omnipotent experiencer of all enjoyments. Yet he himself is untouched by the merits and sins created by them. He is the experiencer of enjoyments like a thief; hence, he is called the Stealing Brahman. The learned know that the root mush means to steal. Thus, he, residing in the hearts of beings, experiences their enjoyments as if by stealth. Therefore, he is called Mushaka; Guneshvara is known by the name Mouse. He, composed of the four Brahmans, and the mouse is his fifth, supreme Self. For the purpose of service, it became his vehicle; hence, he is Mushakavahana. Thus, in the Vedas, Brahmanaspati is declared to be the fifth.

The horse is said to be composed of the Vedas; therefore, he became one whose vehicle is a horse. And he is called Mayamayura by those versed in the Vedas. Vishnu, composed of the reflection of Maya, became the peacock. And thus, he is described as Mayuravahana. The knower of the field, residing in the cave of the heart, and the Sun are called Sihya. Therefore, he would have a lion as his vehicle. Shesha is the son of Hari and Hara. The Lord, who is composed of Shiva and Vishnu, sustains the fourth state. Therefore, that fifth God is said to have Shesha as his vehicle. Time bears the form of an elephant; therefore, he is Gajavahana. Among all, Guneshana is the supreme, according to the authority of the Vedas. Among all the vehicles of Ganesha, the mouse is declared the supreme. Therefore, he is glorified as Mushakavaha by the seers of the Vedas.

Thus concludes the Exposition of the Nature of the Vahana.