The Exposition of the Duties of the Gānapatyas

Narada and others said:

O Lord of the Day, please tell us about the duties of the Ganapatyas with compassion.

Surya said:

The application of vermilion powder, anointing with divine red sandalwood paste, and then, in sequence, applying a mark with vermilion, fragrant red sandalwood, and red pigment. And the wearing of beads made from Shami, white Arka, or Mandara flowers, as well as wearing red clothes and the chanting of the Ganapatya mantra. The worship of Ganesha with the single six-syllabled mantra, with feeling, and also the observance of vows on the fourth lunar days. The recitation of the Atharvashirsha and the Brahmaspati Sukta, and the recitation of the hundred Upanishads, which are like the jewels among scriptures. And the study of the Puranas, and the worship performed during the monthly hearing of them, and the complete contemplation on the Vinayaka Rahasya. Once a year, the service to the deity in one's own place of residence, and once every twelve years, the service at the temple of Mayuresha. And the performance of the Brahmaspati sacrifice, homa, and yajna, and the Purashcharana of mantras, etc., to please Lord Ganesha.

In the month of Vaishakha, the worship of Siddhi, and in Ashwin, the worship of Buddhi, and on the full moon day of Ashadha, the worship of the Lord of the Ganas himself. The duties of the Ganapatyas have been proclaimed in the Ganesha Upanishads. And these duties should never be abandoned by the excellent initiates. However, for those who have not undergone initiation, there is no such strict rule. The sages have proclaimed that they receive fruit in proportion to what they perform.

Before Japa, worship, etc., after taking a ceremonial bath, the Ganapata mark should be worn, and the Ganapatas should wear a rosary. Without bathing, the circular mark made with red sandalwood should not be worn. And at the end of worship, anointing with red sandalwood paste should be done. The application of vermilion powder should be done after the ceremonial bath, and before wearing the Pundra mark, for the purpose of purifying the impure. At night before sleep, and after getting up at the Brahma Muhurta, and during worship, after offering vermilion to the deity. After that, the application of vermilion powder or the tilaka mark should be done by the Ganapatas at the six times of the day, and on equinox days.

Japa and worship should be performed as prescribed by the Vedas. Japa should be performed at the two times along with the Sandhya prayers by the best of Ganapatas. Or worship can be performed once a day, following the procedure. If one resides in a holy place, then the service should be done in the evening. In the morning, the daily visit to the temple should be performed according to the rules, and the reading of the Vinayaka Rahasya or the six Ganesha Puranas. The reading of one chapter, or listening to it, or remembering it, or its explanation should be done daily with devotion.

Ganapatas should not bow to, approach, or even look at a Shaiva ascetic who is not devoted to Ganesha or one who has taken refuge with those who are not. If seen by chance on the road, with feelings of reverence for Ganesha, he should be saluted; a king is respectable; all are to be respected as is appropriate. Superior to the Shaivas and other paths are the Smartas, without a doubt. Superior to the uninitiated are the initiated, without a doubt. Superior to the Smartas is an uninitiated Ganapata, without a doubt. And superior to those established in rituals is one well-established in devotion. Superior to that devotee is one who is engaged in worship. Superior to him is one established in knowledge. One established in the Yoga of Knowledge is the best; truly, there is no doubt. Superior to these is one endowed with initiation, according to the authority of the Vedas and Shastras. A worshipper is superior to a devotee; one established in knowledge is superior to a worshipper. Superior to him is one endowed with Yogic initiation. Superior to him is one initiated for Nirvana. Superior to him is a Yogi; thus the grades of excellence have been declared.

The initiated and the great Yogis should salute each other. Between them, Lord Ganesha, residing within, receives the salutation. An uninitiated father and mother are to be revered by initiated sons. But the excellent Japa with Sandhya should not be abandoned by an initiate. In case of incapacity, the external worship should be performed by a son or a disciple, and one should perform mental worship. Even if one is lacking strength, external worship should not be abandoned. During a period of impurity, it should be performed by a disciple, son, or a priest. Or it should be performed by a worthy Ganapata for one's own benefit. Or, after taking a ceremonial bath and wearing wet clothes, without touching the image or the Yantra, but touching an excellent Shona-shila, a brief worship should be performed; thus worship should not be abandoned. One who has taken the special initiation should perform the worship of the Shona form. The worship of the Shona form should be done with an icon of great distinction. Those endowed with the initiation of knowledge should worship the Yantra, the image, and the Shona form.

Thus, the duties of the Ganapatas have been concisely expounded. The application of vermilion powder, anointing with red sandalwood paste, and the wearing of the Ganapata rosary should not be done by the uninitiated. Other duties may be performed according to one's capacity by those without initiation.

Thus concludes the Exposition of the Duties of the Gānapatyas.