The Exposition on Ganapati's State of Being Without a Wife

Sages like Sanaka said:

Siddhi and Buddhi are the great Maya, the chaste consorts of Ganapati. Yet, some say He is without a wife. Please state the reason for this.

The Teacher said:

In the lamp of the mind, Buddhi is like the wick, having the form of the mode of existence. In that lamp, Siddhi is like the oil, just as the fire rests upon the wick. O Sages, the Atman is declared to be the excellent One, established in its own glory. The Supreme Brahman, which has manifested through the mental mode, is called Ganapati. The Ganapati Brahman is said to be that which is well-established in the mental mode within the heart, and associated with Maya externally. It is realized by the dissolution of the mental mode in the heart. By the destruction of the external Maya, that consciousness becomes of the form of Brahman. The knower of the field becomes the Jiva, which is called the Jivatman. Ishvara is called the Paramatman by the knowers of the Vedas. He is without distinction from the supreme and the individual soul, and is endowed with the union of Consciousness and Maya. The All-Witness, the Fifth, is called the direct Self. The wick and the oil of the lamp are remembered by the wise as His powers.

In the same way, O best of sages, Siddhi and Buddhi, the chaste consorts of Ganapati, are described as His powers in the divine play of His glory. Just as light and heat reside in fire, so also do they reside in Ganapati, being of the nature of the direct Self. At the beginning of creation, the Fifth Brahman, having created the four-fold universe through His mere glance upon Maya, is the conqueror of attachment to Maya. Having become devoid of activities like creation, He became the All-Witness. Ishvara is the agent of creation and is not proclaimed as the Witness. There is no doubt that He is the generator of the Jiva, Ishvara, and inert Maya. Having created them through union with Maya, He then became the Witness. Having abandoned that Maya, which had been enjoyed and was of the nature of truth, He remained established in His own glory. And that Maya assumed an inert form. Having attained manifold forms, she became the universe. Therefore, the knowers of Yoga say that He is without a wife, as He transcends and is unattached to His manifested powers.

Thus concludes the Exposition on Ganapati's State of Being Without a Wife.