92. Kuttadanta Ganapati

I think of (remember) who is known as kuttadanta who has golden complexion, the lord holding elephant goad, lasso, in his two upper hands, modaka sweet in his trunk, he who doesn’t have both his tusks on his elephant face, he is showing the gesture of wish giving and the gesture of protection with his two lower hands and also holding his tusks in the same hands.

Once there lived an ascetic female who pleased ganasha with her worship and austerity. She used to pet a female elephant since the days of her childhood. One day, that elephant reached the forests and joined the elephants and went along with them. Over time, the ascetic lady left her body as it was destined.

While she died she remembered the female elephant. (By that effect) by fate, she was born as a female elephant in her next birth. Along with the elephant herds, she reached the great place of durga. She saw goddess durga in pencance and austerity. On the sight of durga, she became violent and started to hurt goddess durga, furiated durga, slayed her head with a trident. The elephant screamed “gajanana’” and left her life.

Her soul was mounted into a celestial flying machine by the ghanas and they took her to the abode of ganesha. Goddess durga heard of the incident and happily preserved the head of the elephant, she kept it well in a place and invoked ganesha in it and started worshipping daily with great devotion. She attained the greatest of gods (mahadeva)

A child was born from her meditation. She raised the child happily. Once lord shani (the son of lord surya) came to her place (kailasha)

On insisting, shani looked at the beloved child of gauri (durga), by the effect of his sight, the child’s head shattered into pieces.

On seeing her child dead, durga becamed deeply saddened by the unfortunate incident.

Then lord Shiva came and attached the female elephant’s head (which have been praising and worshipped by durga) to the child’s body while meditating and continued chanting the one syllable mantra of ganesha with devotion. The kid raised back with elephant head. This form of Ganesha is called kutadanta Ganesha (Ganesha with the head of female elephant)

Kootadanta is the giver of wealth and fame.





