--- Page 1 ---
|
|
AN INVESTIGATION INTO THE FIFTY-SIX
VINAYAKAS IN BANARAS AND THEIR ORIGINS
Isabelle Bermijn
Thesis submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy
of the University of Londen
September 1999
Department of the Study of Religions
School of Onentai end African Studies
2 pfervifi. :

--- Page 2 ---
ProQuest Number 10731430
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TOALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction s dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
Inthe unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed.
a note will indicate the deletion
ProQuest.
ProQuest 10731430
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017). Copyright of the Dissertation s held by the Author.
All rights reserved
This work 1s protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17. United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106 - 1346

--- Page 3 ---
i
Abstract |
This thes:s invesugates a unique and hitherto unrescarched phenomenon in the sacred city af
Banaras: the filly-six Vindyakas These Vinayakas are arranged throughout te eily in seven
notional concentric cireles with eight directionally oriented unages m cach. The Vindvakas are
fully documented for the first trae: each one is photographed, drawn, described and analysed.
Textual references ave given for each and a methodoiogy is developed for dating them into four
periods over twelve centuries. The grouping :s suated within the evolution of the city, within
the reigious history of the erigins and development of Gianesa, the textual and scriptural history
of Banaras, and symbalicatly and ritually within the concept of the mandala, The Mahatmya in
which they are first described, the Kasi Khanda, is dated and analysed. The text, which
establishes the Lordship of Visvanatha, relates the religious history of Banaras chronologically
through a series of myths which simultanvously effect the cosmologisauon of [casi The
concept of the mandaia is exammed and itis found that although the Vindyakas meet all the
crileria of a physica: mandala they are not themselves a mandala. The only mandala is Kasi
itself which the Vinayakas mark out and protect. [he orngin of the Vinayakas ts investigated
ead the dynasty and ruler respoasible for their installation is putatively identilied. Because the
establishment of the Vinayakas 1s effectively the introduction of the concept of Kasi asa
complete microcosm and the beginniag af the process of its cosmologisation, the dating of the
group of Vinayakas permits the dating of a inajor chapter in the religious history of north India.
a

--- Page 4 ---
Acknowledgements

Whatever the conventions, this thesis mus: first acknowledge and salute Ganesa, my
companion and inspiration for three years. In her foreword to Courtright’s book, Ganesa> Lord
of Obstacies, Lord of Beginnings, Wendy Donegsr described her feelings about wnting a book
on Ganeéa: ‘A book about Ganega, what fan would that be!’ and fun it was, from the momeny
[ started do:ng research on Ganga. to completion, and T have nobody to acknowledges for
consoling ine ducing difficult times: there have not been any. Ti India the enterprise was
received with mach enthusiasm: and over the years many have taken a keen interest in the
progress of this research The fact that I was researching aa unknown aspect of Ganesa |
worship added an extra dimension. Over the years many people toe the role of 'Vindyakas’ by
removing the obdstactes I encountered when writiag this thesis ang when doimg fieldwork in
India. The main veason 1 enjoyed the last three years so much was because they all gave me a
wonderful time and proved (hat even when doing research une is permitted enjoyment | would
therefore like to thank everybody who, throughout, has contributed to this thesis

1 would ike to thank the following scholars in Banaras who have shared their vast
knowledge of the erty and its scerets with me. Prefessur NP. Joshi, Professor Mo N Tiwan
(Head of the Department of Arts, Banaras Hindu Universuy (BHU)), Professor Rao (Telugu
Department, BHU), Banu Shankar Mehta, A Ko Narain, Sukindey Singh and Rachana Sharma
1 would ike to thank the staffin the American Institute for Indian Studies for facilitating some
of the photos in this thesis, m particular Mr J Yadav for his kind cooperation and Dr MA
Dhaky for the interest he showed and fur our Saturday aflerneon discussions [ain also
grateful to Kedarath Vyas for his excellent guidance on the temples and shrines and for ali the
ume ie spent discussing Various aspects of the Paficakros? Yaura. Invaluable, tuo, was the
anowlcdge Professor Rana P. B. Singh shared with inc. Mauy Caanks to lum for taking me on
Wwo Pakcakros: Yatras, for the help he gave me regarc:ng the geography of the city and for
giving ine permission to use his wonderful snags imi this thesiy. For translating: a part of the
Ganesa Purana imo English, 1 would like to thank Bruce J. Graham and Devanath Tripath:
Many thanks to ali those ‘scholars-u-be" in Bariaras who provided constant cumpany and
stimulation Annika, Bruce, Corvin, Dan, Flame, Jason, Jeanne, Lorha:, Manon, Marilyn, Mia,
Signe, Tavis and Uma, Last but not least, | weuld like to express my special gratitude to Mr
Virendra Siagh, Sushila Mausi, Kashika, Annu, Suéu, Santu and their family in Jaipur for all
tae Hinds they taught me, and above all for accept: me as a daughter and sister

When rendered in Hindi, the Sanskrit pafica-hrost citer: secins to lose the 'F ef keosias well as the final iW of
pica Occastonally, (erefore, in this thesis, and especially in the Bnkhepreahy where iocears ithe tiles ef
pubbeations, will be written as paiic-kost
4

--- Page 5 ---
hh: Bombay special thanks go to Dr Devangana Desai fer the keen interest she look ut
Cie iconograpiic aspect of this thesis and for inwoducing me to many Ganega lovers in the city
such as Mr and Mrs Haridas Svah, wine shared with mec the: passion for art and Ganesa. [ also
woud like lo take this opportunity to thack all my tnends in Bombay who have deen ny
friends since the first time [came to India m 1991, especially Neha Mayumdar, without whem |
nught never have been interested 1 India or Ganesa, and whose family spoiled me whenever 1
was around. Gralitude and mary thanks also lo Kumud Aunty and Bhupat Uncle, Meenal,
Ajay and Hetal tor a:l thei atfection and fur! | would like to thank the Mathur family in Delhi !
for their hospitality, and special thanks to Copal and Dipal far sharing their knowledge of :
‘naughty’ Ganesa stories with me ;

! In London | would like to thank everyone who imide the change from India bearable |

aml enjoyable: Chris for her friendship, sharing her home and for all the support she gave ime;
Alison, for prouf-zeading, making valuable suggestiuns and lor making these years
unforgettable; Anne, for her support and the encouragen:ent throughout the last year of my
research: and Simon Brodbeck and Sian Hawthome for proofreading the whole thesis. 1 feel I
have been privileged to do research inane of the mos: dynamic and enthusiastic departments of
SOAS, many thanks to Dr Judith Ceney, the postgraduate tutor and to Maryjayne Hillman, the
evel -chifnisiasuc secretary. Many wards of gratitude must aiso go to Mr Simon Weightman,
my supervisor and ‘Remover of Obstacles’, for the ‘ilos of chocolate biscuits, the enthusiasm,
interest, and creative energy

My thanks are aiso due to the Rotary Foundation-Belgium, the British Academy and the
Trustees ef the Jordan Travel Fellowship in the Department of the Study of Religions at SOAS
for providing financial support

4

--- Page 6 ---
Table of Contents
Adstract 2
Acknowledgements 2
Table of Contents 5
Onthographical Notes 6
List of Figures 7
Introduction 8
Chapter One: Banaras and its History
Contextualising the Vindyakas Historically. 12
Chapter Two: The Ongins and Developments of Vindyaka-Ganesa AS
Chapter Three: Sources for the Study of Vindyaka-Ganesa in Banaras. 84
Chapter Four: Description of the fifty-six Vinadyakas 7
| Chapter Five: The fifty-six Vindyakas as a Mandala 175
Conclusion 204
Glossary 212
Bibhogriphy 221
An Appendix to this thesis is bourd separately for convenience of reference.
5

--- Page 7 ---
Orthographical Notes
Words, nouns as well as personal names, taken from Sanskrit, Hindi, Arabic and Persian aie
given with diacritics? However, for clarity’s sake the names of places and of rivers are given in
angueised form where appropnats. In the glossary these words appear with full: diacritics
Ungiish words derived from non-English ones, such as *Puranic’ aud ‘Brahmiamic’, are waven
without diacritics,

The differcuce between the expression of final ‘a’ in Sanskrit ard Hindi constitutes a
problem ‘or transhteration [In Sanskrit a final ‘a’ is expressed, tat is mute in Hind: Words
such as Unandala’, 'Windyaka’, ‘kunda’ and ‘Ganega’ will he spelt as in Sanskrit uniess, through
thew use in Hindi, such a speliing looks and sounds incongruous or inappropuate. For example
“ghata will be written ghat Personal names such as Kubernath and Kedamath will not be
written with a final ‘a’. No single convention is capable of handling all af the situations which
vecur in the course of this thesis without producing anomalies or absurdiies. It 1s possibie that
ke apply common sense, as is unphed in the rus above, may leave too much to discretion. If,
however, the rule is applicd consistently, as itis believed to be here, itis doublful if aay reader
wall mistake what is mtended.

All nou-Englisi terns ate given in ildlics, as are the atles of lexis referred lo. When a
non-English word is tealed eecording to the rules of English grazunar, as for example when
made plural by adding the letter ‘s') the whole word wall be iaheised even though this may
resull nva word which does not occur in the non-English language in question. However, when
tne word refers to a genre rather than a specific named text, as in the case of Purana’ oy 'Siitra,
the word :s not italicised, and ts given with an snital capital. The names of gods and persens are
ot italicised.

Pikae the use of diacritics the carventans a MeCiregar (1998 1972) xuexam) are followec
a

--- Page 8 ---
List of Figures

fig. 1. The Early History of Banaras (sixth century BCE to the Gupta period). 38
Fig. 2 From the Gupta period to the Gahadavalas 39
Fig. 3. The Deli Sultanate (ca. 1200 lo 1326 CE 40
Fip 4. The Visvanitha area, with reference to the Adi Visvanatha site

(courtesy of Rana P. 73, Singh) él
Fig. §. The Mughal period. The shrines and ghats as described

by Varadaraja (ca. 1850-1717 CE) 42
Fig. 6. The Maratha Supremacy, the Legavy of Rani Bhavani and

the Rajas of Banaras (eighteenth to ninetcenth century] 43
tig. 7 The nap of James Prinsep (1831 CE), 44
Fig 8. The fifty-six Vinayakas in the Kasi Khanda (25-126
Fig. 9. Map of the Siirya shrines in Banaras (courtesy of

Rana PB. Singh and John McKim Malville, 1995) 200
Fig. 10. Schematic representation of the fitly-six Vinayakas. 204
Fig. 11. The existing Vindyaka shrines as found today. 202
Fig. 12. Prehminary research on the location of the Vindyakas

by Rana P. B. Singh and John MeKirn Malville. 203

7

--- Page 9 ---
INTRODUCTION
AW theses are born of a burning questen, The question that has inspired and sustained: Utis
chesis iy the existence in Banaras of a group of fitty-six Ganesa-Vinayakas spread throzghout
the cily, arranged i seven notional concent circles with eight Vinayakas im each. Although
inany of the Banaras pandits knew of the fifty-six Vindyakas trom: the Kasi Khanda, the major
Mahatmya of Kasi which forns part of the Skanda Purana, only a handfui of people knew
where more than a small number of them were. Further questionmy and research svon revealed |
that they were an almost totally unstudied phenomenon. This was surprising in many ways’
auch a grouping of fifty-six Ganegas is unique in the subcontinent, the nex: largest group:ng
bem the eight Ganesas near Poona; Banaras is such: an important religious contre of sanctity,
| and Ganega 1s such an attractive deity, visib!y omnipresent throughout the city. However, so
litle seemed to be known about them that 1 was impossible initally to assess ther past and
present importance Certainly in terms of schotwship they were uncharted terrnory and the first
lasix of tlus rescarch was to ducumvat them fully |
'
Locating the Vindvakas required a familiarity wilh Banaras, a goud kaawledge of !
Hindi, guidance from guidebooks and trom local people, and considerable persistence They
were measured, photographed where possible, drawn, and their features analysed Ther cane
ane of she mozy inievalive phases of lus reseaich, winch proved m retrospect io be the key that
unfocked many of the problems regarding the Vinayakas: the construction of a methodology for
dating the images. The methodology is explained in Chapter Four which provides, for the first
ume, ful documentation of each Vinayaka. Here the kind assistance of twa senior art historians
should be acknowledged’ Professor MN Tiwan, Head of the Department af the History of
Artat Banaras Hindu University, and Dr Devangana Desai of the Bombay Asiatic Society The
range of dates trom the ninth century to the twenueth presented a particular problem. The
iconography of Garesa has been treated i scholarly literature Sut oflen only as a fing exemplar
of Indian religious art. The Vinayekas are iniages from across twelve centuries, some of whose
condition renders them almost unidentifiable and few of which attract the art histarian
aesthetically or the historian of religion iconographically. While the existing literature was of
same value, a good visual memory and visits to many museums, sites and temples across north
India provided a sound foundation for tits inzta! task.
While the findings of this imtial phase of the research provided the answers to the
queshons ‘what aad ‘where! to same extent, st became evident trom tic range of dates attributed
to the Vinayakas that the images and ther periods and locations wouid not hold the answers to
the crucial questions of ‘why’, ‘how’, ‘by wher and ‘when’ they were established. These would
&

--- Page 10 ---
have lo be found through other means. Accordingly, a thorough reexammnation was conducted
of existing scholarship relating to three areas of enquiry: Ine iustary and evolution of the city of
Banaras, the historical development of Vinayaka-Ganesa, and the literary, mythological, ritual
and icenopraphic sources relating lo Vindyaka-Ganega in Banaras Giadually there emerged & i
probable explanation fer the prescuve of Usese fifty-six Vinayakas in Banaras, the hiely date for
then establisiunent and even the most Uukely insugator af their insntutionalisation. Since,
however, the argument is based on taking a conce:ted view of the matenals from all these
different Aelds, there arose a prodlem of exposition: namely. how best to present and structure
the argument. Ideally, the centval characters, the Jifty-six, Vindyakas, should be itwoduced first,
bul to de se would raise many unanswered questuuzs at Ue outset. To avoud this if was decided
lo set the scene in three chapters which would successively describe, firstly, the historical
evolution of (ie city of Banaras im order (a contextualise the establishment of the Vinayakas, :
secondly, the various stages in the development of Vindyaks-Ganega, thus locating the fifty-six
Vinayakas in the religious history of north India; and, thirdly, the cultural sources relating to Ure
presence of Vinayaka-Ganesa ia Banaras, thus providing a mythological context. With this
material sa place, the fifly-six Vindyaxas could be ther introduced and documented as fully as
possible in Chapter Four. Chapter Five deals with the concept of the niandala in order to assess
the ritual curtext of the Vinayakes Finally, the full thesis is presented in thy Conclusion Were
the argument presented sequentially, the order of expes:non would have been self evident
Since, however, the aiguinent here depends on the simultansous presence of disparate material
tom a aunber of discrete fields, every effort has been made to idicate mm the first three
chapters which components will hve a parucular relevance to the final argument

As explained adove, the documentation of the Vinayakas 1s delaved unti) Chapter Four
because the various contexts in which the Vinayakas ae to be simated have to be exammed
first The tirst centext, the history of Banaras, has been addressed i: Chapter One. The maia
prodlems of dealing with the instory of Banaras are the bias of some of ils exponents, the
difficucty of discntangling the history of the settlement of the present city, and the enormous
vacunac mn the sources available for a reconstruction of the history Ddeth of the city and of ats
various sites aud sacted centres. The only clair to originality regarding the weatment in tiese
chapters is in its emphasis. The purgosy of hs essentially introductory chapter is to provide the
‘amewors within which an attempt can be mace to date the formation of the Vindyaka
grouping.

The second context witiun which the Vindyakas need io be cxammed 18 the: religious
lustory. The question of the origins and development of Ganesa is dealt with in Chapter Two,
making use of the considerable existing scholarship on the subject. While much of the literature
is concerned with how Ganega came io have an ciephant head, im this chapter itis net

v9
|

--- Page 11 ---
considered a major question.’ The question that warrants further investigation is how the
somewhat gloamy Vinayaka of the Manava Grhya Sita became the happy and adored Ganesa
who is inveked at the beginning of entezprises to guarantee success. Work 1s already well!
advanced in demonstrating that Vindyaka-Ganesa has borrowed some attributes trom Kubera
and became associated with Laksmi, and this thesis was in its final stages when Thapan’s Delhi
University ductorate was published and a review copy received. This excellent study,
Understanding Ganapati (Thapan 1997), reaches similar conclusions tv those reached here and
takes them further by showing that one elemert im the dynamic which propelled Cianega to
pronunuence was his adopuon as patron of trading castes and Jains. lis yraufying to have one's
avn miual conciusions confirmed and developed and, duc to Thapan's analysis, vt has been {
possibie in this chapter to add some further material on Jyestha. One of the strengths of |
Thapan’s work 1s her insistence on the way that Ganesa developed differently aad in different j
stages i various regions. This consideration becomes important later in the thesis when
seeking to identity the stage of development and the region cn question which is represented in
the concept of Vinayvaka captured in the fifty-six Vinayaka grouping in Banaras

|

The third context within which the Vinayakas need to be situated is that of the textual |
sources relating to Banaras. This 1s examined in Chapter Three, which also deals with the cult !
ef the Paiica-Vinayakas where it has been possib'e for the frst time to tink the iconography to a ;
textual source One of the major probiems for anyone working on the religious history of India i
is the daling of the Puranas. Many are dated by Rocher with a range of at least six hundred i
years and mast are composites compiled fram different texts of varying dates. Fortunately very !
‘ite vf umportance to this thesis depends on the dates cf a Purana, except the dating of the Kasi
Khagda which it has been possible to date to within at least ane hundred years. Excellent
preluninary work had been done by Eck on the various Sanskrit sources for the study of
Banas. The mia conteoulier of this chapter, however, is the analysis of the Kasi Khanda. i
Ick exanunes the Kasi Khanda in a tradiuanal and tru:tfil way cxamining its structure and how
mythology was used as the means for effecting the cosmologisation of Banaras. For example, i
sne shows how, in the Kasi Khanda, Siwagarman, whe 1s taken on a journey round the cosmos,
is told how the regnant Lords of cach foka acquired their status through having performed
severe penance and having established Hagas in Kasi. In this way each part of the cosmos is
represemed :n Kags and Kasi is responsible tor the status of the fokas. Here, attention is drawn
lo the fact that the sequential organising principle was chronology
“de seems that Kugdna sculptors m Mathura prodaces elephant-headed nages ane these were identiied as
Vinayaka Histary does rot record whether they were avade to arder as Vindyaxas or whether Brakimins idenufied
ine enages of other beings as Voviyakas. From tins parent onwards Vinay aka-Ganesa had a clgar visual ideatty and
his nvythology inivally followed his conograpky yeti! they became amerdependent ota laier stage.
10

--- Page 12 ---
Chapter Four ts entirely original since it documents, desersses and dates each of the
Vinayasas tor the first ume With regard to this chapter, for the sake of presenting the material
WW @ Manner corvenient to the reader, photographs and drawings of the Vinayakas are inevided
ia separately bound Appendix to the thesis. This pennits the text relating to cach image to be
accessed at the same time as the accompanying illustrations. It should be emphasised that the
sketches are inciuded to assist the identification of the contours and features of the photographs
and inake no claim to be perfect representauons of the statics. Because of the inclusion of an
Appendix volume translations of certain key lexts relevant to the thesis have also been t
provided. The translauon of the Vinagyaka Kalpa trom the Manava Grhya Stites is followed by
that of the Windyaka Sang trom the Yapiavalkya Smit. These are followed by summaries of
vhapters thirty-nine to fifty-five of the Kasi Khanda, ard a complete wanslation of chapters
fifly-six and fifty-seven. Chapter fifty-cight then follows in sunumary After the Kasi Khanda
these ace descriptions of the Mudgala Purana and she Ganesa Purana with translations of the
relevant chapters from the Ganesa Purina,

Chapter Five examines the question of whether the fifty-six Vindyvakas constitute a
mandala. This is in order to locate the Vindyakas ritually and symbalically, [he Kasi Khanda
does hut use the word mandala for the Vindyakas, but reters to cach of the concentric circles as
acover The theory anc characteristics of marches are examuned and the thes main criteria for
identifying @ mandala are applied to the group:ng of He Vindve‘cas. Nonetheless, for reasons
given im Uns chapier, itis argued that the Vinayakas co not themscives constilute a smadala.
Various other features concerning the Vindyakas are addressed in the final part of the chapter,
such as ticir nuniber, proximity to wate, and other Vindyakes mentioned in the Khunda and
found in Banaras, Finally the problems concerned with Dhundhiraja Vinayaka are discussed

The Cenciusion seeks to date the establishment of the grouping of the fifty-six
Vinaya‘as and io idenuly, if not the originator, ther: the dynasty responsible. Whereas Chapter
Five ullisys the inalerials presented in Chapters Three and Four, the Conclusion uses materials
presented in Chapters Ore and Two as well, Tae lack of hard historical evidence means that the
hypothesis presented 10 the Conclusion can never be proved but itis argued from the totality of
circumstantial evidence and from the climmation of unsuitable aitemmatives. If tne conclusions
reached are correct, the imphation must be that the agent of the grouping's estabushment stands
at the beginning of a process which later emerges as Une mature ritual and symbolic microcosm
that is Banazes today.

i

--- Page 13 ---
CHAPTER ONE

Banaras and its History: Contextualising the Vindyakas Historically
The fifty-six Vinayakas, the subject of this thesis, are located in Banaras * Thus chapter traces
the relevant periods in the history of Banaras which assist the contextualisation of the fitty-six
Vinayaka phenemenon. An examination of the existing histones of Banaras reveals thal
accounts are patchy, that is, they reflect the uneven coverage of the sources with regard to each
peniud. Sume works portray Banaras as an cternally unchanging cenuie of sanculy which was
periodically desecrated and destroyed during the period of ‘Toreign’ Muslim rale~ Such a
portrayal chooses to ignore that the major cenue of setdement shifted southwards and changed
preaty throughout the centuries: that the final recension of the Aasi Khanda which
encapsulates the cosmologisauon of Banaras, tock place during tne Deiht Sultanate; that
Banaras witnessed periods of revival’ as well as destruction ard that Banaras developed greatly
asa prgrenage site under the Mughals, and that many of the s:tes and even structures now held
li) great sanctity, were of Buddbist arig:in. This account will concentrate on the period prior to
1350 CE, which 1s the approxunate date for the Kas? Khanda, because :t is clear trom that text
that ths groupmg of the fifly-six Vindyakas was fully established by that ums. The later history
wall be dzait with in surmmary but, throughout, the emphasis wil be on the evolution of the city
both in terms of its settlement and its development as a sacred centre, The purpose of this
chapter 1s te provide the background necessary later in das thesis tor proposing, possible dates
fer the founding of the difty-six Vindyaka mandala

Sherring (19752) writes. The part of the cily along the ghats has no right to be called
anerent. The nerthern boundary of Banaras, 1s Uae oldest portion of the present city, while that
large extent of buildings lying south and west beyond itis chiefly of recent date’. The earliest
Waces of the history of Banaras are found on the Rajghat plateau, which is situated to the north
ef the present day city, at the confluence of the Ganga and the Varana rivers, Frem the very
lunited archaevlogival excavations in this area, itis clear that chere are four main periods inte
which the garly history can be divided: first, from $00 to $00 BCE, second, fram S00 BCE to
lo BCE , third, from 100 BCE to 200 CE; fourth, trons 200 CE until the end of the Gupta
‘ Thiowphaut the thes:s The narte Banaras wil be used bot the othe: names cf Kad?, Benaits end Virirasi. as well
as the epithets Avcuukta, Mahasmasana, Rudravasa and Ananosvane, will egcur in quotations ang elsewhere as
appropriate. The various names anc epitacts are discussed im Eex 11993 28-23). whist should be supplen ented
awit Metichand (198 5:2-6),
*Motehands Kasi ki ftfias (1985), Altchats Banaras and Samet (1947), and Sakut’s Varanasi Verbhay
CI and Vavdnasi through the Ages (1924) se woe exanrgles of tus tendency
“Ww 1808 Sherine (1975) wiete ‘The sty presertty known ae Banaras wes clnctly erected under the
Makammadan tule"

12

--- Page 14 ---
period (600 CF). Despite the Epics’ and Puranic myths tracing the history of the city and the
Kasi dynasty back centuries before Gautama Buddha, the archasological evidence available
does not predate the eighth ceatury BCE. The excavations of the first period, dated be:ween 800
and $00 BCE, show that the setement on the plateau was snainly centred on the confluence of)
the Ganga and the Varana rivers. The setlen:ent was small with no mud brick buildings and the
material evidence suggests that the inhabitants were skilled in making various types of pottery
and metal ebjects. None of the metal objects found indicate the existence of an agncultural
society This suggests that the people on the Rajghat plateau were mvolved in the manufacture
of objects and vtensils, although it 1s unlixely that they did not know some farm of agnieulnire
QOniy ane terracotta image depicting a female figure bas been found, perhaps suggestive of
terulity worship in some form: ur that these peuple worshipped ‘the moihe:" as a fertiy symbol
(B. P. Singh L988 2§4-256) The scant archacological evidence available sugees's that the
earliest settlement on the plateau was not structured according lo an urban patlern
Some h:storians, for example Motichand and Skerring, offer an elaborate version of the
Kasi dynasty based on the genealogies found in the Puranas (Motichand 1984:22-25; Sherning
j97S:inteduction), Other surveys of the Kési dynasty are included in the work of Pargiter
(1922101) and Dutt (1986 3). The vanous accounts describing the exploiis of the Kasi cynasty
suggest that this dynasty flourished between the eighth and the sixta centunes BCL. By the
lime of Gautama Buddha, however, power in the region had passed to the KRegalas (Mot.chand
1986-2¥-30}, whose capital was located in Magadha
From the sixth century BCE onwards, the lustery of Kasi is documented in the
Buddhist Jatakas which describe the Kingdom as one of the sixteen janapadas or ‘tribal
strongholds’, situated next ta Kosala and Magadba. The archacelogical remains of this second
period comeide with the foundation of these sanapadas. Important findings include a rampart
and a moat, two characteristics which define an early Indian city, thus suggesting that at the
onset of the sixth century BCE Banaras had reached some stage of urbamsation* In 1808
Sierrmg described Gis rampart, running from the Varana rtver into the Adampura area, which
he considered to be the remains of an old boundary (1978:8-11)" According to Sherring there
“the Mahabharata mentions a mbe called the Kadis and altheugh :t is possible that thee termtery was te. the
vieany of Cie Rajgnat plateaa. there is no confirmatory evadence that i was on the plateau ilsel& Tae catiest
nention of Kasi ix found in dhe Atiarva Veda in which Kasi is mentioned along with the Videtas and the Kogalas
'Dust 1956 2) In later Purdzas tac Kas's are referred to as a vibe living in che kingdom ef Kasi. ber further deta
on the mentian of KAST in ditferent Purdnas, see Pargiter (1922 11) and Monchard (.988:22-28)
>. Singh (.985.257) cedefines tz notion of ant early ladvas ety Accordag to bina ety, apt the pudde ol
tae fist cubenum BCE, was fist a centre uf political power and susequently ceveloped its economy. As
sansequence thes been argued that eo snportant characterstic of the seat of power was the presence of seme fort
of defence, Se tin the form of a city wall or @ moat Jn the case of Banazas. both are present
“This emaanxnent may have extended ta the Ganga, contewing its present dizection, but Sherrmng (1978) arters a
second kypothesis by suggesting that it may Lave formed a right angle anc extended to the Ganga by the Tilya
Nala Uf tus us the case, then the partion after the right angle te the oxtending: sidys rust have een removed ir
nicer te Make space tor the city to prow southwards. Prasep considets this adgs to be a ramiart constructed by
ia

--- Page 15 ---
are grounds for believing that part of the enty did indeed exist en a small stip of land an the
banks of the Ganga, perhaps as far as Man Mandir giat, ever: before the common era. If the
moat and the rampart were charactenstic of a capital city in ancient India then Banaras lad
reached a siage of preliminary urbamsation atan carly period. Besides the moat and the rampart,
however, there are no other structures indicating urbanisation. Although there is an inerease in
the number of artefacts found in the levels of the second pened, animal husbandry, agriculture
and hunting seem to have been the main means of subsistence The artefacts show a certain
degree of skill, suggesting that simall industries had been estabashed. Buddhist sources descrive
tae eariy Banaras of the Buddha as a signilicar centre for textiles,” cosmetics and perfume, but
there is no archacological evidence of this. Overall, the maternal evidence from tins second
period indicales economic prosperity which may have been the result of sume form of
midustrialisation or wade. Except for archacocogieal evidence indicating that the mother goddess
cuit continued, the religious life of this period is unattested by the excavations.

North-east of the city was Sarnath where the Buddha preached lis first sermon.
According to Buddhist chronicles from Sr Lanka, Banaras was already a place of great
learning by the tune of the Buddha. After his preaching in the Deer Park, Sarnath gradually
became an sn:portant centre of specifically Buddhist teaming. In the Maurya period a stiipa was
censuructed there by the emperor Asoka and around the beginning of the common era Sarnath
was renowned far its school of Buddhist art

From the downfall of the Kagi dynasty urtl the Gupta period, there are few Interary
sources reporting the specific history ef Kasi, suggesting that the kingdom had ‘ost its influence
and was mconporated in the larger empires of the Kosatas, the Sigundgas and the Mauryas
Consequently, scholars offer general reconstructions of the lustory of north India,
acknowledging that details of the city's political tustory are simply net available. The
excavations on the Ra:ghat plateau, however, show that between the second century BCE and
the Unrd century CE, which is the designated turd peried in the development of Vinayaka
iconography, the city expenenced new cultural uifluences comm tron the foreign powers who
wivaded the north of Indie. | After the decline of Banaras as 4 political power, die inhabitants
were probably concerned with improving their economic weitare, for there is evidence ef well
orgamsed trade and considerable progress in the copper and iran industries, A seal with the
the Mus.rns to attack the ony However, Shering contradicts tin: on dis posit, stating: that the cidye os fu cnore
encrent that ie Muslim peood Hayell (19s), an the other hand, completely ignores Shersng’s findings and states
dha the presevt city has hardly slufted since the eariest days. Based or the ubservutions a? sotre Greek rulers suc
as as Meypasthenes, who sacd that the Aryans love space, he argues that Cae city was very spread out
 Motichand (198S $9-60) refers to a passage ct the Kautiva Arthasasta (uans G Shasti, part 119°) wheel:
ruentsoas thet fact ‘hat Banaras was famous for its clota

Indo-Gieeks, Indo-Scythiaas, Indo-Parthians ané Kusanas avaded the noch of India and established ther nce
(Motchand 1985.89)
id

--- Page 16 ---
inscription gavayaka sreniye or the ‘Guid of Milkmen’ suggests that urban life was orgamsed
into guilds. There was also a sudden increase in luxury goods and the earliest remains of brick
houses date froin this period. There 1s evidence indicating that these houses were constructed to
pian and that the planning extended throughout the whoie city ° Excavations reveal that daring
this period the arva became densely populated
In contrast to the paucity of material evidence Som the first and the second periods, the
rehgious life of this period is reasonably well documented. Scals and terracotta figures indicate
the iniluence of Buddhist in some parts of the city. In the iatter part of this period sore seals
indicate the rise of the gad Siva. However, most of the sources reflecting the religious hte of
the city indicate that the majority of the people maintained their own religious traditions,
probably eather gaddess or fertility worship (B. P. Singh 19X8:260-263). In this context it is
interesting to compare these findings with Buddhist and Jain sources describing the rengious
life of the cily. According to these, Banaras was not known tor its Siva cult, but rather for the
worship of yaksas and nagas. However, the Mahamdydri (trans) 1 évi 1905), a treatise giving a
list of the existing yaksas, classifies Siva as a yaksa and mentions trait in Banaras the worship :
uf the yaksa Mahdkala was widespread. ‘The Jatakas give abundant evidence of a yaksa cult in i
Banaras" and, based on the excavation of yaksa statues, scholars dave suggested that the yaksa i
pija was present until the Sunga period (180-73 BCE). The evidence in the Jatakas is |
sl.pperted by Jain ltcrature which cescnbes three yakgay celled Cand: Tidung, Mambhadra and {
Punyabhadra (Motichand 198%:32-33; V. S. Agarwala 1960;198-201). The detailed story of j
the yaksa Harikesa in the Mafsya Purana suggests the early presence of such a cult in Banaras.
bok bas argued that the yaksas were autochthonous deities worshipped near trees and ponds
41993:54-54) but, if this worship were autochthonous, 1 should have survived on the Rajghat
Matean and no evidence pots to this The presence of yaksas in the Buddhist and the Jan |
literature suggests rather that the worship of yaksas was unported oy the Buddhists at an carly \
alage of Buddhisin. H
The fourth and last period excavated at Raighai covers the Gupta penod, extending tron:
lag fourth to the seventh centunes CE, Contrary to the general belief that the Gupta period
witnessed a declue ia urbanism bat was still a golden period for the arts, iiterature and
sciences, the Rajghal findings prove that there was na such decliae on the plateau On the
contrary, everything indicates that the cily experienced a period ef unsurpassed prosperity.
Nowhere else in northern India have excavations uncovered such a large number of residences,
with vast underpround structures beleved to be storage space fur grain. This has ved sche‘ars to
suggest that the city became an important trade centre. An interesting finding is a seal reading
Houses were burt un rows and wete separated by 2 lane ar an open space Sturdy foundations show that Oe
Lanabilams of the oxty took the construction of tit: Louses very seously (B. P Singh 198-261-262)
Stok (993.54).
15

--- Page 17 ---
Varapasv-Manvaka-srem or the (Guild of the Foresters of Varanasi which suggests thal, valside
the chy. the woods and foresis were being farmed and cut Other seals and smal! terracotta
figurines reveal that the Saiva cull and Buddaism had both gamed induence + Representations
of Visnu are notably absent. However, son:e of the Vaisnava symbols, sucit as the conch and
the cakra, are depicted on seals implying that the Visnu cult had some support. The rise of
Visnu, $:va and other gads 11: the north of India 1s described in detail by Eck (£992:60-79) and
need not be repeated here
A separate group of seals were those issued by a college ar an educational instinitian,
which was probably associated with a shrine. These seals are the first epigraphic evidence of
the signiticance of Banaras as a centre ef learning. The Clunese traveiler Fa Huan alludes to this
in his travel accounts of the sixth century BCE. In the evocative portrayal drawn up by Eck
(1993°S5), sages and rss were well represented in the ‘Forest of Bliss’. The importance of
Banaras as an educational centre certainly grew during the Buddhist period but was in no sense
| restricted to those of Buddhist persuasion. There must have been Vedie schoals and inaduas
where Bratumins and asccuics organised Chemscives in order to preserve aud spread their rituals, ‘
beiiefs and philosophies. The growth of Banaras as 2 tittha suould therefore bz considered as
having been encouraged Sy the existence of a widespread network of cducational institutions
preserving Vedic and Brahmanic traditions.
The lnnited excavations on the Rajghat plateau nevertheless provide invaluable
information concerning Banaras They prove that the earliest settlements developed into a
Nourishing city on the plateau They alsy zeveal that, parallel with the decline in political power,
there was am mercase 1n economic prosperity. This in tort gave rise to au urban centre known
for its trade and education in whick new religious movements such as Saivisrs, Vaisnavism and
Buddhism flourished alongside the existing mode of worship. The seals reveasing the existence
of guiids suggest not only that the population was centred on the platean but that there must
have been seitlements, some of considevable size, in what was called the ‘Forest of Bliss’
(Anandavanay However, except for Sherring (1975;291} ne olher schular has addressed the
obvious question: when and by whom was the Anandavana sctled? It is clear irom Sherring's
findigs that there were substantial Buddhist bu:ldings in the Anandavana from an early penod
These buldings, seme of which were wharas. must have comained a large populanon. The
other major cenue of Buddhist population was at Sarnath. In addition to the Buddhists in the
Anandavana there must have heen other ascetics, teachers and schools. Itis also known, as we
have seen above, that there were a nuniber of guild-specitic villages south of the Rajghat
plateau . The growth of the trthas must have also enceuraged further settlement out the maim
“Teas generally believed that the majonty of tie religious seals was sued iy a shore and cistnduted ameng
dev oices
16

--- Page 18 ---
shift in population was net to vecur unul the cily un the Raighat plateau was overthrown by the
Muslims in 1194 CE.

Whale it may seen that this account of the early history of Banaras has litle bearing on
the later presence of Wmayaka-Ganesa in the city, the Kass Khanda suggests otherwise
According to the mythology of this work, itis precisey the religious situation outlined i the
account above that leads to Siva sending, Vindyaka-Ganega to Banaras. The early predominance
of Buddhism in Banaras, it will be argued, is represented in the Kas: Khanda by the rule of
vurtuous Kung Divadisa. Vindyaka-Ganesa is sent to Banaras by Siva to remove Divodisa, that
Is to say, the religious rule of Buddhism, after the failure of his previous emissaries. Only when
Vindyaka-Ganega succeeds is Siva able to return to his beloved city. This early iustory, at least
onthe eyes of authors of the Kasi Khanda, is the reasan for the presence af Vinayaka-Ganesa
wit the exty.

After the collapse of the Gupta empire, northern India came under the control of various
Hindu kingdoms, The absence of any reference to the city in the political records of that cariy
medieval period suggest that Banaras did not play a significant vole in the politics of the area. A
detailed description of Banaras ‘s given by the Chinese pilgrim Huien Tsiang, however, who
wavelied through the city in the middle of the seventh century. This account provides more
information about the city and its social life

The kingdom of P'o-lo-ni-sse (Varanasi, Banaras] is about four thousand its
[six hundred and seventy-seven miles] in circunt To the west near the Cranges, is the
capital, which is from eighteen to nineteen fs Mthree and a hai wales] long, and from
five to sin dy fabout one mile) broad. The villages lie very ngar together, and contain a
numerous population, Familics of very great wealth, whose houses are stored with
rare and precious things are to be seen. The people ae gentle and polished, and
esteem ost Inubiy men given lo study, The greater portion of thent believe in the
heretical documes and few revere the Law of tie Buddha. The climate is temperate,
grain is abundant, the fruit trees ars luxuriant, and tie earth is covered with tufted
veyelation, There are tirty Buddhist monasteries, containing three thousand devotees,
who all study the principles of the schoal Tching liang pou [the scheol of the
Saramatiyas]

There are a hundred semples of the gods, and about ten thousand heretics,
who, for the most part, worship the god Ta-Tseu-Thsai [Mahesvara]. Some cut af!
the hau, others reserve a at upon the crown of the head, go naked, and are destitute
of any kind of clothing {the Nirgranthas]. Some besmeer their bodies with ashes and
gea.ously prachse severe austerities, in order to odtain release from lite and death.

7

--- Page 19 ---
In the capita! there are Owenty temples of the gods. Towers of many storeys
are scen there; and magnificent chapels, constructed of stone, ssilfully carved, and of
nich painted wood, Umbragcous trees cover them with their shade and streams of
clear water flow in all direcuoas. The statue of the god in brass is lithe less than a
hundred fect in height. Its aspect is grave and majestic; and, at the sight ef it, one is
Aled with respectful awe, as if were, indeed, alive. *

Ifuien Tsiang's account appears to separate the ‘capital’, by which he must mean the city
on the Rajghat plateau, from the Anandavana which he says contains villages and a large
population. * He refers to thirty Buddhist monasteries but does not jocate them, although it 1s
veasonable lo suppose that the majorly were at Sarnath, with the remainder in the Anandavana
itself. It is also clear from his account that Buddhism was, if anyding, on the decline 1 Banaras
ard Saivzsm in the ascendant. He numbers twenty temples in the capital, that is to say. on Lie
Ravghat plateau, and no tess than a hundred temples in the Anandavana. While he does not
specify the size of these temples, and doubtless some must have beer sinall shrines, he paints
an overall picture of considerable deveiopnrent within the sacred area

A century later Banaras was described by Pantha, a pi'gram who visrted the city and
vstadushed a Devi image there. The account of Pantha corresponds in many ways with the
previous one: there are descriptions of the greenery in the city, the beauty of the wonten and the H
lively lanes. Pantha’s observations contribute to the city’s history for he is the first to describe :
the Devi cult. He states that he himself established an image of Bhavani, called Candi, The i
unage was a fierce Devi wita a neckiace oF skulls, snakes hanging down from her threat and
pieces ef flesh on her axe. The visit of Pantha took place curing the time when Tantrism rese to
prominence, thus explaming the papuianty of Bhavan. Pantha’s account alsa confirms that the
city had become a place tor devout Hincus to obtain moksa (Sahni in EL TX 1°8:59-62; Eek
1993-80). In none of the materials relating to Banaras examined so far is there any mention of
Vinayaka-Ganesa, This is unsurprising, however, when considered in the light of the evelution
af the deity described in the next chapter.

Yor four consecutive centuries the city cid not play ary significant role in the palitical
history oF norll: India ancl power over Banaras changed hands continuously. From the death of
Hazsa in 64? CE unul the Pala emperor Dharmapala (770-810 Cl) conquered vast parts of
‘Translated fom the French of Mo Stamsles Juien by Sherriag £1978.366, sppendix B) The same acceunt aise
ascurs in Beal (1963:44-48) and cn Watters (1905-46-47)

“In dealing with the eatly medieval period, Eck has restricted herself ta a short patagzaph. (stead of making the
chatinchon between the capital city located on the Rayphat plateau and the rest of the area, she considers Ue
descrtrun oF the vapral as the deseriplion of the Anundavana, since she later wanders whether the deva. status
ser: by Hs:en Tsiamg is Adi ViSvandtca (19932132). By consicermg He eecusnt of Hsien Tsang as a tclection of
Inecelypous hfe nthe Arandavana, aowever, she contradicts her earier romantic vision at which sac states that
the Asuadusana was a Jush and green pace, fl! of asenmas and henmitages (1993.29)

Is

--- Page 20 ---
north India and established his rule in Kanauj, litte :s cnown. Whether or not Banaras was
inchuged i Dharimapala's domnuons is disputed for Altekar (1947) argues that Banaras was
merely used as an snvampment fur the anes. Rastraktita revords reveal iat Dharmapala was
defeated by the Pratthara king, Vatsaraja, who ascended the throne in 778 CI. The victory of
the Pratharas marks the beginning of a tnangular stuggle between the Pratiharas * in the north
and west of India, the Rastakutas in the Deccan and the Palas in Bengal.* Whereas the
authonty of Vatsara’a seems to have been limited to Rayputana for most of his reign, Ins son,
Nagabhata IT (809-833 C15," expanded the terzitory and established Kanauj as the capital of
lus domain A struggle between the Rastrakitus, led by Govind IU, and the Pratiharas, circa
809-820 CE resulted 12 a loss of termtory which curbed the impyna! aimnbiuiens of the Pratldras
for same time. However, with Bhoja the grandson of Nagabhata, ascending the throne a new
era was ushered in™, The epigraphic matena! for this period celebrates the victories of Bhoja
over neizhdouring enemics such as the Rastrakiitas and the Palas. In the west of the terntery,
however, he had to deal with the revolt of the Pratihdras of Jodapur, a family branch who
claimed independence “ Bhoya managed to bring them under Ais authority again, though not for
long.* Because of the intemal weaknesses of the Palas and the Raswakiitas, he was able to
conquer virtually the whale of north India and hes fame was known even lo Arab historians.
Bhoja probably died around 885 CE and was succeeded by Mahendrapale about whom

little is known Mahendrapala had two sons, Bhoja Tl and Vindyakapala, but the succession to
lhe throne 1s not clear as there 1s some doubt whether Bhora [I ever ruled. One inscription states
Wat a son, Malupala, ruled between 914 and 917 CE, according ta another inscription,
Vinayakapala ruled in 931 CE; and a durd record names Ksiupala as the ruler (Maiumdar
1964:33}). Majumdar has argued that Vindyakapala, Mainpala ard Ksitipala are names for one
ruler, who in addition to these three names was also Known as Herambapala. However, Ray
(1928:220-234) argues that Bhoya I] was also knowa as Mahipala and Ksvupaia The
discussion concerning the names does nut elucidate the succession of Makendrapala as there 1s
“The Pratihasis were founded by the Briamnana Harécandra in Racputana and tegether web other Guréra clans
taey set up bile pimeipantes in Rayputuca and Gayarat Por move details on the Pratharas, ste Majumdar 11964}
Heder (928%; Jain (1943-1985): N Rey (2928) and D. Skarm:a (1943-2944)

a though the srugele for power ketween tie Réstrekstas, Pritibsras and Pélas naught not seenr to be cies tly
related to the history of Banaras, 3 provides tie Instorico-polica! backyrounsd fora pessible date fer the Vinayaka
gree an Hanaras

"The date fo: Nagabinata’s ascension tu the tieng is disputed and enclear. In aus aztigle on the Guryara-Pranitarss,
Menuindat ives 825 CE as the possible date bit elsewhers (1964.27) he suggests that Napadhata fougal a wat
agamist the Rasuaxutas in $09-$10 CLE which would .cad one conclude that the actual reign of Nayadhata stared
aetore 809 CE

" Nagabhata was succeeded by Ins san, Ramabhadia, but his skort reign of kes years was anremarkale. His
sev Bheya ascenced the tazone in 835 CE

“ftwas Kakkuka, the cule of the Jodhpur beach of tre Prating:as, who established toe Ghatyala pillar in 861+
862 CE en winel: tere was an anage of four Vinyakas This pillar is referred to again Chapter Two aud en te
Conelusen,

* During the reign af Rmabbadza, the Pratiharas of Jodhpur, wha had long been vader the authority of the
Pizstinares of Karauy, caine uvto prominence ant probably gained mdepencence Ong of the Jodhpur Pratiha:as
named Kakka accompemed Nagabhata 1 on ais exped:tion apasnst the Palas of Bengal

19

--- Page 21 ---
aconsiderable gap between the dates of the inscr:ptions of Bhoya (917 Ck) and Vindyakapala
(931 CE)

A land-grant made by Vinayakapala is of interest here because it shows that Banaras
was part of the Pratihdra kingdom which suetched ftom Banaras in the cast to Saurashtra in the
west In the grant Vindyakapala makes a donation of a village autside Banaras to a Brahmin.*
The name of tis ruler indicates that by the tenth century CE Vindvaka must have acquired
sigmficant status amongst tne gods, otherwise his name wauid not have been used by a king.”
Apart from this land grant issued by Vindyaxapala, there 1s other evidence indicating that
Banaras formed part of the vast Pratihéra kingdom. A ninth-cenlury Pahea-Vindyaka panel
found near the Laksim kuada in Banaras is sad vo have come frem a Pratihara temple
Sirnilarly, a lemh-century representation of the Pafica-Vindyakas found on a small replica
cemple is also dated to the Pratihaza period

Although often overloaked, the art of the Guryara-Prathdzas is one of the highhghts of
the post-Gupta period. Because little 1s known of the dyaasty’s carly architecture and sculpture
between 550 and 750 CE, it seems as if the art appeared fully developed (Huntington
1985-482). A study of their art which depicts a fuli-bedied and fleshy iconorraphy, reveals that
it provided a transition between post-Gupia and medieval dynastic art, combining the Gupta
idoms ofnorla India with the western Indian art uf the Martraka and other dynasties and the art
ofthe Vakatakas in tie Deccan (Trivedi 1989:3, Huntington 1985:452) Much of Pratihara art
and architecture was desttoyed but numerous inscriptions indicate considcrabis patronage of
temples * The epigraphic recard attests that not anly kings but also people from other sections
of socicly crected temples.” From around the middie of tre eighth century, paficayatana temples
3 Maranidar (964-34) argues that the omiss:or ef Bhora Hin the 831 CE inscription coule be the result of a
commen prachee ni which the king's Cescent cs tried pack in direct line only However. fran the avticles by Hall
and Peet {see sntia) itis knows: that Bhoya us mentioned in ie grant, alkeu as the brother of Vinayasapadle,

Le land grant of Virayakapala ss desenbed by Hall (1862.5) and Veet (186.1 48-241). Whereas Hall states
wan the village. Tikkatixa. was siguted on the other side of the Ganga, Fleet argues Git there ts ne sush pice
Howes, (60 miles south of Banaras and on he same stds of the river, tere vs a village called Trice Phe fet
nes of the lancig) art state that the place of issue was Mahodaya (Kana.j) ‘Lhereatter follows a pasental genealogy:
which mentions Mahenciapuladesa but also Bbovadeva, woe us sad to have been a worshipper of Visnu
Vurdyakapila is sed te be a werslupper of the Sun Taereafter “allows the coatent af the grant which is donated by
Viaayuhapala to increase the nent of the religious acusviies of his parents
8 :

Ja dus conleat tis inleresting to note Gata study uf the nme Ganapati io the Deccan ls been conducted by
Miclay (1972) He finds taat the name of Ganapag as the ate fora sing, did not oceur befere the eiphtl: century
Rastrakuta recotds show two suck names while a third name .s Herantbeka, waich cs also an eenthet of Garesa
During the Yadava period (twel@th to durteenth century) the nurtaer of Ganega epithets in names increased. Ir
Guiarat, on the othe: and, tie: 1s ne record of a namic wath Ganesa ot Ganapati unt the thiicenth century.
© Krisana (1989 32) stutes that the majonty of inscuptions ot the Pratihdias were made mm order to record
sonetens to terples, Brahmins and monssterics. The fact dat the Prathdra peed was a pened af relative peace
mas have centibuted to they attentian to act and religion
* sGishng (1989.34-36) provides aa overview of patrons cegaged in teriple balding, Among them ate seme of
the feudatones of the Prothara kings as wel as meicharis and Brabaurs.

20

--- Page 22 ---
were constructed all over the Prathara empire,” suggesting the ecunemsm of the Prathara

rulers and the significance af the pafcdyatana paya” The existence of these temp‘es not only

indicates that the pija was supported by the Pratihara rulers, it also proves that Vindyaka-

GaneSa had gained such importance that he needed tv be inclided.” The numerous statues of :
Vinayaxa-Ganesa found in the Pratihara periad evidence the extent of lis worship. The

sculptures of Ganesa can be classified in Wo groups: dsana (seated) and nrtya (dancing)

stalues."" Vindiyaka-Ganega is one cf the most frecuently encountered gods, carved in the

atches of the Pranhara temples and in Saivite temples occupying the traditional southern niche

(Srivedi 1990.41). A survey of Pratinara remains in Banaras is urgently needed and would

undoubtedly reveal the considerable intlucnce of the Pratiharas in the develapment of the city

With the decline of Prauhara pewer in the iniddle of the tenth century, the Kalacuris
occame the domizant dynasty m north India? They were known as atdent worshippers of
Siva, and various Kalacuri kings made very large Gonations to Saivite mathas and sects In the
begining of the cleventh century, Vikramaditya. also known as Gingeyadeva, ascended the
threng and he is said to have expanded the empire from: fis capital Prayag (Allahabad), where
he died in 1041 CE. Vikramaditya's son Kamadeva 1s said to nave moved the capital tom
Prayag to Banaras where he constructed a temple known as the Karnameru temple The ruins of
this temple have been excavated north of the K2Si railway staton (R. K. Sharma 1980 29).""
Interestingly the only reference found to this temple is in the Kalacuri records (Hirarlal
1928:294)

Because the cily of Banaras did not play an important role in the political lustery of the
pre-Gahadavala period, its Instory is often portrayed as marginal to the general history of early
medieval north India, As a result the evolution of the city as a maior pilgrimage centre is often
forgotten. [tis known from literary and epigraphic sources that by the time the Galadavaias
“The put ryatana temples were constructed accerd:’p to a siatdars! plan wrk: the cemial garda prfia sur: ounded
by four subsidiary shines. The Deogark tempie at which Durga was the main dey os ore ef me earher and
suapler forms whereas the [an-Hare tempke in Oscan is an exanple of an claboruc pattcaystisa tempt
tMuntagtan [985:457-459).

The cupins al this puja are 2 sudject for Jebate Bahnemann (1988) and Kane (1968-74) are of the cpimor
thay the pupacav which fe five pancipal deities (Seva, Visau, Devs, Strya aad Ganesa) ate worshioped, ongurted
Jeng before the medicva. penod and was. probagly already wrlespierd at tbe cme of Sausanicarya Pathak
(1987.58! on the otter hand believes that die putt is a phonamenen of the eleventh century. bur das is. clearly
wreng.
¥ Altaough the general pattem ter the put is Siva, Vistu, Devs, Surya and Ganesa, Mere cre some variations
Somes nes Ganesa ‘s replaced by Braluns, Gras investing: that some sGll believed that Bethura was mere weportant
w the incu pantheon. Another vaatier ts the replacement’ of Sdrya by Brahma fay the sane reasons.
“The nuaber of dancing Vinayaka statues fom the Prat.haza period fevers that they were particclariy fvource
A dave:ny Ganess cin have up to siawen hands, although on the earlier phase ef the au be wes represented with
only Avo or four hands (Kitshna 1989-1 89-160}
“Sane Salacuos under the leadership of Koxkaia Chad euler invades: Praiara tersiery but a deal seems to have
been mids in whieh it was agreed Ct the Kalscutis weuid no loner attacs the Pratriras (Ganguly 1964:87-92),
“Var firther cnfo.n:ation on this peried see Huarlal (19283, Ro K Sharma (19863 ane RoC Majumda:
904 ING

Pal

q

--- Page 23 ---
came inte power un the beginoing of the twelfth century, Banaras had become the most sacred
pigrimage place in India, attracting pilgrims from all corners of the subcantinent. In the seventh
century Kasi ranked third among the drthas of India, behind Prayag, which was called the
Tirtha Raja, and Gaya, known for its sanctity concerming the sraddha riuals By the tenth
ventury Banaras had taken over from Allahabad as the foremost Grtha of India and was mainly
known as the ideal place from which (a obtait salvation after death. Various Puranic sources
describe the city’s greatness as the Avimuxla Asetra, thereby indicating that there was 2
disunction between the centre of power located on the Rajghat plateau aad the sacred terntury
krewn as Avimukta, Varanasi or Kas:. The Patdla Khanda of the Padma Purana (Rocher
2986:207-210) as quoted in the Tristhalisetu (verse one hundred) and the firthaprakasa (verse
one hundred and seventy-five) describes the Varanasi kseta@ as having its muddle point in
Madhyamesvara, with a radius stretching lo Dehali Vinayaka in the west" At the eastern
border is the Ganga mver. Another descnipuon of the ksetra found in the Afatsya Purana
(184:50-52) refers to the kseta being two and a half yoranas from east lo west and halla
yojana from north to south. Ibis alse said that Varanasi extended as far as the dry rivulet of the

Assi in te south. Another verse of the same Purana (1%3:61-62) states that the ksctra is ony
two veyanas in length, a reference which is taken up by the Agar Purana (112:6). A version of
the Langa Purana (Purvardha 92, 99-100) as quoted in the Tristhafiscty (103) declares that the
kscbais four Arosas in the four diteclions and ong yoyana in extent: However, Kane states that
there is ne unanimity about the actual distance covered by a voyana. Quoung Rhys David
(1968-74, volume III: 145-!46) he gives the approximate length as seven or eight miles to a
yoyana, These various sources mdicate that the religious centre ef Banaras, known as asi,
Avinukta or Varanasi, probably existed between the Asst and the Varana river and extended in
the west up to Dehali Vinayaka. This comesponds with the present sacred territory * It should
be noted, however, that today the Kasi ksetra is the largest whereas the Varanast and the
Avimukta ksetras actually denote smatiler areas.”

The Muslim invasions of 1194 CE not only destroved the city an the Raighat plateau, it
also had far reaching consequences for the Avanukta cult. Seals from tne Ralghat plateau show
that Avimuktesvara existed from as early as the fifth or sixth century, when he was worshipped
“ta the introduction ta the Krnakaipatans, Atyargar provides a shost everview of the importance ef Kasi as a
fatta Although itarly bearne fineous as a imajor fife the seventh century, records ef an earher date mentor,
Kasi asc pece to. Vedic worl: and pilynmages The authou believes that the Pardnas were wetter to prcmotc
the Siva cult and that they cantnibuted ta the wider appeal of <8. Fran: the tnd: century onwards, the cily was,
gconfied im south Indian works ferats supremacy among the dthas (Aiyangay (942 Ixvi)

“Dehaa Vinayaka os situated an ty outer erche af the Vindyakas and is cansidgied the keepe: of the wester gate
te the sacted ony In the tie when te pilprims care yverland, Dchall Vindyaka was the first deity te winch the
piigis had to pay konamage
©The sacied terntary is the area encircled by the Paheakross Yatra, a pilgnmage circumamydulating the sacred
terttory af Kasi Later in this thesis more details wil be provided about this prynmaye toule whieh cacludes:
several of the fitty-six Vindyakas, A scholar who published # great aurnber ef artckes and books an this santos
Rana P.B. Singh
Bo . : 365.36

Fora fill account of the present situation see Eck (1993-appendis 11359-3537)

22

--- Page 24 ---
together with PithakeSvara."* Hight seals ranging {rem the fifth to the eleventh century indicate
that his shrine must have existed for six hundred vears. The Jabala Upanisad descrives
Avimukia as situated between the Varana and the Assi (GL, as in Olivelle 1992:142), The
earliest epigrapnic reference to his existence is found on the inseripuon of Pantha in the eighth
comury (B.D 1X:60) while the Armaresvara tenpic insenption af the eleventh century
clniivraws tt as one of the five great Magas, the others bemg Kedara, Orikaresvara,
Arnaresvara and Mahakala (Pathak 1987:1 73-174). The significance of this shrine ts also
shown by the tact that the Gahadavalas issued grants afer bathing in the Avimukia drtha. The
reference in the Jabala Upanisad supports the view that the Avimukta temple was actually
situated in the sacred teritory, between the Varana and the Assi. ‘The question about its exact
lecation remains unanswered however, for the central attraciion of this verse is not the locauen
of the Avimukta shrine but the denotation of Avimukta as the place where Siva whispers the
satarudriya manta in the vars of the dying (Olivelle 1992:141-143)." In the sixth century
) Dasakumaracat na (Kale $966:84), Arhapala, having bathed in the Mamkamika firtha, gocs to
Kasi where he worships Avimukta, This quotation places Avimukta in the vicinity of
Mamkarmika. The Liaga Purana quoted oy Laksmidhara inentions Avirmukta as being situated
north of the liana Vapi (Ketyakalpatara, Virthavivecana Khanda pages 109-110)" These three
sources suupest that Avimukte must have been somewhere in the neighbourhood of its present
lecation in the Visvanatha tempic
In seeking to identify the dynasty most Like:y to fave been responsible for the grouping |
of the fifty-six Vindyakas, two candidates have so far declared themselves: the Pratharas and
the Kaiacuris. Tu Use nvo must now be added a thie, Use Gahadavalas In the Gahadavala
period (1090-1194 CE), the city on the Rayghat plateau again became a centre of political
power. The power vacuum caused by the deaths of Bhoja ef the Paramaras and Kamadeva of
tre Kalacuris provided the opportunity for Candradeva to establish his sovereignty over north:
India (Nivogi 1959:18).* Although there has been some discussion as te whether Candradeva
belonged to the vara of the Asatrivas (Ganguly 1933:952), evidence in the form of copper
plates and cnscriptions shows that he was a ‘ruc leader and a protector of Hinduism (EL
XIV-192;, Sur 2929-92; Ray 1931:506). His son did not leave behind any inscriptions, thus
“in, the Rasghat area seals of seven difercet gods and ther: temples are feard Pishaxesvara :s the earliest, porn
back to che Gl century CE when he was depicted logether with Avimuktesvara From, hes represcutation it can 3c
dzcucec that thew shrines were combined and that Pithakesvara was the mast important of the two After the Gupts
period, however, this deity cost prestige aad Avimukta tese to prommence Pathak (1957 171-172) believes thar a
teference to a Pitkakesvara daga cn the Langa Parana as quoted by | aksmidhara supports tie connection benveen
ca : sdiinabiya is a chyna coptamng the hundred aames uf Rudsa, upon aceemy whieh the eying person
achteves salvation (Ohvelle 1992 143)
los mentioned that sauth of Awmuktesvara there os a sacred sap well) [is sad that -f someone dns tus
wate. three figes wil. spring up in bes heart (Sukul 1973-138)
“to the enly existing nonog:api on the Gahadavala dynasty Roma Niyogt ies utuased Ie snsen pions :n stuar
ans of copper plates published in Fpcpraphica Indica
23

--- Page 25 ---
leading some scholars to conclude that he was litte more than a nominal ruler (Vaidya
1979:213-214}. The most glorious of the Gihadavala dynasty was the third inthe line,
Govindacandra (1114-1155 CE), who is sai¢ to have sent iis elephants ‘in the three directions’
(Vaidya 1979:211-212) and who was referred to as the conqueror of ‘the three kingdoms!
Gowever, itis difficult to establish which kingdoms are being referred to. Besides being a
brant statesman, Govindacandra alse acquired the title sarvavidvavicaravacaspati or ij
‘spokesman for the reflection upon all knowledge’ (Niyogi 1959:230) Under his reign, his
preme minister, Laxsmidhara, composed the Vyavahdra Krtvakalpataru, a large treatise on
dharma, which is soll considered a masterpisce among the Dharmasistras, The forty-two grants
which were issued during Goviadacandra's reign form an invaluable source of information
about the holy city. Although the capital of the Gahadavalas was situated on the Rayghat
plateau, the var:ous locations mentioned in the grants refer to frthas in the south of the capita:
and on the site of the present Banaras. The majority of the inscriptions issted im this: tine
shows a preference towards Varsnavism, although Saivism and Sun worsiip are also
represented

The son of Govindacandra, Vijayacandra (1158-1169 CE), tived most of his fife in his
fataer's shadew and not much is known of hum today except that he appears to have been
succesiul in warding off Mustim attacks (Majumdar 1962 volume V:54, H.C. Ray 19317536)
He was succeeded by his son, Jayacandra (1170-1193 CE). At that time the kmgdom included
the Gaya district, the Doab and Banaras, Allahabad and Patna (Ray 1931:541). Around 1°30
CE the Gahadavalas came into conthet with the Sena dynasty who expanded their territory
lowards the west. The Senas claim to have concuered Banaras but [is cannot be verified. By
the year 1186 CE the poitica! situation in the north of India had changed; the Yamini dynasty,
long considered a buffer against Musiim attacxs, had been conquered and lie eastern Punjab
was open to Muslim invaders. In 1191 CE the Karnal region came uncer attack and the
Cahamanas lost their kingdom. After conquering Delhi, Mutizawd-Din Muharunad Ghuri
advanced towards Banaras. In the year 1193 CE doth armies snet in a fierce battle and
Jayacandra was killed. Aliegedly his head was presented to Muhammad Ghiri Thereafter the
Mushins proceeded tu Banaras which they sacked completely

Tt has been mentioned that Govindacandra fought the Muslims. Some scholars have
argued tat it was mere.y raiding parties he dealt with,” whereas others believe he encountered
the Muslin in his campaigns towards the west of the country. One Muslim account describes
the attack of Malis Afzal Alavi (Motichand 1985:117, Sukul 1974/4) on Banares in which the
* The mast important pahtical achievement at Govindacandra is the fact tat se fought battles ayainst the Mushis
an war. Broo? of Ins victory :s attested i several inscr.pbons. Metichard. however, rightly questions the ze of
these Muslin attacks, as there 1s no record of thers in the Musiirtchtemicles He bebeves drat they were mere cacds
iMouchard 48S") 165

24

--- Page 26 ---
army did not pet further than the present Kasi railway station. After this attack a group of
Mushy aliegediy settled in an area which is stil calied Alavipura and is in the north of the
present city. The story relates how these Muslims became loyal to the Gahadavaia kings and
established twe settlements bearing the names of two kings, Madanpura, nowadays just south
of the Das&$vainedha area and Govindapura (Sukul 1974:4) ;

The Gihadavala pezlud was a glorivus ent: whereas ponucal power was firmly
gslablished on the Rajghat plateau, the southern part of Banaras confirmed its position as the
first and foremost drtha of India The Gahadavala rilers were ardent patrons of culture and
religion, as is shown from their grants lo Brahunns ” Although the majority of the grants were
issued from villages around the capital, some of the inscriptions enable us lo recenstruc? the
tirthas iv the Anandavana. The Qrthas of Varanasi which are mentioned are. Adi KeSava,
Kapala Mocana ghat, Vedesvara situated in the Avimukta Asctra, Krtuvasa, Loiarxa and the
Koti urtha. Available epigraphic material also indicates that the sacred place of the Avimukta
Ksvtra was never referred to as Kasi, butas Avimukta ot Varanasi, The Tirthavivecana Khanda
of the Krtyakalpataru by Laksmidhara supports this since there :s only one reference to Kasi in
the whole volume. The Krtyakalpataru of Laksimidhara is conclusive proof of the Ganadavalas'
patronage of cducation and scholarship.

The years 1193 and £194 Cle mark a turning point in the history of north India as vast
parts of this area were brought under Muslim control. Fer five centuries it would stay under
ther ruie. The Muslim history of north India is well documented and need not be rehearsed
here. The foflowing description therefore puts the emphasis on the evolution of Banaras under
vonsccutive Muslim governments, In the past too many historians have fecused an the
destruction of the rel:gion and culture of Banaras, thereby ignormg the fact that during these
live hundred years there were many periods in which Banaras flourished again as the main
dilyr:mage centre of India. In sketching the evolution of the cry, alention wil be paid to these
penods of revival.

In describing the sack of Banaras in 1194 CE, the Muslim chronicles tell uf the vast
riches being hauled away from the capital on the Rajghat plateau by the armies of Qutbu'd-Din
Athak (Elliot volume 11209; Niyop: 1959:193-194). owas dunng Uns rad that same of the
major lemples souta of the capital were destroyed “ Although no source has descnbed the
destruchion of the Avimukta temple, the sudden decline of Avimektesvara after the first Muslim
© \ Geuvled description of the all the grants issued by the Gahadevalas is given by Ray £1931)

Trey include the Hindu tex:ple at the Bakatiya Atsnuét. the Kamameru temple situated at the contiucnce of the
Ganga avd tio Varana, a Visnu temple which was canverted later inte the Arhaiya Kangura moscuc. the
Kettvigessaia temple which becare the Alamgir mosqae, a ceanple sear the Cauk ares row knew as
Caukbambha mosque and the Ac: Visvanatha temale. Eavept for the Katnamere teupic dail by Kama of the
Kalacunt dynasty i: the cleventin century, all the other temples which were destroyed by the Muslims were in fact
converted Buddhist strictures, as shown by Soerrang (1975 208-321)

25

--- Page 27 ---
raids suggest that Ins temple was also sacked. After the raid a govemor called Shahad Jamalirc-
Din was left behind to govern the occupied area. He founded the present Jamali'd-Din mohaila
an the north of the present city. The effects of these raids must have been traumatic for We
reugious life of the city, and the Rayghat plateau and the area immediately suuth of the plateau
were probably im ruins because people fram taose places must nave fled and settled further
south, #loug the ghdts and im the Cauk area. In the north of tae city, Adampura and Chaitpura
were already sina.] Muslim settlements and new Muslim innnuigrants settled there. Three years
after the first attack, Qutbu'd-Din returned to sack she city a secand tine.

The successor of Qutbu'd-Din, Iuutmish (1210-1236 CE), placed Banaras under the
supervision of his vassals, the Ghuliém Sultans, who allegedly constructed the Arhalya
Kangura mosque (Motichand 1988-181), Despite the image of Itutmish as an intolerant despot.
Montichand tinds evicence fora large Conauion by a Gujarat setha for the reconstruction of the
Vigvandtha temple during this period (1985:182).* More evidence of a religious revival dure
these limes is found in an inscription, now 11a musque ut Jaunpur, dated 1296 Ch. A tlagment

of the inscription reads thata Padmesvara temple was constructed al (he gate of the Visvanatha

| iemple, thus confirming that m 1296 CE there was a Visvendtha temple (Pathak 1957:174,;
Lillhrer 1969:59) but no information concerming ts location 1s given. After the Gaulam rulers
lost power over the city, Banaras fell into the hands of Ghiyaza'd-Din Balban who ruled from
1266 CE to 1287 CE. Nothing is known about his rule, except that a ceitun Jalale'd-Din
Ahmad was appointed as the subedar tor the region, and jg establisned a mohatla there wm his
own name. Until the year 1320 CLE, the beginning of the Tughliig dynasty, Cieze are no suurces
for the political history of the city, The inscription of 1296 CE, however, suggests thal during
the reign af the Kha‘jis (1290 to 1320 CE) the city witnessed no remarkable upheava!. Apart
from the construction of a Padmesvara temple” and a new Visvanatha temple, 1 has also been
suggested that in 1302 CE (1359 vkram samvat) a Manikarnesvata temple was constructed in
the Mamkannka tirtha. The presence ef these three [:ndu sires clearly indicates that: the
preseat Visvanitha area was the maui site fer temple construchen. The establisiunent of yet
another Muslim snefalta indicaies that Muslin settlement in the north of the city was further
extended,

In the context of this study of the fifty-six Vindyaxas and the reference to them in the
Kis)’ Khanda, :t 1s necessary to examine in some delail the euesuon of the sudder
disappearance of Avimuktedvara and the rise ta power of Visvandtlia, for the entire Kas?
Khandais a glonfication of Siva as Vigvanatha and bis entourags. It should be noted here that
“Fhe Gupuatt sethe called Vastupala donated one kiki for tis recensinictoa of the Visvanatha comple
‘Prabancia Kosa, volume 1132, as in Moticiand 1985:182;
™ Pek (993.134) gives 1383. CE as the date for the constuction uf the Padinesvara temple, but Uhis is in fact tbe
date in vidas samvar, thus placing the date at 1296 CE.

26

--- Page 28 ---
the position of Vigvandtha is also of importance for the later analysis of the fifty-six Vinayakas,
and more specifically, the position of the mast important Vinayaka, Dhundhiraja, who is
currently slationed at the entrance of the alley leading to the Visvanath temple. Furthermore in
the Kasi Khanda (see supra) the position of tus Dhundin Vinayaka at the mght hand of
Visvandlaa is meationed, thereby suggesting Uiat Diundhi Vindyaka' s shrine is in the viciuty
of Visvanatha’ s finga. Seals excavated on the Rajghat plateau show that up to the Ovelfth
cemury Avimuktesvara was the most important deity of Banaras (Pathak 1957-174) The
curstion as to where this Avimukta shrine was situated has been discussed earlier and it ca: be
assumed that, based on references in the Dasakumaracarita (Kale 1966:84) and the Jabala
Upantsad (1101, as in Olivelle 1992:142), his temple was somewhere between the Asst and
the Varana, probably in the vicinity of the Mankarnisd tirtha. The prestige of Avimukia was
farther enhanced by the references in the lwellth-century treatise, Kriyakalpataru, and by the
tact that in the same work Visvanatha was ne more than an ordinary dinga (Aryangat
1942 Ixxiit),” There is evidence that the Vigvanatha temple was destroyed during the Muslin
raids of 1194 CE and, although no sources deseribing the desiruction of the Avimuktesvara
hnga ave found, there is no doubt that this temple was also demolished, which could then be
considered as tae most likely expianation for the sudden dechne of Avimuktesvara's status. The
Jaunpur iuscription of 1296 CE and the culogy of Vigvandtha in the Kasi Khanda. which was
provably composed somewhere between 1250 and 1380 CE. sugges: the rise to prominence of
Une Visvanatha dinga

Various scholars have discussed the exact location of Unis temple at length throughout
the history of Banaras Fxcept for Altckar,* most agree that the Adi Viévanatha temple was
originaily situated at the placs where the Raziyya'd-Dia mosque stands today. As carly as the
Tirthavavecana Khanda, the position af Vigvanatha 1s suggested by the verse. ‘lo the north-east
of Visvesvara is the Avadhate tirtha (KKT:93). Suku) has pomted out that this tirtha extended
as far as the Laypat Rai Road where the Raziyya mosque ts situated, The Adi Visvanatha temple
was knocked down by the armies of Qutbu'd-Din Aibak in 1194 CT) and the ruins must have
renamed untouched because between 1236 and 1240 CL Raziyva'd-Din constructed her small
mosque from the debris of the temple on shat site. Although its destruction does not seem
unusual in the context of the Muslim raids, the question needs to be asked why the shrine ef an
lasignificant fiiga was singled out for destruction ‘This quesuon is answered by Sherring,
whose study of Buddhist remains im the city of Banaras reveals ata significant number of the
carly mosques were built frum the ruins of Buddlust swuctures which, afer the deciine of
Buddhism in the area, aad been converied into [indy temples. The Caukhamba mosaus. for
* Of the three references ta Vidvedvara, ane 1s probably at: mterpolaton, another one refers to Siva as ‘Lord of the
Lamverse and the third reference isto an ordinary nga Aryangar (9a2:Iyxuc}
“ Alichar believes that the Adi Visvanatha temple stvod somewhere ese onginaily defore bemg moved cous
present locaton reat the Raztyye masque. ‘The present Adi Visvaratia tecile was constucted rm the expbtecnth
semucy bya Re, put prince (Sukel 1970.7 28)

27

--- Page 29 ---
imsiance, shows four styles: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain and Muslim In the case of the Adi
Visvanatha mosque, Sherrmg argues that the orginal construction was probably a Buddhist
monastery. The use of these Buddhist structures, most of them of cansiderable size, by Hindus
provides the answer to why they were destroyed. Because of their size they attracted the
attention of thy Muslun soldiers who were primarily interested in looting. Supporting this
theory Is the existence of the Vrddhakaiesvara temple which is the only surviving Hindu temple
of the welfh century and was not originally a Buddlust construction. {ts smal! size and modest
[ealures did not attract the attention of the Musiims althougi it is situated near the Krttivasa
temple in the Matsyedari arca
The second nalf of the Uurwenth to the first hal? of the fourteenth century was clearly a
period of revival in Banaras. The Padmesvara temple, which, according to the inscription, 1s
built at the gate of the Visvanatha temple (Fiikrer 1969:59), shows that by 1296 CIE a new
Viévanatia temple had been constructed with a large donation trom a Gujarati seta. ‘The exact
location of this new Vigvanatha temp:e is not known but in the context of later reconstructions
of fhe temple in the same area, thas hiely that it was also rebut near dhe ongmal site. The
constraction of the Manixarnike$vara temple (1302 CE)* further supports the theory that there
was a period of tolerance. Although the date of the compasition of the Kasi Khanda wili be
discussed tater if should be noted here that it was in this era of vevival that the Mahatma was
most likely to have been written, By the fifteenth century the status of Visvauatha was such ‘hat
he had completely eclipsed Avimukta. Evidence of this is found in the Tirthacintamani written
by Vacaspan Magra (TC:360; Aiyangar 1942). In his digest Misra assumed thal Avimukta and
Visvanatha were both different names for ane and the sance fiiga, as did Narayana Bhatta in the
sixteenth century
Despite anew wave of utolerance during the Tughleg reign,” the Vividhatirtha , a work
of the Jain dedrya Jinaprabha S:ni, provides further inlonnatien about the lopography of the
city (Vijaya Jina 1931, Motichand 1988:186). Jinaprabna Suri vised the cuy in the first half of
the fourteenth century.” Accerding to him the eily was divided into four parts: Deva Banaras,
Raydhar: Banaras, Madan Banaras and Vijaya Banaras Although the text does not provide any
detuled infonnation as to where these four divisions were situated, the text states that Deva
Banaras was located around the Visvanatha mandir Raydhan Banaras probably indicated the
area which was considered the centre of the Muslim rulers, thus defintely including Adampura
and Chavpura (alse written as Jaitpura). The third part is called Madanpure. Motchand argues
™ The construction of tte Marikarnes+aca temple couresponds with the seyptof AAR ud Din Kaahi
™ hove Shia Tughlag, the thie sulta: converted tre sums of the Hindn teriple at the Baxanya ud coo a
neadescupl muse (Motichane 198$.187), thas demonstratuig le tre Hinds populeGor aus religious zeal This.
event allegedly took place in 1376 CE.
“No defimte slate has been established ror the visit of Jinaprabha Stirs Hewever it:s knows that tie wrote tis.
ware ers Oe rags cf Mekammad Tughkic whe rulec from: 1322 to 1S) Cr fFrédene L987, Motchané
28

--- Page 30 ---
shat stis unlixely thal the Madanpuze mentioned here is the present muhalla and believes it could :
be a reference to an area outside the city, namely Ghazipur. When, in the sixteenth century,
Babur set up camp outside Ghazipur he referred lo tits place as Madan Varanast (Mouchand
19K5..86). Locating the fourth area, Vijaya Banaras, is another problem. Because Mirzapur at
that ume was also called Vijayagarh, Motichand considers tins as 2 passibility. Motichand's
crgument concenung Madanpura and Vijaypura is unconvincing. The cities of Ghazipur and
Mirzapur are respectively about seventy and sixty Kilometres away from Banaras, which means
that Jinaprabha Stiri was describing a very large area. The inclusion of Ghazipur and Mirzapur
in Its account seems implausible because these two cities were of no importance for the Jains
whereas Banaras was. It therefore seems more plausible to take Madanpura as referring to the
present’ Madanpura mehalla which even im the fourteenth century had been inhabited by
Miusizms tor two centuries.

The locanon of Vijayapura remains unknown. Did it mdicate another part of the city
conquered by the Muslims, as the word vyaya suggests, or should viyaya here be interpreted
from tie standpoimt of Ja:msm, thus indicating an area which was important for the Jain
community? Clearly the city af Banaras had some importance for Jains because, according to
the Jain Srutis, the seventh and the thirteernta Jcnas were born there and Jnaprabha Suri refers
to the Pargvanatha temple, a Jain shrme, although ke gives neo lacatioa fort. A Jain temple with
the same namie is today situated in Bheiupura. This Parsvanatha temple is also mentioned by the
Jain snerchant Bandrsidas im his biography, Ardhakatha,*, written 1641 CE, but there 1s no
evidence that the temples are one and the same It could be that the temple mentioned in the
fourteenth century was later destroyed and reconstructed by the time Bandrsidas visited the
siting. I the temple was located in what is new the Bhelupura area itis possible that, because
ofits location, the temple was never touched by the Muslim armies. [11s therefore reasonable to
curclude that Vaaya Banaras was a relerence lo tae present Bhelupura area.” The text of
Jmaprabha Seri 1s thus a valuable indicator of the cry environs in the cary fourteenth century
There were large Muslim communities living :n the narth of the city, in the present areas of
Adarmpura and Jaitpura and also south of the Dasasvainedha area in Madanpara. Although the
extent of Deva Banaras is vot precisely known there 1s reason to believe that it stre:ched along
the Ganga trom Trilocana to Dagagvamedha ghat and imwards as far as the Cauk area. The
fourth part, Vijaya Varanasi, was passibly the present Bhelupura ares.”

* Ardhakatha of ‘Half a Take’ is the oly Keown bregnapbica: work a: TLad: tion the Miaghal period Tt was
waiten Sy the Jaci merchant Bandssidas waen ae was fifly-tive years old, in 164i, the ceyday of the Mughal
enyste The suthor’s vivid accourts paint a picture of daily hfe in the tne of the Mughals. Desp:te his rane,
Bararsicdis did not live in Banaras anc be visited the city only once (Mukurd Lath 1980)

lo 183. wher Prinsep conducted a survey of the aumocr of temples in the diffsrent aohales, one handied and
vitty-four temples were counted for the Hhelupura area, making f the third largest area for teinpies in vic city (B
Verma 1935.44),
“ Mikough not sivictly relevant, lis mteresting thet the palace of the Mahataya uf Banaras m Bhelupwa is called
Viezyanayar Bhavan.

29

--- Page 31 ---
Durning Tughlug rue, the smal! independent Shargi dynasty gamed contol ever the
Banaras and the Jaunpur area. Although they are descuined by Eck as iconoclastic, there is
some evidence of their tolerance towards Hindus (Sa'eed 1972195) The jast Sharqi ruler was
defeated by Buhlal of the Lodi dynasty who brought the temmory again under the authority of
the Delhi Sultanate. Sikander Leci, the eldest sen of Bubltl, céeclared himself rucer over die
Banaras area by dethroning his brother. Le raided the city and its temples and it cs said that ater
Isis raids no teniple stuod erect (Motichand 1985:185). Givea the turbulence of the vears of the
Deliu Sultanate itis possible that Muslim social and religious allitudes were a significant factor
in the rise of wrguna religion among the lower castes

The battle of Panipat in 1526 CL marked the beginning of the Mughal period in india.
In tre first years of their rule, Babur, the first Mughal, gradeally conquered the north of India.
In $529 be inarched to Banaras and to Cunar where there 1s @ fart occupying a strategic position
over the Ganga, Because of the strategic position of Banaras on the river Babur made the city
an impertant commercial centre. Humayin, Bab.'s successor, could not maintain the vast
lepacy of Ins father and the territory was under constant atlack. Deving dus period Sher Khan,
an Alghan ruler, descended on die region and took hold of tke fort at Cunar but he never set
foot in Banaras itself. In $56 CL Akbar ascended the Mughal throne. Having conquered most
of north India, he then focused on the welfare of his subjects and opened up the vast Mughal
adnumistration to Himdus, Many of his generals were recruited from the ranks of the Raéputs.

Although the Mughal period is weil documented, litte is cnewn about religious lite in
Banaras. Narayana Baatta who lived througa most of the svecenth century provides an account
ofacity in ruins However, the very fact that Banaras was chosen as a siguificant comunercial
centre suggests that (ie eily Nourished at least un an economic level. In the Fristhalisetu (verse
two hundred and eight) Narayana Bhata comments or lie sitvation of religious file at the
beginning of the sixteenth century. One passage states thal ever the Visvanatha finga ts taken
away, the place where 1. used to be should be worshipped, thus indicating: that in the lifetime of
Narayana Bhatta the Vigvanadtha temple was not only destroyed, but the finga was alsa
removed.” This comment reflects the situation of the Jale fouricenth and fifteenth century. The
Lodis had lett the city in ruins and the policy of religious intolerance was maintained under the
first two rulers of the Mughal dynasty, Babur and Humayiin. There is evidenes, however, 17
the writings of Narayana Bhatta, that there was a period of revival in the middle of the sixteenth
comliny (T. P. Verma 1984:200; Lick 1993:134). For most of his life Bhalla experienced the

“Laen ifthe ing of Vidvesvara here os taken off somewhere and ccother is brought uv and estadlished by

ued hands. on the account of the dilficulty of the tases, wiateve; is coteblished in tit place should bs

warsaipped...And tf, oven to the pews: of forsgm riers, there iste Eagan all ns that place, even se, the obarint .

of Laat place itself should be observed, with the rites of cireuanaaanon, salataten ete, and cn thes way die daly

pilgrimage shall be performed’ (Eck 1993-134, quoting from the Tisthabsetu) .
30 |

--- Page 32 ---
hardships of be:ng a Bralumin living under Muslim domination but towards the end of his life
the revival period began [tis said that Bhatta actually persuaded the Hindu general Todar Mal
to reconstruct the Viévanatha temple around the year 1585 Ck although some scholars believe
shat it was Todar Mal's son Gobardan who reconstructed the temple (Motichand 1988:193,;
Vyas 1987:289-290), The new Visvanatha tempie was constrected on yet another site, but
nearoy the old site. IU was a huge building consisting of a garbha grha surrounded by eight
pavilions (T. P. Verma 1984:201). and was built on the spot where the Aurangzeb mosque is
presently situated near to the Jfiana Vapi. Axbar's reign was a period af prosperity which not
anly witnessed the reconstruction of the Visvanatha temple, but also saw the construction of
many other religious shrines. Ln 1$89 CE the Draupadi kdpa (lucated in the Sivapura arcay was
sonstucted by Govind Das on the order of Akbar, Following Todar Ma‘'s example, other
Rajput gencrais and vassals Hinanced the construction of buildings er ghats. Raja Man Singh
trom Jaipur laid the foundation ter Man Mandir ghat and for the palace at the top of the ghat
| Today this palace is one of the few pre-Aurangzcd buildings remaining. In 1611 CE the Raja of
Bundi, Suriana Singh, built a palace and a ghat. Construction in a climate of religious tolcrance
continued under the rule of Axbar’s son Jahangir.” In 1627 CE the Jaana Vapi well was
restored by the queen of Gwalior, Baila Bare (R. PB. Singh 1993311, Motichand 1988 197).

Both Eck and Metichand refer to the accounts of some of the European travellers who
passed through Banaras during their stay in Ind:a, These descriptions through westem cyes
provide us with a broader view of the religious life and topogzaphy of the city. The first account
is by a British traveller, Ralph Fitch, who described Life on the ghats at dawn. From the
slesenmption given by Fitch 103s clear tat the stone ghdfy were not yet constructed whereas the
Mushins lived im well-made quarters outside the cit, thus suggesting that the Mushin:
neighbourhoods were not withm the sacred Hindu area. Considering the division of Banaras
given by Jinaprabha Stiri, the reference to “the outside of the e:ty’ probably indicates the north of
the ccty, earher cailed “Raydhani Banaras’ (Monchand 1988:201, Eck 1993 10-11) It as
uvtcresting that Fitch, travelling in 1884 CE, does not mention any important large temple or
shrine, thus suggesting that at the me of lis journey the city still lay in rums.

Akbar's grandson, Shah Jahan, ignored the policy of tolerance of Ins father and
grandfather and opted for strict Muslim mule. Eck remarks that he gave the arder to demolish ne
less than seventy-six newly constructed temples in Banaras (1993.83). Motichand adds to this
that when the zmperor learnt that not all were destroyed he went over to the city and personally
saw that ail were ‘properly’ demolisned (Mouchand 1985°209) However, the construction of
the Pisacamocana kunda by Gopai Shahu in 1630 CE indicates that the wave of terror did not
““ fa the history of the rule ef Jahangir. the name ef Banaras was venioned on!y once. “aus indicating that the cry
wes of ao urporseice to the emperos and Gat the holy centre of the Hindus was not considend to be a tireat
Islan {Motchand 1985 198)

--- Page 33 ---
lut Banaras in the first years of Shih Jahan s reign. There 1s aise some condusion with regard to
the demolition of the seventy-six teinpies attrbuted to Shah Jahan Shah Jahan’s sun,
Aurangzeb, was even more zeaious than his father, and he is credited with the demolition of the
city's greatest temples such as the Viévanatha temple, the Kritivasa and the Bindu Madhava
cemple. (tis difficult to understand how these three very important temples could still be left
standing for Aurangzeb to destroy if the story about Shab Jahan is accurate. It cauld be that the
story concerning Shah Jahtin was exaggerated” or that the authors of the Muslim chronicles
were indulging in competive iconuclasm. .
Invaiuable for the reconstruction of the topography ol the city in the beginning of the
seventeenth century is the work of Varadaraja (who is cated between 1600 and 1660 CE)
enulled Girvana pada mafjari (Gode 19412193, Motichand !988:202-203). The text, a record ef
the life of Bhattoy1, ists some of the ghaes and mohallas of Banaras. Bhattoj1 18 said to have had
a house on Kedara ghat, Further in the text Varadaraia refers to ather houses of Brahmins Dut
Gode suggests that itis possib:e that the names of the Brakmuns are fictitious aad merely
| provide the excuse to list the different quarters in the city.* This work describes some
mleresting features of the city in the carly seventeenth century, particularly from the point of
view of the present study of Vinayakas in the city. Starting ‘rom the north and going towards
the south of the city, it seems that there was a ghar called Siddiu Vindyaka ghar, thus indicating
that this Vinayaka had acquired a considerate reputation, espec.aily given that the famous
Mamkarmka ghat is nowhere mentioned. The text also mentions the name of ‘Dugdiia
Vinayaka' as Ue name of one of the mohallas, thus providing evidence that in the severteenth
century Didh Vindyaka had acquired snough sta:us for a whole mohalla to be named after him.
Apart from the text of Varadaraja, there are also the wave! accounts of the French
uaveliers Tavernier and Bermier who visited the city together in 1665. They write of the
reigious life af Banaras in the middle of the seventeenth century ” White Bernier mainly wrote
about the imteilectual life in the city, Taverner pives a picture of life along the nver and the
“A comntesandzeatien of tehgroas toleraace cuneg the reign of Skah Jahzo 1s provided by Kana? Bo Singk who
otguca that tae Vern Machave temple way restored on 164d CF (1992 V1}
The following places are refered oom the text) Rajehatts, ‘Tslocena, Bevin, Durnk, Bmdumdclava
Mangaiggauz, Raina, Agnisvara, Nagesvara, Viregvara, S.ddh: Vanayaka ghana, Svargadvara _ pradesa.
Moxsadvara pradeta, Gangakesavapatva, larasangia. Viddhadstya, Samedvan, Ramesvara, Lolarka, Assi saga,
Varuna singe, Lexsou sage on Bindemachava phat, Gange$vaia on Bindumadhava ghat, Ad:kesavesvata on
Bradumadhava ghaf, Daksesvara, Dugdba Vinayaka, Kala Bhairava, Datasvamedba Catust! Yog:ni sizt,
Sarvesvaca ghat, Marsaravesvara, Adi Visvanathesvara, Kedaresvara (Cede 1941-1931 Umakanth Shak JO 1B,
rats 2. 2,5. 4and 7)} Mutchand provides more information on the present location of the sites and mentions thst
the Adi Visvanatha temple which is cefetred to is the Vigvanitha temple of Raonandie ghat: situated on
Tur iamachava ghat. However, Motichaad Goes net give any reference and ro Raymanc:: was found in ofer
works dealing with the glats of the temples of Banaras /Meouchand 1985 202-203)
“Rare Po3 Singh, however, states Cat Taveruer visited the city croand 1680 CE and tiat the visit of Berner
wast: p60. CE (1993 311) Motchand dates the vist of Taverner to 1665 CE whie Bere: would have visited
the ety wn 1660 CE However, a footnote the book by Bermer sukeates thal both mcr were together -n Banaras
ta .605, on the eleventh to the thurtzenth ot December (Beiziee (891 WW)
32

--- Page 34 ---
‘grcat pagoda’. The ‘pagoda’ mentioned by Tavernier is the Bindumadhava temple as is clear
fram the account in which Bindumadhava is rererred to as “Basnmadou' having 'Garou' as his
velucle. Besides the great temple, Tavernier aise describes a cullege adjoining the temple and
erected by Raja Jai Singh (of Jaipur). On the other side of the street in which the college is
situated was another pagoda for the god ‘Richourdas' who had a brother called 'Gopaldas' (Bail
1889 volume 1237} Who exactly Richourdas and Gopaldas were remains a mystery.
Gopaldas could be a reference to Krsna. Tavermer also describes a pilar situated ina Muslim
graveyard in the north-west of the city, probably the Lai Bhairava pillar (Ball 1889 vo:mne
1119, Fek 1993:196-197), Both the accounts of Bermer ard Taverner suggest that, despite the
policy of intolerance attributed lo Shah Jahan, life im the holy city c:d not seen to be much
disturbed and intellectual activity continued. From the work of Varadaraja and Tavernier it cau
be concluded that the river tront up to Kedara ghat was wel!-developed. Aithough nene of the
stone ghits had been constructed, some af the princes, all vassals of the Mughals, had built
palaces anc had made provisions for pilgrims fram their segion. She present situation, in whice
sone ghdts are connected with ummugrants fiom specific places, probably originated at tus
tune
Tue rien of Aurangzeb (1659-1707 Ch) is genetally considered to be the imast
destructive period in the histery of the holy city, Eek (1993-84) even states that: "There is no
major rehgious surctuary in all Banaras thet predates the ume af Aurangzeb in the seventeenth
century’. However, from the writings of Bermer and Taverner il is quite clear that the wave of)
desttuctier. did not set in unt! a later period of Aurangzeb's reign. The main reason may have
been that early in his reign he was preoccupied with the rebellious activiues of the Marithas in
the Deccan During the carly period of his reiga it seems that the Krttivasa temple, situated near
the present Alamgin mosque, Was reconstructed and, also in Banaras, Dara Sukoh made use of
the assistance of pandits froin Banaras to translate some of the Upanisads (K. Verma 1992:14-
Is) They also assisted him in a work on the temples of Banaras wiiel, accord:ng to Verma,
was later used by Aurangzed as the guide for which temples had to be destroyed Even under
Aurangzeb's government, the Rajput aristocracy played an umportant role in the religious hig of
Banaras as shown from an account about Maharind Raiasingh, who in 1665 CE performed an
ehiborate pajd in the Visvanatha temple (Verne 1992)
© er ge bualding sim the form ot a crass, axe all ether pagodas, haviag ils tour arms eqs In the muddle a lofty
dome nses ike a kind of tower witty many sides, which termunates ea part, and at the end af each am of the
closs another tower rises, whick can be ascended from veloide. Before aching Ci lop you mest several deleomes
aid many niches. which project to uvervept the fresh au. and al over the tower tere are figures m ighet ot tie
seccous nds uf animals, which ate redeiy executed Under this preat dome, and exactly m the naddle of the
pagoda, tare cs an altar ake a xind of lable, of seven to sight fect mm lent and five to 91x tect wide, with two steps
w. the front, which serve as a foctstoo.’ (Ball 1889 11222), Bail, editing te book of Tavernier, explaes that
Bairazadou' must be a reference to ‘Bhin Mahadeva’, a combination of names for Siva (289 232, feamate 1)
while (Garoa’ passisly stood Zor ‘gau’ or ‘cow’ (1889:233 feotnote 4) However. it :s more akcly that Bammadot*
18 a reierence to Bindumadhava. whose temple was at the ghat
33

--- Page 35 ---
When the armies of Aurangzeb invaded the city, they destrayed some of the most
Important temples: Krttwasa, Omkara, Mahadeva, Madhyamesvara, Visvesvara, Bindu
Miachava and Kala Bhairava between the years 1669 and 1673 CE. As Eck (1993:84) nightly
suggests, ‘same of them never recovered, ike the Krtivasa temple, others went into hiding, like
(he guardian deity Kala Bhairava. Likewise, te Visnu image of Bindumadhava, whose site was
usurped by a luge Musqus, Was moved toa nearby house’ Although Eck is correct regarding
the scate of the destruction which wok place under Aurangzeb, Sen (1912 269-273) has argued
that it was Aurangze> who issued a directive that the Brakmins should not be harassed and that
thei places of worship shoud nov de interfered with. Bayly (1981:163) has argued that cities
hike Banaras and Gaya probably benefited om the political unification of the Mughal empire in

Ube sense that it provided the pilgrims with safe travel." An example which certamly supports
this argument is the biography of Banirs:das, in which the author, a Jain merchant, deserihes
bis many journeys through the north of India (Mukund Lath 1981). The list: ef temples
demolished by the Muslims in the seventeenth century enables @ reconstruction of the
topography of the main city in that era. 1f1s noteworthy that not one of the temples was situated
south oF Visvanatha, thus suggesting that the religigus centre of the city was then mainly
around the present Cauk area.

The modem history of Banaras, trom the demuse af the Mughal empire te the present
day, has been theroughly examined by a number of scholars fein se variety of viewpoints
Notable amongst these ere Bayly (1993), Cohn (1960, 1962 and 197), Frestag (1989),
Lutgendorf (1991), Mishra (1975), Kumar (1988) and Parry (1994) to attempt to summarise
thew findings kere would be redundant. The city usclf witnessed the same revival,
resonsuuction and even re-inventoa that eccurred im most of north India. ft particular, people
with new found wealth sought outlets for paronage, both as a means of religious expression
and a’so as legitimation and vatorisation. The remainder of this chapter will now concentrate on
the consequences ef this patronage.

For centunes the Maharashtrians had maintained extensive links with Banaras.
Aithough Altekar's statement that modern Banazas is largely the creation of the Marathas 1s
certainly exaggerated, it does contain some truth, because, with the decline of Mughal pewer,
ihe Marathas were amongst the first to attempt to revive the religious hfe of the haly city. Trey
were the main financiers of the construction of ghdts along the nver front (Bayly 19932137,
Freitas 19925, K. Po Moshra 197S:antroduction; Motichand 1983:277 and following)” and
they were the first to construct dharmasalas for pilgrims (Qanungo !960°122). In 1807 the
* Bayly C1987 163) arpues that the Moyhul empire bad x direct interest nthe promotion of mobility between the
varous regtens of Indhaas it derived @ substantal revenue tens trace and came to .evy a charge on the pulgrains
atending thy tual centees

For a dctuled survey of all the whats of Banaras, sce Har-shankar's Kast ke Gikit which prov.des a sarves. of all
the graces and ther history
ae

--- Page 36 ---
i

Peéva Aimrt Rao commnssioned the building of Raja ghat, the most southerly of the ghdats
constructed by the Marathes In 1812 a minister of the Raja of Nagpur constructed the
Darbhanga ghat and the palace adjacent to it. In the same year he cummissioned the
consiraction of the adjoining Munshi gaat. Norta of Munshi ghdtis Alalya ghat constructed on
the orders of Ahilya, the queen of Holkar in 1785." Queen Abiya Bhai, together with the
vuleys of Indore, he!yed finance the construction of Sali ghat Because of its sanctity,
Dasasvamedha ghat was one of the carhest ghats to be rendered in stone. The work was started
wo 1735 by Bajirao Pesva who also arranged for the embellishment of the main cremation phat
in 1730. Bhonsia ghat was constructed in 1798 on the orders of the Maharaja oF Bhonsla. In
tais peuod the Marathi: community also constructed what is today one of their most impartant
temples, the Ganesga temple, wiih houses the statue of the coral Ganesa, at Ganega pirat,
formerly known as Agnisvara ghat (Sheshadr: 192835). Shyehuy further te the narth is
Trilocana ghét, ons of the five most sacred ghafs of Banaras, which was rendered in stone in '
1740 by Narayana Diksit (larishankar 1996:37-87, R. P. B. Singk 1993:67-101). The Pesvas
also financed the construction of many temples within the city itself of which the Bade Ganesa :
temple in the Kabircauta is one (Newell 19168, Parker 1895:26). They were also responsible |
fer the construction of the important shrine of Saksi Vinadyaka. It was Queen Ahilya of Holkar
who w. $777 sponsored the construction of the present Visvanatha temple, situated beside tig
stig of the demolished mosque (K. Verma 1992:23-24, Eck 1993:120)

In addition lo the Marathas there were other princely states and royal families who took
a keen interest :u the reconsiniction of the hely city. One Rajput princess who proved te be aa
entastastic sponsor Was the Bengal! Raul Bhavani, who lived in Baneras delween 1756 and
1758. She allegedly gave orders tor the construction of more than two jundred buildings. [t
was she who constructed the shrines and the dharmagalas along the Paitcakrosi route (I
Bhattacharya 1980). During her stay in the city the mohaila which 1s now called the Bengal:
Tola became the primary area of Bengali seltcment. It was in this fe/a that Ram Bhavani
commissioned the construction of several Devi temples. She also constructed the
Nilakanthesvara temple where a statue of a Panhcamukha Vinayaka is installed.

The story of the rise of the Bhumihar Rajas of Banaras is well known. The dynasty
began im 1739 when Balwant Singh, son of Mansa Rama, received a certiicate for the kingship
over the Banaras area from Muhammad Shah, the king of Delhi. Notwithstanding the fact that
Lae vajas of India lost their power after Independence, the Raja of Banaras is still an impertant
fig.we in the sociai life of the city. Throughout the centunes (he dynasty positioned itself as the
protector of [Endu re‘igion and culture. When the East India Company gamed polsical contre,
over the city ef Banaras m 1764, the rajas became nonunal and ceremonial kings who
 Betove it was nade patha by the queen of Holkar tis ghar was kcown as Xevalgin giuie

35

--- Page 37 ---
cencentrated their activities on patronis:ng the cultural and religious life of the city The many
aspects of thei patronage have deen described by Freitag (1992) and Lutgendorf (1987). The
dynasty was responsible for the construction of many of the ghats in the southern part of the
city Amongst these are Chet Singh ghat, Sivale ghat and Nivafjani phat, all of them
cutbellished with a fortress or palace located at the top of the gaat They were also responsible
for the construction of the Ramnagar fort and the adjacer: Durga temple (Haztshankar 1996:44-
28)

The settlement patterns of the various regional groupings are clearer from the eighteenth
century anwards. [ny general 1 seems that the vatbest immgranis have ther mohallas to the
north of the city, The Maharashirans, one of the earhest regional groups to settle im the city, are

| concentrated around the Brahma-Bhonsla ghat area. the mohalla af the Gryjarats and the
Nepaus is in the arsa around Did): Vindyaka, The azea around Seindhia ghat became a
scllement lor immigrants from Madhya Pradesh. South of Dasasvamedha ghat is the
Madanpura mohaila vath its large Mushm population and south of that is te Bengali Tola
which was papulated from the eighteenth ceamry. The prmary area of setdement for
imimgrants from the soush of India is around Kedar ghar The Visvanatha areca, now cahed
Ketwalpura, which eventually :eads ta the Cauk, has a very mixed popination with a high
percentage of Muslims living towards the western side of this area The north of the city,
Adampura and Jautpura, are mainly Muslim arcas and have been tor centuries. The British built
their residences in the north-west, outside the city m what 1s called ‘Civil Lines’. They
contributed to the landscape of the city by constructing the considerable eovernment buildings
aad Dy instaliing a closed drainage system in the main streets and lanes, which resulted in the
chevation of the centre of the city.

Another important contnbution of the Br:tsh to the history of Banaras are the beauutul
sketches and paintings of Thornas end Wuliam Daniel and James Prinsep. Prinsep, who spent
several years in the city, produced a map of the entre city sn 1822 showing the maze of lanes
aud allevs for waich Banaras 1s famous. From this map 1 ts clear that by that tame the city nad
established its present overall snape, with the greatest concentration of cuizens living in the
aorthern part of the city. The density of population decreases towards the south. A second map
prepared by Prinsep is parucularly valuable since it shows ati the different nalas, Kugdas and
talabs, many of which have now disappeaied. In add:tion ta mapping sad sketching the city,
Prinsep also conducted 4 temple count 9 1831 CE. Out ef ore thousand four hundred and three
lenptes, six hundred and mneteen were in the Dasasvamedha area alone, two hundred and
sixteen were in the Kotval: mohaila, the Kalabnairava area counted twa hundred and sixteen
temples and the Bhelupura area one hundred and fifty-four. The lowest conceniration of
tympies was in the traditional Muslim: neighbout hoods: Adampura forty-eight, Jaitpura thirty
and i Chetgann ffty-taree (Bo Verma 1935:44). A present-day Prinsep would have a much

36

--- Page 38 ---
more sudstantial task: so great has been the extent of termple and shrine construction (a process
that is acceleratiuig as the nullennium appreacies) that the total today would Have to be put at
detween twenty to thirty mes that of 1831
As stated at the beginning af this chapter, the aim of this abridged history of Banaras is
1a provide a framework within which the group of the fifty-six Vinayakas can be dated. Three
pre-Muslim dynasties have been identified as pessible candidates for thei establishment: the
Pratharas, the Kaiacuns and the Gahadavdalas. [In addition to this, the material outlined im this
chapter is aise of value in suggesting the approximate date for the Kasi Khanda, the Mahdtmya
which provides the first textual reference to the group of the fifty-six Vindyakas. Since this
macor work which proclaims the Lordship of Vigvanatha was probably finalised during the
penod of Muslim rule, attention has been paid to those periods which can be deemed ‘tolerant,
as evidenced by the building of Hindu shrines, and those which are considered ‘intolerant’, as
evidenced by the destruction of Hindu shrines. If the Kasi Khanda was produced during
Muslim rale, the possibility nust at least be considered that Uae authors of this work were also
responsible for establishing the fifty-six Vinayakas as a group Finally, it was necessary to look
atthe contibutioa of the Marathas lo the reconstruction of Banaras Given the prevalence and
the popularity of Garega in Maharashtra, and the tact that the Marathas played such a large part
in the reconstruction of the city, the possibility has to be entertamed that the Marathas may have
reconstructed the fifty-six Vindyakas i the eighteenth and nineteenth centunes using the
cetaled blue-print given in the Kasi Khanda. Little in this chapter is gratuitous: even the varty
lnstary can be shown to de relevant lo the mvestigation in hand The attempt to trace and date
tic fonnation of Muslim settlements will be important because, whie an existing Vindyaka
night have avoided destruction, i is umprobable that anyone could atlermpl te establish a
Vinayaka for the first time in a new or estadlished Muslim settlement. This has implications for
the concluding argument of the thesis. The overall unpression is of the very chequered history
ot Banaras and one obscured by a frustrating lack of reliable source material. Banaras has
remained an important cily commercially, educationally and retigivusly from its inception but
ships au and out ul politival hisiury aliiost cnoblrusively This makes the invesligator's task
more difficult but equally more interesting in that it requires the utiisation of many different
lypes of material, which the next chapter on the evolution of Vinayaka-Ganesa will address.
47

--- Page 39 ---
|
Fig.l. The Early History of Banaras
(ca. sixth century BCE to the Gupta period).
7" i) RAIGHAT
a -1. PLATEAU
7 ae
7 WA % we
1% uv yL---
ADAMPURA ae
/ * a
. * a
| -
roy
Go
DASASVAMEDH a /
GHAT }
i
|
I
j 1
(
\ |
\ : \
a i
oN _, wo \
17554 soak
\ |
‘
38

--- Page 40 ---
Fig. 2. From the Gupta period to the Gahadavalas.
ae Se 7
| =; |
| RASGHAT :
F PLATEAU .

Bi lf~ AK |
F Fil yar
' = & Len
| ae
i Le
| kv a we H
i a va i
i Pa L
: CH foo 7 1
| _ 7 a |
i Ay. /
dV Ay J é .
&, :
DASASVAMED Ht 4 / j
anar / |
| ( : { Index. \
| 1 | AK Ad: KeSava
! | AY adi Vigvanatha :
: \ 1 '
1 \ | BK Bakariva Kuada |
! \ . : i
| A. 5 4 CUb Caukhaniha temple !
~L AS #4. Mr JV + Aw Sidna Vap: and Avumuktia
ASS “ON . :
\ wy KV. Kr tuvasesvara |
\ LB: Lat Sharrava :
\ LK Lolatka Kunda
ay

--- Page 41 ---
Fig. 3. The Delhi Sultanate (ca. 1200 to 1526 CF)
eo an . b RAOGHAT PLATEAL
eh 7 ra AREA ct ~ soe .
Kyi . DESTROYED . > To
ot BK. > BY Muscims (lef. . J ole
7 in 94 AD Jee
4% ' LS -
€ vK we eee
! .
| KV/AN SO
\ “y
\ evA BANARAS ao
\ O77 CO” Ny a
1 a x . . oo
ve AMR -
v °
_t
DASASVAME DH GHAT, _
: MADAN :
“ :
f .
/ vigay bananas] :
' |
\ 5 \
oa G
- Sows \ . ‘ i. \
: a,
\
\
AV/ RM. Ach Visvessara temple, replaced by Raz siya niosque
BK. Bakanya Kucda
KV/ AM. Krtowasa temple, replaced by the Alam: mosque
LD. Lal Danvaza moscuc
M. Mamkarnesvara teruple, established 1302 AD
PV. Possible location of the Parsyanatha Jinn tenrpte in Bheleputa
VK. Vrddhakilesvata temple
seoreees The four sections of the city agcordiny ta fia Praia
40
eeSSSEEENe _ oe

--- Page 42 ---
Fig. 4. The Vivanatha area with reference to the Adi Vigvanitha site
« GoorAuLia —

--- Page 43 ---
Fig. 5. The Mughal Period:
The shrines and ghdfs as described by Varadaraja
(ca. 1550 to 1717 CE).
vaRay,
ae
| !
I VARANA
: ' SAKGAM
i Bom RRonat ‘
' Sn
| MM cs oo
| g KV BRAHMA G
1 _ OVRGA G
Gay wo
oon vin dy ag. 8 BINDU MA pHa
: ~ re No ff MANGAL GAR;
, Be OSM NS, ARMA
SVARGADVARA,,.. tines :
PRaveta onsa ey Y KA G ‘
GANGAKESAY
VA. a :
SopLlAR ASAPH 6
; MAN MANDIR 6
: f
' UVavig ot index
DaASASVA eyo :
ASASNAMEDHA G AN Ade Visvandtha
64 VOGINT G ‘VeWis fhana Vapi and \ vanatha !
| PANOEY 6. KB Kala Bharava
! : AN ON: thvasesvara temple
I KE DARESVARA G . .
. £B Lat Bharava .
: TULs: a. . ik Lolarka kunda
| LK wok MD) Matsyodess ara :
| rex woot ° : . :
me \ MM.) Madhyamesvara tempie |
! “ “ OM Omkaressara temple . !
: \ Nom Semesvara temple: :
1
{

--- Page 44 ---
C i vani and the Rajas of
Fig. 6. The Maratha Supremacy, the Legacy of Rani Bha’
Banaras (eighteenth to nineteenth century).
Ya,
4
'
& TRLOC NAN, a
BARE Gan ON. Dini
. 194
1 AENTSUARA GAANESA G
MBMOUSLA'S. r95
MAMIKARNIKa G /* BHASIRAG 1930
VISVANMATHA .
ANNAPURNAL :
NILA KANT HES coat
” Ren VAME DHA G.[" BHadiaan peswa. 1735
“ ALVA G oan >
Keraai. MUNSHI 6 NYA MocmaR 1725
reraal: DARBHANGA 6. +l wRaruR oewasty | 1212
Ida :
TRRVA 6 * Aner lpag 1803
Souty 5
Indians SiVALA'G :
UO AGHET SINGH | 6 BANARSI RAIAS
NIRANIAKI »
RAMNAGAR,
q ° BALWANT SINGH
48
a

--- Page 45 ---
es coer ae es ee Ce La me ON - SEE
7 eee a ar ae cl vac TEN at = hy aM ve .
Pe Bl & tae Tre: parce eg (5s
4 nee ee Pte
or lame ee ot a "ys ae al
Bare | AS ee ee, ie Ke < Ha ; ae
Se: ae ria ES a
‘he Waser ge De i or ee
' awa i a Sa ONS ES
ry ni ; gi > a ek Ee
rc a ae N | , : A te
4 a . $ Saran

--- Page 46 ---
CHAPTER TWO
The Origins and Development of Vinadyaka-Gancsa

Cenual to Unis investugauon uf the (fy-six Vindyakas :s the question of the organs and
development of Vinayaia, ais names, his mythology, Ins altubetes and dis icanographic forms.
This chapter Waves this development frei pututve origins te Vinayaka-Ganes2's present day
slatas, acknowledging the present state ef scholarship an tlie subject. Since the first monograph
or Ganesa by Alice Getty (1926) soul the most recent study on the clephant-headed de:ty by
Thapan (1997), the origins of Ganega have proved te be the mast studied and analysed aspect
of his character. Most of the accounts provide hypotheses as to the god's evolution in literature
or sonography, thereby focusing on the elephant features of Vindyaka-Ganesa.” out here
attention will also be directed to a hitherto neg.ccled aspect of Tis evalution the dynunics
befund fis rise to prominence. Mus account will be chronologica:, using iconographic, literary
and other lustotical sources to analyse the development of the deity from his original demonic
tature as Vinayaka to his present status as a happy, fun-loving deity, invoked by tie name of
Ganeéa or Ganapan, the Remover of Obstacles, the Lord ef Begumings, and she Criarantar of
Success aud Prosperity. At this stage in the thesis a chronolegica: account of tae evoluton af
Vinayaka-Ganvesa has litle to offer to the main analysis of the thesis, namely, the fifty-six
Vinayakas in Banaras. However, as will be cear trom the last bvo chaplers of this (esis, the
chronological anaiysis of the cevelopnient of Vinayaka's character will prove valuable far the
Investigation of the group of fifty-six yn Banaras. Since the deity’s character is complex, a full
analysis will se provided of the evolution of Vindyaka-Ganesa and of the dynamics behind bes
rae ta power. This will make the subsequent argument both clearer and more persuasive.

The vkephant’s head 1s Vinayaka-Ganesa's most obvious feature, providing him with a
distusct identity even, as Thapan states, with a rarson d'étre (1997-42). The carhest references in
sterature to Vinayaka do rot mention his elephant features Sut, as will become apparent, it was
the elephant head which determmed the yoc’s evaluten ang nse to promimence. This prototype
ef Vinayaka became linked wath the elephant which cnioyed a seered status in anczent India
* Kconayraghs en Ganesa providing theanes concerning the deily’s oryms melude Getty (1971 ¢.936)), Rassaz
(.954), Courtright (1Y893, Skat Lal Nagar (1992), Brews (ed } (1992), SK OR. Raw (1992) end The oar, 61997)
© Meny attempts to explain Ganesa’s clepnart head and kis nse te pawer have failed t¢ pravide a complete and
scsty.ng expansion Courtright {1988.22} expresses these fustiasens: ‘i is ingess:dle bo say just ow Canesa
saeco existence or whether there was a distinct Ganesa nefere he appears in the modes he does ins the
Brahmare socices'; “There may rot be any compelling evidence ter GazeSa pacer to ius emergeace into ‘he
Brake coud, simply because be wes never there
“Only the recent publication by Thapar: (1997), published while ths thes.s was beg firalised, has addressed thes
SHES TL.

| AS

--- Page 47 ---
Courtright (1988), Thapan (1997), Srivastava (1989), Zimmer (1962:102-106) and many
others have dealt at great length with the status and the symbolism of the elephant in ancient
India. They trace its Instory from the mature Indus culture, when the animal was first
cepresented on scals and on terracoita, to the Buddhist periud which gave an extra sacred
d:mensian to the elephant by linking 1 te the previous lives of the Buddha, In this connection,
the singie tush of Vindyaka-Ganesa should also be mentioned. The single tusk is one of the
tain characteristics of the god and the Puranic myths do not offer any convincing explanation
as to why Vinayaka ts represented with only one task. Thapan has anxed the singie tusk to the
single horn of the amicorn, 2 mythological ammal knewa te Jadus culture (1997:50-§2). The
hoi supposediy symbolised male virility, and seals trom the Indus civiltsation have deen
found cepicting other anunals with one horn © Eliade (19$8:164) suggests thal the single horn
of the unicom: is related to fertility worship and the moon. The assoc:ation between the meon
and Vinayaka’s single tusk ts made ma Maharashtrian variation of Ganesa's mythology,* thus
ending some support to Thapan's hypothesis.

From the sixth century BCE onwards increasing use is made af elephant symbolisny
places were named after the various epithets of the animal and w:bes, clans and kings used the
elephant either as a name or as a symbol to denote their strength and prestige. Evidence of
clephant-retated names given by ‘Thapan (1997:54-56) suggests that the anunal enjoyed great
presuge throughout the north of India, mere specifically in the Doab repron, the Ganga basi,
and parts of Gujarat and Orissa. From about the Chird century BCL onwards the elephant was a
popular mouf in Buddhist art. The story of the Buddaa's birth features a wate elephant and
many of the Jalakas, relating the previous lives of the Enlightened One, inchide stories about
the elephant.” Liter rendermgs of the Buddha's birth scene in which the Buddha ?s bathed by
two elepharts attest the populanty of elephant motts and also show the associauon detwecn
elephants and snakes.* According to Thapaa (1997-73), the role of the elephant and the naga as
protectors and bestowers of wealth and presperity changed tn later Budéhist art, being reduced
* & Mcheuro Daro seal represents a sh:noceres with ore hom (Taspar, 1997 $1)

* The story relates how Ganesga, having calen too aca, falls eff his rat, His belly splits ang all the modakas tell
over the grouns, Tae moon, watching the scene, starts laughing, Ganesa hece-nes so angry that he pulls gat his:
tosk and throws att the moon, the-eby causing itte disappear. The other gods plead wrk Ganega to restore 2
honaur cf the muon, but Ganese dee:des that, as @ purishiment, the moon willlave forreyeles Tas tery os given
an esta Gimersion oan Maharashtra where, on the Ganesa Caturthi festival. one is not stpposed to took at the
naan. [one does se, ane has to thraw stanes on the reef of one's se:ghbour ie order to ward eff the unmet
danger (Gsky 2971.20, Courtright 1985.81), Courtnght (5980-75, 0986-97) assoccates the myths saraing
Ginesa's sagle tuss wrk the bereadg of the god and suggests that itis merely another form vf ‘symbore
castrate’
“Bos an overnew of copbant symbolism in Buddinsn, soc Thapar (997 65-601 and Cournpht (1985 22 27)
the warte clephant occupies a special posizor im Buddhisir. Relying ca the story ef the Buddha's conception
sunng which 2 white clepaant entered the warmth of Ins mother, schelars beseve that the reference to the wite
vephet cs a iefeencs to the Buddha biaself Examples of cary Buddist at show thet the elephant bad a
sumiticant tole For futher details on the symbelisin of the clepnant in carly Indian art, sce Srivastava (1989).
“|eonographiva evidence suggests that the lak between the elephant and the spent os of @ later date, Whereas.
the bret scenes en the siijas snow the Buddha hemg oathed hy we e'ephants. later Gupta representauons of this
scene depict twe snakes bathing dhe child “Thapar 1997 7)

16

--- Page 48 ---
to that of being mere guardians on account of the transfer of the: previous furncuon to other
deities

The clepaant'’s cise to prominence in Buddhism runs paraile! with its rise in slats within
He Vedic znd Bratimanic creed. The vahana of Indra, one of the major Vedic deities, is the |
vlephant Acravala, Velie texts tace the origins of Airavata back to the realm of the ndgas, thus
providing another exampie of an early association of the elephant with snakes.” Tt is. this
conuscuorn which links the clephant also with water and subsequently with feruhty As the
prestige of Indra declined, so did the prestige of Airavata and, later, Puranas tell of his defeat at
the hands oF ademon Repressntations of Gaja-Laksi on tie stupa of Sanchi, dated to the
second century BCE, pravide further evidence of the elephant's symbolic connection wil
water? and ferulity.” The association of elephants and rain dates from the Velie period when
elephants, aiong with snakes, were considered to be linked with the clouds (Znmmer 19622102.
(OS) Zuriner (1962:108) refers to a ritual deser:ved in the Hastydyurveda in winch an
cephant, painted in white (te colour of Anavela), symbolised both ramfall and fertility. More
evidence of the elephant's association with rainfall is provided by K. S Srivastava (1989°37-
43)

Despite the late representations ¢f the elephant u: Jain art,” it appears that (ae animal's
assocralion with the bventy-thid Jina, Pargvanatha, was established in the pre-Christian era,
Thapan (1997:74) has suggested that the link between Parsvanatha and the elephant can be
explaince by Lhe fact that the Jina, living in the eighth century BCE, was from Kasi, which was
one of the regions in which the elephant was venerated As in Duddhism and Brahmanism,
Passvanatha's elephant is oflen associated with the snake.

A simular process of the iecreasing veneration, cud possible sanctification, of the
clephart :s evidenced by material from the nordi-western corner of the subcontinent. Must
scholars examining the clephant's symbolic represertations in what is currently Afghanistan
reter to coins of the Indo-Greek rulers of the Bac‘rian area (around 150 BCT). A coin of the
fourth cenlury BCE, however, from Afghanistan (though fosad iu Sicily), depicts a deily
"ha the Atharva Ved, Anavata 1s consicered te oe the sen ot Isivat wha isthe chief of tne nayas Althoug.s
Anavata later becomes dhe elephant snout of Indra, seme Parame texts refer te hig: as a stake and the Ager
Purdie (119.2) states dat he should be wo,stippec on Naga Pancaan The seis Parans represents hin as ong cf
tre ecght digesias or elephants of the Zour Grections’ (£1260: 14-23)

2 Vayu Pardoa Lo 144 suggests that elephants, sakes. clouds cod mavorans all Saund their origins av water
‘Thapiyals argument (1970 112) thet cle iepresentaticns. of Sri-Laxsint showered by clephams en the Budéh:st
sfiipas are sn fact representations of the Buddha's mother MZya, cannat oc nuled act Inv this connecuan Foucher s
view trat the cuacept of 'Gaja-Laxsmt found its args m the concert oF Miyé 1s aot generally accepted. as Oe
later cenveptis of a much eaker date (Trap.va, 197112) A monogtaph discussing the different wencgrapiue
aspects of the Gala Laksini representatians is found mn Sangh (1983)
“Thepan movides some examples of Jain statues of the early and late ucedieva: pend, taken tian: the ware or
Simakart Skak

Vv

--- Page 49 ---
wearing an vlephant scalp on his or her head, thus suggesting that the veneation and worship
of clepkants in this area is of considerable antiquity (Scullard 1948:159), It secms that
admurat:on for the elepnant was the result of the encounters of the Greek armics of Alexander
the Great with Indian rulers such as the mighty Porus, the king of the Puryab (Basham
1992-50). The increase in the status of the elephant was reflected in the numeraus Gree coins
depicting either the elephant in full form“ or :n the torm of the elephant-skull worn dy the
Creek conquerors” Althouga these coms de net conmnbute te the evoluden of an clephant-
headed deity, they attest the significance of the elephant in the Gree temtories
The first evidence of an elephant deity occurs on ‘he coms of Demetrius [, Menander
and Maues, which depict an elephant with a bell around its neck (Dhavalikar 1980-1981:139)
A com of Apollodotus shows the ammal with a band around ils budy (Gardner 1966:plate IX,
§, 9). Tass motif becomes an unportant feature on later coins where the elephant is represented
together with the Greek god Zeus,* Whereas some scholars’ hypotheses explaming the cou are
somewhat far fetched,” the theory suggested by Tarn aad Banezjva deserves more attention, for
Wainight help to elucidate the iconographig or:gins of Vinayaka-Ganesa. Based on a deseripoion
ay Philostratus which gives an account of an old elephant in the Sun temple of Taxila, it has
been argued by Tar that he elephant with the bell was none other than the elephant dedicated
by Alexander the Great to the Sur temple in Taxila. From the account of Apollonius given by
Phiiostranis, :tis known that the peopic of the city anointed the ammal with myrrh and garlands
of flowers (Tarn 1951:1643.% Banerjea (1938:200-301), on the other hand, states that the |
“The encourte: between Aleaxandet and Porus took place at 323 BCE when the Greeks had classed thy Thelant
ver. In the bate whien fo..awed Porus was taken capive Lowever, Alexander tis Cecat was so inpressed with
the Songs personally that he appointed hintas vassa! for the Punjab (Basham 199! $0) Aster the deteat of Poras,
the adiy.ratian for the elephant prew amonys: the Greeks ard soon the animal beeame a symbol of siatcs and
pewer When Alexander's general Seleucus Nicatar os: the terntoty of Atynaristan io the Maurya) king
Chardryupta wy 305 BCE, be asked fur five iundred elepuants i: exchange. i
* Cums representing the elephant in its ull far ate those issued oy Hebocles, Archebius, Zorus, Ades. i
Anumachas, Anvale:das and Menander to mame bul. a few (Gardner 1966, Dhavalikar 1980-198 1.127) i
“ln Compas of the Indo-Greek Coms Laks writes. ‘The ermve among the Gieex kings for the elephant, the
septeble tank on ancient batte-fields, :s well depicted or coms af Demetrius 1 On all ins ‘Herekles-crow ning:
minself cetas the obverse bust of Denretrius is adorned wath the scalp ef an elephant (1965:23). Ties pecul:ar
Vicuseciess is also Found cr the coms of Menander and other icngs (Gardne: 1966 poate 1, 9-10 and 11-22)
“A Goin assicd by Antaliidas depicts the bust of the king, whiie or, the revetse of the cum: is Zeus sitimg on bis
throne and Lolding 2 mikerin “us hand. ‘The maker dears a wreath On the left cf the cas, we see the folepart of ar.
sephant with 2 bell around it neck The elephant :s raising ris inink i. acceptance of the wieath (Diavaukar 1986.
JORL 140, Gardner $966.35, plate VIL) The sane snost appeass im four variatians on the coins ef Aatalkidas One
variation is Zeus holding a scepoe and setting cou throne with a weeatheho.ding aiken in ius bard Or. the lett tere
ean eephant with its dunk io the act ami a bell areend its eck A second vatiauon shows Zeus seting or. ies
Lone, holding a scentre aad a wreath Tae elephant. depicted oi the left side of the coin, press the wreath watt its
tung. Here the mézr is absert, A thid vai cty shows Zeus on the left of the throne, the sicker im tes night herd and
she scesty in hes left hand On the left Chere san clephant camying eff the wreath (rom the asker “Tae last variety
copes Ute cleplait altas rigat of the coun Whavalzxar 1980-1987 1400
* Dhavaltkat has suggested Chat there cs a ssuilanty bewween the clephart oa the cous and tie Ganesa image of
tie Bhumara temple which aiso wears a be! around fis reca, whack is aa unusual feature for Ganesa,
Ceamaaswaniy C971 14-18) has ted to explan the appeatance et the pe.) py ceteniny, to an ancient Tibetan,
legend, bat a connection henveer the Tibetan story and Garesa s, except far the bell, non-existent
ay

--- Page 50 ---
elephant with the bell was a representation ef the elephant deity af Kapisa, the present day |
Beeram in Afghanistan :
The existence of an elephant deity in Kapisa provides encouragement in the quest for a |
deity which could have given rise to a prototype of Vindyaka-Ganesa. That the elephant deity of
Kepisa is not just @ scholarly myth is attested by numismatic material dated fram 170 to 150 |
BCE. A coin issued by the Indo-Greek ruler Eukratides, shows on the obverse the diademed .
bust of a king wearing a heinet. The reverse depicts Zeus siting on a throne and holding a |
wreath and a palin. To tae right of the throne there is the front halt of au elephant and lo the lett :
there is a Kharosthi inscription: kav? (pi)sive napara-devata (the deity of Kapisa} (Latin
1965 plate XVI, Dhavalikar 1980-1983:241-142). Since the discovery of this Kapisa com by |
Charles Mason, it has been the subject of lengthy discussions, Some numismatusts are of the
upinion that the deity on the com is not Zeus bata female goddess."! Narain suggests that the |
dgity on the coin ts a representation ef the criy’s fortune, supporting his theory by referring to
similar coins of Hippastratus On the basis of some similares beQwee: Indra and the deity of
Kapisa, Banerjea concludes that there may have been some confusion between Zeus and Indra
on the Indo-Bactrian coins (194 1:28 83-2593."
i
Despite the divergence of these various thearies, itis probadle that the deity depicted on :
Whe Kapisa com is not she Greek god Zeus but the city deity of Kapisa. The travel account of |
Hiner Tsiang (seventh century CE) provides further muimatien about this city god and |
demonstrates Uiat as late as the seventh century CF. the peuple ef Kapisa venerated the tutelary ,
deity Piiusdra (Pi-Lo-Sa-Lo} who had the form of an clephant” Although the descripnen of 1
Hien Tsang dates from the seventh century, is known taat the Gevational tradition centred
on Pilusira was of great anuquity.” Having studied the account of the Chinese traveller, !
Rapson was the first nunusmaust to link the figures of the elephant and the pros (mountain) of
Qe Kapisa com: with the legeré about the elephant deny. The elephant represents the elephant
Wontehead observes Ciat the divinity in question was, 1 facia ety peddess He came to ts conchisioa becauss
the Esanuty resembled the tepresentatioa of the city Tyche cn com ef Tiprostratus (Dhavaliker 1980-1981 1405
| Doneyea identities the erthroned deity wrth India wie was also known aw the jake: of Indrapura, te pattly
shower elephant gn the cain then was a represcutation of Mndta's mount Airkvata. Hanenea a'so makes 4 connection |
relvecr, the nsenipeon veferrirg to Kapisa and Indras abode which is caved Svetavalay.. According to the
Chinese traveller Hiuen Tsang, why visited the aica on the severvth certury, Svetavalaya was @ suburb of Kaptsa
“Te ine southwest of the lowi is Mount P.-Le-Sa-Lo (Pilugara}. the mountain spint lakes the form of an
glepkant hence the nance. In the ald days when Tathagata was alive, the soint cae Plugara (siang-kein, Le
elephant-tixed!, asked tae Lord of the Werld and twelve inmdred Aibets (to partake of his rosmiainy) On the
chosnun cig was a solid tock: ere was Chat Tathagala toceives: the offerings, Oo sprat (Beal 153-127.
Doavakccr i980-1981-142 and 1992 $3; Tam 19S 196-98)
“The aame Pragars cs linked with the Tad word far Ganess. Pulanyar, which as denved trast paffu er pelle
meanmy tooth er tus (Getty 193631; Narain 1992-25) Another possb;lity -s that Pilloiyat cs derved fiom: pile
wheck means ‘a neble child In Pelt prfaka has the same nacariag. Caldwell, as quotcd by Narain (1992-28), states
thal the organs of this word are Scytuer ard they aave lirks witty the Lann pefies which oeans the young of an
animal, Rassat (1984-7) notes inst pala wes a name which was aliikuted to anima‘s and plants “The werd pil
susposedly iicant young corn hu Arce. the language which was spoken in the north-west, the word for
elephant is pif
¢ cepts.

--- Page 51 ---
cetty and the pilos would then de the symbo: for the hoty mountain on which this deity resided
In this context, the coin of [ukradites could be considered as evidence that the cut of an
elephant deity in Kapisa already existed in the second century BCE. The combination of bath
Zeus and the elephant god 1s interpreted by Tam (1951:137-138) as a representation of the
replacement of Zeus by the locally worshipped elephant ped. Dhavahkar (1992:54) pails out
Usat the ling between Zeus and tae ciephant god of Kapisa was their mountain-dwelling. He
writes ‘hal, ‘since he [Piusara] was a god of the mountains, the Greck rulers naturally ted to
identify him with their own Zeus, for to the Greeks # mountain ged could not well vecome
anything but Zeus"

The representations of the elephant deity described above sugges! that by the beginning
vf the Common Era there was probably an elephant deity in the norlii-western comer of the
subcontinent, Although no such conelusion can oe drawi from the Buddhist, Brahmanic and
Jain material of the plains, the wvidence indicates the sacred status of the elephant and an
associauun with ndgas, water and fertiligy. Neither the detty from Afghanistan, nor tie sacred
elephants in the early Indian art should be considezed us prototypes of Vindyaka, however:
rather, they provide some of the necessary elements for the assemblage of Vindyaka’s features.

The name Vinayaka 1s considered to be the oldest name for the deity, although from the
context in Which wo was used for the first Gime in extant texts, it cs clear drat Vindyaka had.
except for certain. characteristics, Jite in common w:th the present clephant-neaded deity
Ganesga. The name is derived frem wie and paya Wich can have several meanings. One is
‘controlling, imposing order, regulating’. However, jt could alse be derived from vi - and ni
which means ‘ty lead away, to drive away, ta dispel’, This ctymology would correspond with
the present funcun of Ganesa as the Lord of Obstacles or the Dispeller of Obstacies. A third
explanatian of the word vindyaka is offered by an eghth-century commentary en the
Yajftavalkya Smrt by Visvarlipa. It states that vindyaka is derived from viniyukta meaning ‘the
one wko is appointed as the head of a distinet class al men’ (Sastry 1982:174). Naran
{1992.22) adds that ‘iY the visarga vi indicates the quality of distinction (visista), it means
‘without’ or ‘deprived of (# leader), too! This new approaci then leads us to Vindyaka as exher
a distinet andividual leader or a group wilhoul @ leader. Opinions conceming these
Interpretauons are divided bul il seeins that, in the context of the characier of the four Vindyakas
inthe Manava Gyhya Sava, all the explanations mennored avove are possible. Related to
Vinayaka are the namcs VighneSvara, Vighnesa and Vighnalarta. They are all based on the
same word stem vieghna which means ‘obstacle’, Vighnesvara and Vighnesa tus meaning
Lord of Obstacles whereas Vighnaharta incans the Remover of Onstacles,

*Thepan corsicers this the only saplanatien for the word Vendyaxa’ (1997-84)
50

--- Page 52 ---
Scholars examining the ongins of Vindyaka agree that the earliest occurrence of the
wae is found in the Menava Grhya Sitra (I-16; Vindyaka Kalpa).” It devotes an ennre |
chapter, called the Vindyaka Kalpa, to Vindyaka worship (Dresden 1944:159-164). Recently, i
however, Thapan has noted that a reference to Vindyaka, predating the Grhya Sita, has been |
found an the Sanchi stdpa® It is because of the nature of ‘kis inscription, referrmg to a |
Vindyake as an exalted personality or a Buddlust saint, that Thapan regards Visvariipa’s
explanation as night (1997:85).% ‘The four Vindyakas mentioned in the inscription,
Saiakatankata, Kitgmandarayaputra, Usmita and Devayajana, are described as malevolent
creatures who hann people and who need te be appeased in specific ways.” The Siitra does not !
tvler lo any peculiar physical characteristics, nor davs it menten aay of the guod qualities the
later Ganesga possesses. Thapan's work 1s useful here, as she rightly questions why there has
nol yl been any altempt to analyse these four Vindyakas nor lo explain why a being of sanctily
tu Buddhists is portrayed as demonic in this Sitra, Although some parts of her exolanation
appear to be somewhat far fetched and unsafy, some ef the points she makes are relevant here

The first Vinayaka, Sdlakatankata, could, according to Thapan (1997:86-87), have been
rejated to a lineage of raksasas bearing the same name. Because the nature of the Vindyakas
was very similar to that of raksasas, this explanation :s plausible. Kasunindarajaputra Iiterally
means ‘the sen of the «ang of the Kiismandas’. The word Adymdnuda has two meanings, one
being a type of gourd, the second being a class of demi-gods in carly Buddhism. Although
Thapan (1997:89) also devotes considerable space to explaining the symbolism of the gourd in
ancient Indian rituals, the explanation she provides for the second meaning is more interesting
in the present context. The 'Kiismandas' or ‘Kumhandas’ as a class of demi-gods are veferred
ton carly Buddhist texts, as well as in sculptures. Their leader is known as Wuridhaka aad 1s
represented as the guardian of the southern quarter.”" In later Buddhist art this Viridhaka 1s
dgpicted with a helmet made of the skin of an clephant’s head (Agarwala 1987.10) and, in the
seventh cemury Hhuen Tsiang deser:des Virtidhaka as the ‘Lord of the South’ and the ‘Elephant-
Lozd' (Watters 1908:35). Although Virddhaka is not represented with an elephant head on the
Sanch: stiipa, the tact that he becomes known as the 'Elepkant-Lord' guarding the southern
“The dates tor che Grhya Sitras are st. unde: discussion Kane (2968-74, vokame I, part 114-15) is 07 the
opinion that they should be dated between 600 aad 200 BOY, whereas Maedentel! (1996 208) myatds bepweer $00
and 280 BCE as move apptopnaty. ‘The taditior oF the Sutras es 2 whole 1s known to have tcor:potatec elemenis.
tron both Vedic ard noa-Vede kerage ‘The rales for the aouseko:cers, as proposed by the Siitras. also
agsommadaled widespread folk values In order tw make a diszacter bescecr, Ved.c ard nan-Ved-e sources,
symbols, ananals and deviniies whch were held sacred by the masses were marked as faukihe devas whist
Memily trans.ates as ‘falk deities. From the second century BCE onwards, the trditional Vedic deites Secume
syaeichsed wilh tacse fuck elements (Nwain 1992 30, Ganda 1977 (5) $82)
” The Vunivaka Kalpa as translated and analysed by Dresden iy given as a Appendia tw this thesss.
“Eon 2 more detaried account of this inscription and ats tansialiea, sve Thapar (1997.88).
“ta the gaup of the Sy suc Vindyakas we find three Salakatankata, Kasimanda and Rajaputra
* Thro.gnout ber book Taapan has woten the name ‘Kasmiindndjaputsa' as ‘Kasindindaryaputss’

Both the Kusimandas and Vired®aka are represented an the formas of the Sanchi stipe Whereas the former are
sepicted as typical, yaks. ravinga dwatfish form, Vuachaka is shown as a nennal beurg (Tlapan 1997 87)
SI

--- Page 53 ---
Cirection is noteworthy because in the later Puran:e mythology Ganega takes ever the position
of tae gaardian of the southern direction.” Usmita Vinayaka proves to be 2 prodlem as vo
further details have been found, leading Thapan to supgest that ue may have been a local deity
In the area where thy Manava Grhya Sitra was composed. The term devayajana literally means
le offering or sacritice te the god’ Based on immaterial in the Krona Yayurveda, Thapan believes
that devayajana stands for the worship of nan-Vedic demtics disdained by Brahmaruc religion
Ta her couciusion she proposes that the tour Vindayakas mentioned in the Manava Grhya Sdtra
were representations of particular peuple and practices 19 the region of the middle Ganga basn,
where the Stitra was allegedly composed.”

Thapan's analysis elucidates the idenuty of the Vindyakas associating them with a host
of beings who, trough being ciosely linked to Buddhism, were considered demonic by the
authors of the Siitra.’ Thapan's hypothesis is that many semi-deines and spirits venerated by
Buddlusts and Jains were taken into Brahmanism as demonic forces later and usually
associated with Siva, The direct implication of this explanativn for the idenuiy of the Vinayakas
ts (hat the four Vindyakas in the Grhya Sutra therefore should not be considered to be deities,
but rather personificauons of the concept of ‘creators of obstacles! (Thapan 1997 95). An
interesting diension of the Sour Vindyaka concept 's that they recall the vdea of the four
cardinal Grections. As is discussed jater, this idea ef the association of four Vindyakas with the
four directions 1s subsequently sugyested by a ninth-century pillar in Ghatryala.

Chronologically the next reference to the Vindyakas is in the Mahabharata, although the
references to the Viniyekas within dus Epic are few and of various cates. The sloka of the
Sant Parvan menhonneg Vindyaxa, however, 1s dated te the same period as the Minava Grhya
Séitra (Thapar 1997.99) and thus should be included kere. Thapan stales Uiat in the Sanu
Parvan (284-131) the Vinayakas are classified in the same category as the bhisas, pisicas and
riksasas. Her statement is supported by B. R. Sharma (1975-8) and Hazra (1948:267),% Hazra
Later Purdnas also mention these Kusmandas; the Vayu Purins refers 2 them as one of the sivteen pais of q
pisdca twiss. Thapar. suggests that the Kiismvindss were poss:bly a clan whe did tot follow Bralusumical nenins
she further aotes that the referenze in the Vayu Purana implies that the ‘Kusinandas’ belonged to ope of the sixtees,
waexipadas. Mary of those janapadas ‘were asseciated with the Buddha, Mahavira or cther heisrudex teachers at
thus did act follow Bidumame noms Ube fact that they are reterred to as iict¢ Supports this: suuyestion
avcatding 16 Thapan (5997-88)

 Hexing cxamuccd oo ether closely iciated Stitras, the Kaimke Grhva Siva and the Vndha Grbya Sata,
Thapan (6967 91) votes that these two texts do not mention the Vineyakas once altnough the rest of the text as: very
suntan Because of Cie o:ssiva of the Vindyakas in bese two works, the autior concludes thet the reference to
the Vindyakas i te Mdnava Gihya Suna mest therefore x considered 2 regional charactenstie of the nydéls
Gani. basi:
“Ver amare deta.ed account cf the demonic beings associated wri Vinayakas and then: sigacticance 1 eatiy
Baddlasin, sec Tapa (1997 92-93)
ulus Lipnet pornts out Ghat Sane Parcan XILQKAGLS dees not exist m the cts, edition Appendia | ef the
Sanu Parson (ne. 28. hows 422-623}, however, bts eat cake wesels pusucat sae ret hit ad vinavakab /sighnany kuryer
pric lasya suittayai pethyate stavale® Lipner tanslates tis gs ‘Nor can demons, ogres, uhosts or Vinavakas
create oostacles mt the use of the ene wherg this praise as reested! (personal communicator, NovemDer 1999)

Sz

--- Page 54 ---
further states that another verse in the epic suggests a plurality of Vinayakas and their character
as the creators of obstacles (1998:267, footnote 15).” Again the ecrincal edition shows no such
passage 1n the reference given (Aranyaka Parvan 68:23), but, in Appendix 1:10 of the Aranyaka
Parvan, le sixty-twe resembles the Hazra citauon. A further reference to Ganesvaras- ‘
Vinayakas will be discussed later since it appears in what is considered to be a later edition of |
the Mahabharata. :
'
‘The references tv Vindyakas do not provide any information as to their appearance.” A
refgrence te an elephant-headed deity, nowever, is found in various versions of the Sabha
Parvan (10:35)" where one of the characters in the entourage of Kubera 1s called Dantin. Since
Danun features alongside other yaksa figares, it is clear trem the context that the Danun
mentored m tic Mahabharata is ar vlephant-headed saksa, rataer than 2 prototype ul
Vinayaka-Ganesa.” This reference to Dantin does not sand alone: in the carher Black
Yajur veda two references to Danton are found. The gayatris of both the Maitayaniya Samitta
and the Taitirivas Samhita featare ‘Dantn' or "The ong with the tusk or tooth!” The
Maitayvaniwa Sambitd refers to this deity as being lusked (dantin} and he 1s also Aastimukha or
‘elephant-headed’. The Taittiriya Samita describes the deity as tusked and as vakratunda which
Ineans “the one with the curved trunk’, Dhavalikay (1992-56) has suggested that these gdvatrrs
were Later interpolations in the texts and therefore unrchiabie. An investigation of the context of
these gdvatris proves Dhavalikar right, In successive invacations, other gods such as Siva,
Visau, Gauri and Skanda are worshipped These deites rose to pranunence from the Gupta
pendad onwards (third century CE) and this indicates a late date for the interpolation of the
gayatris referring to Dantin.'” Thapan (1997: 501) agrees thal the invocations are later addiuous
out besing her arguments on evidence oF an elephant-headed yaksa as carly as the second
aa piyd vighna kartrndm aiha va prathanseen rtd
“Despue tie fact that Cicic Gee no dnect indications as te the elephant fextures of the Vinayakas, Thapar
“1997 102) ports out that “wwe ol tbe Vewayakas had links will, the elephant’ Vitiiikss, onc of the basys:
sansiderve io the Midnava Gry Suna as on the same level as tie Vindyaxas. :s te | ond of Mayes. but os cepreted.
a6 at, cephant when ia the position ef digit. Kidsmardacaaputra ss alse essociated wiih ciephants, as discussed
eater Although VirdpZksa was indeed tepreserted as an eephart, this dass not imisediately hak tie four
Vindyexas with elephuits Ane the zelato: between Kusmandargapuna acc the elephants is net direc: but thieugh
te cunmecvor with Virudhaka.
“ Conousiy. although Dantur is merhaced in the Elysium Press editoa tarsiated by MN. Dutt. this passage 1s
pot the eetical edition and noe does the veystaa of in the appendia (Nadie Paiva. appendix | 2 18-23) contain
any tefereace to Dentin.
*Thapan (1997-10) mentions otker references im the Mahabixinda which could bs considered as indicahans of
the existence of ar: elephant deny Mabakiye o: the one with the large bods" is now ane af the ep:thets used for
Vindyaka-Gancga However, 1 the tne of the epics, this name usually denoted Siva
"The giyatis of the Black Yajuiveda crak 2 change an the seme that they no longer invake Savitr as wae tie
case cn the Ryveda. They aduress lac respects to otier geds suci as Rudia. Danyd, Gavada acd apparently also
Danur. The Matsyanryst Samhita (2:91) readstat kasttayat vidiiahe hastenudhdya dhinabs tes ne danti
piecodayat Tas Taitorya Sanibita 100.) ves the folowing hyn tr purusave vidmahe vakritundaya dhisiahy
fat Ho dant pricodayat (Rocner 1992:791
Rocher adds that the lnk between Dantn and Vindyaka was cotabashee by Sayana ct his commentary on the
Araayakas (Rocher 2992-70, footnote 9) However. Siyaca es caled to Ine fourteen: century (Frederic (987 9605
and tous is of po value i dating ths interpolatien.
$3

--- Page 55 ---
}
century CE (sce supra) and based on the reference in the Mahabharata, she suggesis that the .
reference to Dantin could be dated as cariy as the second century CE, This must surely be too A
i
eaurly |
The Vindyaka Sant: of the Yafavalkya Smru (1271-294), generally dated to. the
second or third cemury CE,"* describes the four Vinayakas as four manmtestations of ore
single Vinayeka. Kane (volume V part I), Dresden (1941:157-16¢) and Rocher (1992:71) :
agree that the Vindyaka Sant’ passage in the Smit is copied from the Manava Grhya Sata
‘This misses the point’ The Vindyaka in the Vindyaka Sanu: was appointed by Rudra and
Brahina as ‘the Leader of the ganas’ in order to create obstacles in performances. The link with
Siva ts here made explicit, (t also makes clear why a Vinayaka Santi is needed; that 1s, mm ordez
to propitiate the obstacle-creating Vindyaka who acts on Siva's orders to spoil the performance
of worship. Whergas in the Manava Grhya Sutra the propitiation of the Vindyakas was because
they possessed people who then needed to be released from their intlusace, here it is
anuicipatary, ensuring that they will not spoil the worship offered to Ihe goddess and the
Aditya The Vindyakas determine whether worship will de successful or nol. The reference te
Mahaganapat at the ead is probably a reference to Siva who, in that period, was often referred
to by this name The last sloka links Vinayaka worship to that of Ambika. The connection
betwee Ambika and Vinayaka has given rise to far-reaching discussions * Bhandarkar
(1973.148) concluded that Ambika was the mother of Vindyaka.“* This statement is shown to
be incorrect by Narain (1992:23, footmote 54) who latins that the Yajfavalkya Smrti asks for
the adorsuon of the mother of Vindyaka and then of Ambika.'® The ward fatah at the end
sezms to have been ignored dy Bhandarkar Just as onc Vindyaka represents the four
Vinayaxas of the Manava Grhyva Sitra, Ambika personifies the seven characteristics of the
goddess, implied in the Manava Grhya Stita (11:14:30)'° The Mitdksara version of the
4 Kare (2908-75, vohune |, part 1443) dates the Yaplavidkya Sonn bebwecn (00 and 300 CE, while Wrateritz,
(LOSR-N9K) belicves the Smri sheuid be placed around the Herd or feasts certs CL at the earhest: Macdonel.
(599-208) suggests 340 Ck os the most likely date Since the Yapiavaikve Senitialso mentiens Ambika, Siva and
Shards. the third century CT seems to be the tust likely period for ils compos:non In the Simei Vindyaka is net
yet considered to ve Wake te Siva, thus suggesting: that the Vinasatia Kalpa predates the compesuun of be
Portaas in -sbich the liak between Winayaka and Siva is Sarsly estabiashed.
" Boredackar was the first to state inat Acubika was the mether of Gases. After hin mary sckalans, far instance
Rassat (1954.29.30), have accepted Ins opinion, manly because Vindyaxs evelved iio Ganeka and) Ambit
aweame Panvet! the mother of Ganesa. Heweve:, Natur atgues avatest thes
“the form of tis eiemony comamed cn the Sutre is unquestionably more ancien: chan that costaned on te
other werk, the Yaphavalhya Sint, but the d:fferenve betwoed the peo shows that curmng the penod tat had
lapsed between tie con;pas:tion of the Suita and that of the Saan. tie four Vindyakas bad become om: Ganaal:-
Vinayaka, having Ambras for his mother "The one Garapatt-Virayaka, the sen af Ambika, was introd:ced into
the Hindu pantheon mua late:' (Bhandarkar 1904 248). i
YS 111285 diusasarsapakalpena dattvanghyam piirnan: achation ¢ parvamantrair eva vivtyakasya parautiny
upausthet iafo moikan 7 (A K Narain (992 43).
* The seven pediesses wiphed wi toe Grhya Sutra teprecent beauty and prosperty (t could pe argued that the
Sapeasdu ands orgrnated from these seven godcesses although the Seven Mothers ae known fer ther ess)
chascter Althouph 2 further investigation as to Uy development cf these seven goddesses 16 beyond tie scope of
thes Unests, should be remembered that Vinayak was depicted with the Saptamatckas ir the carly stage of his
Sa
oem _ __ :

--- Page 56 ---
Yajfavalkya Smrtt provides a slight variation and includes six, instead of four, Vindyakas."”
Their names are Mita, Sammita, Sala, Katankata,™ Kiign:incéa and Rayaputra. Rassat mentions
that other texts such as the Gopalatapaniya Upanisad reter to tive Vinayakas (1954 28),'”

Althouyh no contextual evidence is provided as to why the Virdyakas, along with othe
evil beings, are propitled before the goddess, waa is manifested ino seven benevolent

i .

| characteristics, and before the main deity, in this case the Sun, attention needs to be drawn ta
this particular order of worship. Did the appeasement of the Vindyakas and the goddess in the
Grhya Siiua provide an carly mdication af Vinaya‘ca's position as the ‘Lord of Boyumminigs’ or
should this reference be considered circumstantial? His function as ‘Lord of Beginnings’ seems
ta have had a special significance at an early stage of lis worship and bis association with tae
gaddess. “The references to the Vinayakas in the Manava Grhya Siva, the elaborate papa, and
the description of the symptoms of Vuidyaka-possessed people, indicate well-established
Vinayaka worship as early as the third century BCI. Whether or not the Vinayakas need to be
considered as obstacle-crealng personae cannot be answerec for there 1s not. sufficient
evidence, although the hypothesis affered by Thapan should be taken into consideration. From
the Suarti of the beg:nning of the Common Fra, itis clear that these four Vinayakas and their

: . “ps &
worship had evolved as the:r worship became linked to that of Ambika and Siva

Besides embodying the funcuion ef Vindyaka as Creator of obstacles, Winayaka-Ganesa
aisn acquired fame as the Leader of the Troops, that is, as Ganapati, The most common
meaning of gana is ‘hast’ or ‘group: this could refer to a group of gods, demi-guds, jotluwers or
attendants. VS. Agarwaia (1970011) wdieates that il can also reter to the followers of the
‘eachers of various sects. Later the word gana acquires a specific connotation denoting the
loops, especially the dem:-gods and demons. who form a part of Sivas entourage. It as within
Uus framework that the meaning of Ganapatr or Ganesa as the leader of the troops of Siva
occurs,

It has been argued by some scholars’! that references ta Ganapati as the elephant-
headed deity are found as carly as the Reveda: Reveda §:23-17 and Reveda X:112:9°" refer
hanography anc therefure al naght well be argued that the represgatation of Vonayaka anil the Saotamatckes
actually goes back to the pened of the Manava Grhya Suba.

‘A tansiatiun of thus text is included es an Appendix to this thesis
 Rassal wees thil Katankata cy gsc a rune for Sie (1984.79) Aple (1994 377) gives sever a’termmatns
meavngs for tae word tite, gold, Ganegs and Siva
The Tact that the Gopaliiepamiya Cpanisad, 2 Vargnays, text. mentions five Vindyakas os arteresting because the
later Patica-Virgyaka warship is a.su based on five Vinayakas,
“ Ascs discussed ater co this chapter, the associatica of Vinzyake-Ganesa with patoo deites af tade suppests '
that the pod wes appeased at the beginning of the uncertaking it orter to teineve the obstacles (Thapan 1997192)

j " Raccacnandia Rao (1992.1) Degns Ing fast clapter with: Tae cartes! refercnees to Ganapath occur m pve
Eycuns of the Reveda collection’ According t bun the fist hyn, (h23, 15 sili used in Ganega worship. ‘The
“ymn was allegedly composed by @ sage called Bhrgu who composed ne less thar thertysnme hymns a the
Raveds Raa contadets hs opening words wher ie fater states Cat the two Ved:e inynns de agt reter to Ganesa

$5 |

--- Page 57 ---
lo Ganapati. However, this Uivory is dismissed by a second group of scholars who claum that
Ganapati in the Vedic verses was a reference to other Vedic deities The first verse (1123-1) is
taker to be a reference lo Brhaspati who ts considered tu be the patron ef the hymn
Ramasubramauam (1971:110) supports this theory by stating that the words  ganapati,
kavinam-kavi and jyestha-raja ave indeed synonyms for Ganesa but 2!) the Vedic conunentazies
declare that this hyn: was dedicated to the god Brhaspau, why was alsa considered “Lord of
the Hosts’. Rocher (1992:69), Courtright (1985:9) and many other scholars agree on this point
Vhe second verse (X 112-9) is taken to refer to the gud Indra (Rocher 1992.70; Ramasubramam
1971 1-11; Aravanimthan 1969:226, Hazra 1968;263). Although the second explanation 1s
tas most ikely, it should be neted that these Vedic hymns are used by the Ganapatyas to
legiuniuse their account of the or:gin of their patron deity.

The Anusdsana Parvan of the Mahabharata provides the first link between the
Vinayakes and the Ganesgvaras The Ganesvaras- Vindyakas are described as the "Lords of all
the worlds'.'* Because the exact number of Vinayakas 1s not mentioned, it would be merely
specalative to suggest that the ‘Lords of all the worlds' refers to the four Vinayakas in the
Manava Grhya Satrat, The argument in favour af this passibihty is the fact that these four might
have keen linked with the four directions which would therefore expiain their function as ‘Lords
of the World’) Notwithstanding the limited reterenees ly the Vutiyakas in the Epics! the
reference i: the later Anusasana Parvan clear.y indicates that the Windyakas have cast off some
of thers negative charactensies.'"© The multiple number of the Vinayakas suggests that the
composition of this Parvan probably took place before the Yiinavalkya Srrti. In the
Mahabharata, names such as Ganadhipa, Ganakara, Ganatat, Ganapati, Ganesvara and Ganesa
occur dut they ars epithets of Siva (Sorensen 1963)/
but ie Brlaspati and Incta, In cotc.asion ke vartes that Ganapat: of the ckissiecal age represents the composite
taxe.y of all these Vedic devtes Broaspan. Brahmanaspat, Indra, Ape: and Rucra’ (1992 4) Rao's crew on the
Vedic engins of Ganeda has beer taken over dy other scholars such as Aravacnudian: (1966), Dantelou (19843, anc
Sarcer (1909) An overview of the authors suppo:ting the theory cf Ganed's Vedic ongins ss piven by Michael
VORB,

“Gananam fve panapain deanna kavim kavindas  apamaseavastaman 6 tyesthardyam — orabmanan
brelnsuiwepate nah Sivan nanbhit sida sddanam 7 We uvoke thes, O Ganapati of the tracps, Brhaspatt of the
Prayers, the must creative among the artists, avounding in Veasure beyond measure. Cre most buliart among the
stpenu: Femps. Lister to or prayers, comme with your bless:ngs and ass.cances nto our abode, and >: seated}
(ranslatian according ta Rae 1992-2)

“on su sida genapate gengsu, tain ahs Vipratanian kavinda: (Rocker 1992.79)

NW Anusisana Parvan, (90.25-28. Hvarih sarvaiokanam ganedvaras mayakahs

ES wWwoenas the ceferences to Vindyakas or Ganesvares in the Mahabharata acc few. the Ramayana docs rat
senor eter Sharma beleves that, at the time of the wumpasition of the Ranidvena, Vinhyasxa worshop was pot
setestaalsed amonat the masses (Shani 197 $ 4-5} However, the evidence tenn the Mahdbhamia and the Gaby
Su.ua suyests tkat there wes a corceptof an obdacle-creating entity

'[Rapan (1997-99) has stwgested that the Anusisana Paras should probably be dated ‘o around the secord
comuy CE, tus making :ta itie eacier than the Ydjhavaikya Smet ‘This would explain why the Vinayakas un
abt relered to tn the plural

"Shame (1978.9) bas suguested thet wie eepienteaded god may have been a pepular ceity among some
libys who were abso knowa as gerias aml wlio were ico by Gananalss Ih tae Maiabharete the word game, neanung
‘ca, occurs frequently

56
1
|

--- Page 58 ---
The introduction of the Ad? Parvan of the Mahabharata which features Ganesa as the
scribe of Vyasa, the composer of the Mahabhavata *stands in sharp contrast to these few
veferenzes im the epic to VWindyaka. Op:ntons concerning this passage are divided. Some :
schoiars, Sharma amongst them,'” believe that this section was an mlegral part of the epic.
However, the suggestion that Ganesa featured in the Mahabharata is contradicted by the
Endings of Winternitz who, after analysing the Grantha manuscript of the epic, comes to the
conclusicn that the story 1s a ater interpolation (1898:147)  Wenternit?’s conclusion is
supported by the critical edition of the Mahabharata in which the Ganesa story is merely
referred to ma footnote, thus indteating that il was a later addition (Rocher [992:72)}. The fact
that A; Burdid noted that the Mahabharata was written. by the elephant-headed pod (E. Sachau
VORK:volume L134) indicates that by the eleventh century the story had become an integral part
ofthe Mahabharata and that Garesa had become so important that avy interpaiation was made to
connect lim with onc of the most important texts of Indian: history.

It has been established so far that in aacient India the clephant enjoyed a sacred status
and this led to the creation of an elephant deity in some parts of the subcontinent which can be
regarded as a possible prototype of Vindyaka-Ganesa. However, the textual references to an
elephant deity (Dantin) are isolated and do net contribute ta the elucidation of the development
ef this prototype since al! they have in common with the present Vindyaka is a single
lconographica: feature. Apart trom this elephant deity, which 1s distinct from Ganega, there are
carly references in the Manava Grhya Satra which are very suggestive for the god's character as
‘Creator of Obstacles’. The four Vindyakas described are evil and the text dogs not clucidate
whether they are abstract concepts or resi demons, The Mahabharata commects the Vinayakas
with the Ganesvaras and the passage is also suggestive of thet association with the four
directions, The Yamavalkya Sing refercness seem to represent (her acceptance within’ the
Branmame pantheon; the four are now associated with one Vindyaka whe is appo:nted by
Rudra and Brahmad as the ‘Leader ef the traaps’,, a ttle which proves to ve the logical conclusion
of their connection with the Garesvaras in the Mababhdrata However, the texts remain silent
about the physical features of Cie Vindyaka. At this stage itis clear that all the ingredients fo:
lise creation oF Vinayaka-Ganesa were present. Gelly maxes teference to three clephant-headcd
images, dated to about the first or second century CE, which she considers to be protolypes of
Vindyaka-Ganess. The first is a fragment from the Amaravati sdipa which Gelty (1991 28) and
Coomaraswamy (1971°30) belisve is a transitional form of Ganesa. However, a criical
"8 Le exnact cn question natrstes haw Vyasa asked Bralinz to send aint someone who would write down fe
Bkdeata while be dictated i. Heatnsg the request of ¥yas1, Brahma sent Ganesa Vyasa tien said that ne should
write the Ghamta down only when he understaad the fu.l meaning of tie words. thus endling him ta refiect upon
the text -

Sharma (1975 6) bey.ns with a reference to this passage ‘The Adi Parven of the Mahdbharata not an'y
idigztes Genesa worship bat it alse Crows fight op epe et his main aspects, ¢.. God of Wiscou. and the | ord of
Cearn:ng’, as regards bun as the weler of the Mababiarac’
57

--- Page 59 ---
vxanmnation of the frapment fails to support this theory because it resembles a bull-headed
figure rather than an elephant-headed one. A frieze depicting five elephant-lieadcd vakyas is
considered by VS. Agarweia (1963:106-107) as the earliest representation of a Ganesa
prototype m Mathuran art. P. K. Agarwala desenbes the figures as being gajasirya yaksas
However, as Narain (1992:26) points out, this term devs not appear in any of the yaksa lists. A
third disputed representation is the fneze of ganas in Mihuntale (S71 Lanka). Paranavitana, who
discovered the frieze, suggests a late date, but Getty (1991 25) 1s canvinced they belong to the
frst centuries of the Common tra. While these isolated instances could be considered
protolypes af Vindyaka-Ganesa, they are more tikeiy lo be clephant-headed yaksas

These clephant-headed yaksas provoke a discussion in view of a group of Vindyaka
statues excavated near Mathura. Dy dating these statues between the first and the third century,
Dhavalikar (1992:51-52) defies the geneval belief that the first representations of Vindyaxa-
GaneSa appeared in the Gupta era, around 400 CE." He believes that since the elephant-
neaded statues are carved in the round, they belong te the Kusaia period. A detailed description
of these three Mathura statues is provided by Dhavahikar and need not be repeated here but itis
imteresing that these figures show the elephant-head with only ong tusk and the trunk 1s coiled.
towards the ‘eft and touching the mrodaka bow]. These ate specific features of Vinavaka-
GaneSa's :conegraphy and itis unlikely that they are also characteristics of clephant-headed
yaksas.

Thapan (1997;104-105) disputes Dhavalixar's findings, arguing that these statues must
have been representations of the elephant deity that period, as has been suggested by the
findings trom Afghanistan, the references to Daniin in the Mahabhdrats, and the interpolations
asthe Yegurveda. [ev argument ts supported Sy the fact taat these dure statues show a singic
tusk, the main feature of Danun. If the suggestion made by Dkavalskar 1s taken seriously, shea
ites possible Uaat the earliest representations of Winayaka-Ganesa were sculpted accerd:ng to
the characteristics of the elephant-deity described in the Mahabharata and the Yayurveda As
fitrther indicative materials or texts are not available, itis impossible to state whether these
Mathura statues represent the elephant deity, or whether they were indeed the earliest
representations of Vindyaka.

‘There is no doubt that titer statues dated circa the fiith century CE are Vindyakas. Two
Afghan figures prove to be among the best examples attesting the various characteristics of
Vinayaisa. The earliest of the two is the statue of Sakar Dhar which 1s dated to the fourth
century CE. Its iconographical features betvay its creation in the transitional pertod between the
Kasana art and the Gupta schoei and reveal taat the iconography of the clephant-headed deity
""hvamples of these early statues have been found in the Macihyadese (the Sasisa mound 11 the Mathara repien),
us the caves ef Uedayagin (Madityt Pradesh), Raign (Bihar) ard Afghanistan

58

--- Page 60 ---
was not yel standardised. Interesting are the two gana attendants, indicat (he link between
Vindyaka and panas The other statue was found in the same region and is kaown as the
“Ganesa of Gardez’, Both Dhavalikar and Agarwaia have dated it lo the late fifth er the carly
sixth century, whereas Sircar believes Uhat ct dclungs lo tne seventh century CE (Sircar in ET
XXXV, 1963-1964.44). The inscription on the base of the statue This image of Maha-
Vindyaka was instailed by Parama Bhattaraka Mahararadhiraia Saku Khingala, on the tlurtecntl:
day of the dught halt of the month Jyestha in year eight’ | makes it quite clear that the statuc
represents Vindyaka rather than a prototype. The reterence to che king Sahi proves to be more
sompiicated and his idgntity 1s still being debated.“! The iconographic detuls of these wo
‘igures from Afghanistan are described by R. C. Agarwala (1968:166-168) and Dhavalisar
(1992: $0-51) and do not need to be repeated here The physival features of the statues show a
strong Hellenistic influence, as can be seen in the Gandhara school, whereas the jewellery and
the castume are inspired by the Magadha school of art. The tiger skin and the ithyphallic nature
of these 1nayes suggest an association with Siva!

While acknowledging the fact that Vinayaka had accuired a distinct wonographical form
dy the fifth century, the question stil remains as to why he became associated with elephants
and the elephant-headed deity It can be argued that there were certain factors linking the
Vinayakas of the texts with the sacred status of the elephant, but sice there is no hard evidence
lo prove Urs point, the following interpretation is conjecture Ore of the four Vindyakas of the
Manava Grhyva Sita, Kasmandarajaputra, was associated with elephants through the character
of Vutidhaka, the leader of the Kismandas, called ne Lord of elephants, * The second variy
link between Viniyakas and the elephant is Virfipaksa, the Lord of Nagas. who farms part of
the Vinayaka entourage. Thapan has shown thal, although he was calted the ‘Lord of Nagas, he
was depicted as an elephant alongside Airavata among the cight diggajas. The four Vindyakas
may have been a reference to the four directions which wouid automatically have affiliated them
wath the elephants supperung the cosmos, This idea is supported by the later reference un the
Anusdsana Parvan of the Mahabharata which mentions the Ganesvaras-Vindyakas as the
lords of the Worlds’ (Thapan 1997.98, footnote 8$).4 The Yapilavalkva Smrti, despite

“Tucer identities the «ing weth Sak Khingila of Klingsla of the Kaskenr chron:cle and of the coms which were
issued by an early king bearing that game (Dhavaakar 1971 342: RC Aganvala 155% 166} Surcsr on the other
hard beheves that Khingala was a Sal: rutcr of Kapisa ur Kabu

* Thapan stipgests that, rather than an association writ Siva, Giese figures represent the syneretic torn of the
cephkint dcuy ard Siva, The existence of an elephant dsuy cn the Kapisa area has beer, discussed above. Thapen
provides an excelent stady of the ongins of Siva, deanng with the carly htemary references to the ged and ackiog
his cult to the worsiup of Mabisasura, She also avalyses Pasupat sorstup and the relatioasmp detween Siva and
animals such as the elephan:, the bulTalo and U2 ber (199 chapter 4) In conclusion: (1997 Li¥s she states that
tere isa connection between Siva’s assacation arth the tiger, the elepaant and the finan

“Ta the group of the fifty sux Vinayakas, te name of Kitsraanaerajaputra ¢s sall in use, although at rs split ne
nse, Kusmanda and Rayaputta ace found ot the scone circle of Vindyakas The preset riurt: of Kesmynda is one
of the aldest of the fifty-six. In the Kas? Khanca. bewever, the assecitor ef Kismanda anh clephants has
completely disaupeared. Kiigmanda is now senerated for warcung off caiamuties and RAjapitia is, as oe name
sagyests, Unpertant for xings

8 Anusdsana Parva, critical edttion aypendix 18:54

89

--- Page 61 ---
reproducing parts of the Vindyaka Kalpa from the Grhya Siitra, gives evidence of the rise in
status of the Winaévakas to the puint that they became linked with Ambika and Rudra. In
conclusion itis prebable that this associaton with clephants and the existence of elephant-
neaded deiues combined to provide a favourable context in which Vindvaka became the
clephant-headed god par excellence and in which the Kusana sculptors’ images, regardless of
what they might have been representations of onginaily, could be identified as Vinayaka

Despite the fact that Vinayaka acuuured lus elephant churaclerisucs in the date Kusana
and carly Gupta periods, statues of that era depicting the deity alone are rare. In the ages
following his emergence as an elephant-headed god, he usually appears together with other
deities or ina subordinate position at the gate of tie taresloald. In lis earliest representations
with other ceities he frequentiy accompanies the Sapta Matrkas or Seven Mothers and the Nava
Grahas or Nine Planets. This :s precisely what tie Vinavaka Santi would have led one to expect
since it requires the worship of Vindyaka and the Grahas before worshipping Ambika and the
Sun ( Yajiiavalkya Smyti, verses 293-294), Because a thorough study of the Matrkas!* and the
Nava Grahas is beyond the scopy of this thesis, emphasis will be placed on their relationship
wilh Vinayaka

| . ors a = = .

The cathest representation of Vingyake and the Maukas dates from the sixth century
CE In Peogarh in Citar Pradesh two rock panels show Vindyaka as the last figure in the row
The Naharghatt reliet represents nine figures, all with haloes. The first figure is identified as
Niradhadra or Siva,' followed by the seven goddesses and finally Vindyaka, depicted with
wo arms (RoC. Agarwaia 1971:85)) The tock-cut Ra:ghat relic? shows an athyphallie
Virabhadra: Vindyaka is depicted with two arms and seated
vor ainore detailed study on the Muthaas, see Kinsley (1987) Kesamby (1962), Mishra (1969) and Shar
(978) The earliest reterence to them is found in the Mfahabhdrata anc cadicates that these goddesses onginated
from ron Vedic tracstion (Kinsley 1987:255). These earls descriptions car be dated to the first century and nucly
specify their number In later radians ther number :s csua.]y seven asthouph there are representations ot igs
and even sixteen (Kinsley 1987 15), Mishra 1989-13) Ls the cally penod these nares were nol fixed e:ther (B.
Sahar 1978-218). It was only a the medieval period Gal dieu number axl names became standardiscd. Despite,
Qe ncme Mothers and the eary resresentaz.ons at the vith  chvdien en their lag, they were cousidered a
dangee te sinall cheidiens As a result of ther association with evil ard the references 19 ther non-Bralunanton
onpins in the Mahdbbarate. ene ix cnclined to canghute thay they were onguually gediia devanis who were
plopitated ui the villages (Karsley 1987 155, Kesambi 1962:19-20) Ir the post-Fyrs pened (from: 400 CF
oawirds) the Maurkis kecome wereasingly popular nm wotsinp which resulted in the sandardisatou of tae
nuoiber and names, and the rinber seven uself became a synonym for fe MUkas
“ Onyonally Virakhadra was a gana crested by Ructa to destroy the toes of the cevorces of Rudra. bn the Linge
Purina (196 45) tas said that Virabkadra embodies the fury of tre Avother verse ef the same Puriins.
CLD 96 64 75) Cesersbes how Virebhadia took te foray of Sambha (half amual, bal bord) Although these verses
were composed ata laterstage, they reflect the venous associatons uf Siva befere fie Comma: Fra
Mishra (1989: 14) has sugested that the representation of Vira hace and Ganesa at the benniing and the end
oF Lie panels rep.aces the ayudha purusas. The rock-cut panel of Pathan, “owever, enly represents Virabbadra an
assocuation will the Mairkas Tlus panel is assigned to the fifth century which may indicate thal dere was uo
sanveztion 3; Urit carly period to: deprerng both Suva and Garega in the same parcel

60

--- Page 62 ---
From the early medieval period the associalion between Virabhadra, Vindyaka and the
Matrk’s became more proniunent. Two panels from Jodhpur and Abaner, dated to the early
Prethara period (seventh century) shed more ght on this (R.C. Agarwala 19§7:111-114, O
P. Mishra :989:18) ibis clear from invecations to the Sapta Matrkds én dieir inscriptions and
Tae numerous scuipurres, that the Calukyas of Badami were also mother-worsluppers.'” More :
satues of the divine Mothers and ‘heir bvo companions are also feurd in the cave tormples of .
Ellera, uz Orissa, in Machya Pradesh and in Gujarat.” Several reasons could be given as to
why Vinayaka obtained a piace alongside the Matrkas, There are some s:milantics between the
evolution of the clephant-headed god and the goddesses, and this is suggestive: beth arese trom
obscurity, and both were originally feared tor their negelve qualities, the Vindyakas (and later
Vindva'sa) for their ab: lity to create (roubles, and the mother goddesses for being able to miliet
diseases on children. Thapan mentions that, in the Manava Grhva Siitra (11:14:30), seven
poddesses personifying beauty, prosperity and alter good qualities were invoked after the
Vinayaka worship (1997-96), but she does not develop this anv further, In the Yapiavalkya
Sinrt tic worship of Vinayaka precedes that of Ambika. Leaving aside the wueshior ef whether
Ambikz should be regarded as Ins mother or net, it 1s required that al! the worsiippers of
Vinayaka should alse pay obvisance wo her.’ The affihation between Vindyaka and the
Matrkas witnessed in the pancis probably stems from these literary sources That the Vindyaka
lepresented in the Matrka panels was still not entirely accepted in the Brahmanical pantheon is
suggested by his standing or dancing stance and the fact that he is depicted with only lwo arms.
Banerjez (1984.40) argues that To depict the susidiary postition he (Wneayaka? was probably
shown with tvo arms which exhibited that the figure was a demi-god whose admission in the
Hindu pantagon was not yet completed. The position of these pane:s varies bul they never

| seem to occupy a prime position in the shrine, thus suggesting what the worskup of the
Saplamatrkas and Vindyeka was sudordinate to that of the main deity. In this contest
Viniiyaka's attribute as “Lord of the Threshold’ may be considered since, in his position as an
attendant alangsice the Saptamatrkis, he was propitiated before the main god of the temple. The
suggestion that Vindyaka and Virabhadra were both representations of the dyudha purugas,
who were considered to be some sort of dvdrapalas, is also undicatve of his status as the ‘Lord
. of the lhreshold'
FB any of the temples around Badan ceotie panels depicting the Saptumndtrxas vath Siva 2nd Ganesa Une of
these is the panel of bakkanet in the temp. of Kasivisvesvaca winters taere is also a vepresentaten af the vahana of
each For Ganesa there is a ratunder bis throne (Getty 1997-27}. Other reiiefs ul that penod often depict
Miradkacta and Ganesan a dancing pose
“Fer festa: descaphons ef the various Matki rebefs, see Getty (1091 27 311 and OP Miskia (1989), sec B
Saban ¢.978 60, 211-224} for the Manka panels in Orissa.
“in the Gobirla Savi (Kare 168-74, volume 1V529, foomete 184) ckere is a direct reference fe the
asspciation, namely that all the ntes should bepia wid an act of worship Ganesa and the Métrkas
ol

--- Page 63 ---
Karly representations of Vinayaka with other geds also include the Nava Graha panels,
or the mae planets of Hindu cosmology.” Gelly describes a pane! of Kankandight where
Vinayaka is standing at the aight hand side of the Nava Grahgs, wearing the high jata-mukuti of
Siva and carry:ng a rosary and an axe. In the Qrissap temples sum:lar panels have been round
or the doorways, whereas in the south of India they are us the veranda around the main shrine. .
Getty believes that such panels were put im the lemples as a protection from evi and as an |
assurance of prosperity for the temple builders (1991:30; Redig 1996:47). The reason for t
associaung Vindyaka with the Nine Planets might also be sought in the Yajsavalkya Smrtu :
which prescribes the worship of the Grahas as one of the essentials after the Vinayaka worship
(Thapan 1997 96) It can ve argued from the iconographic evidence that the clepharit-heaced
god had not yet risen abeve the stttus ef a demi-god, similar to his subordinate position
amongst the Mat; xa: that is, he was more propitiated than worshipped. Both Vinayaka and the
Gyahas were able to place obstacles in the performance of worship, therefore their propitation
permitted the worship of the main deity to be successful

The above account suggests that the creation aad development of the elephant-headed
Vinayaka-Ganega was the result of different: factors. It can be argued that the material
concertung the status of the elephant in South Asia, and the aumismatc tindings do not
contuibute much to the analysis of the fifty-six Windyakas. However, in order to give a complete
account of the ged's evaluuon this maternal has been found valuable and necessary to
comprehend the farther evolution of Vinayaka-Ganesa What is of interest here is that the
theriomorphie deity of Atghanistan and the sacred elephants in cariy Indian art provided same
of the necessary elements for the creation of Vindyaka's character. When analysing the group of
lne fifty-six Vindyakas im Chapters Four and Five it will be shown that the sacred elephants
assuciation with water and the four cardinal directions plays a vital vole, The chronological
development of the character of Vindyaka also plays a vital role when dating the group of the
tifty-s:x Vinayakas in Banaras. Although :t would be premature at this stage ta make
predictions as to their date, 1¢ can be sud thatin their function the fifty-six Vinayakas still show
some of tic orginal characteristics of the Vindyakas

The increasing prevalence of Vinayaxa in iconegraphy 1 reflected in Purani¢ Iterature
As Vindyaka was linked to the worsh:p of Siva, itis no surprise that the majority of the Ganesa
rayths are found in the Saivite trachtion. The Siva, Linge, Skanda and Aga Puranas contan
several stories about the elephant-headed deity. OF the Purdinas of the Varsnava tradiuor,
Garnesa appears inthe Vardha, Padnia andGareda Puranas. In the Brahnanival wadition Ganesa
plays aorole in the Bhavisya, Brahma, the Brabindnda and Vamanai Puranas. The
Brahmavaivarta Purgna of the same tradition devotes a whole Khanda to him cailed the Ganesa
“hese one platets are Surya, the sun, Candra, tite moon, Angitaka, Mars, Budhato, Mezcuty, Brhaspan,
suptter, Suxre, Venus, Sans. Saturn, and then Rabu and Ketu, the tye cemons of the eclipses

a2

--- Page 64 ---
Khanda which contau:s forty-six chapters I was the Saivite wadition which determined the
character of Virdyaka-Ganesa in the Puranas. One ef the earliest Purame roles of Vinayaka is
as the ganapati of Siva, The ganas or troops were created by Siva and were considered fo be his
entourage. Over the centuries other deities hnked to Siva worship became associated with these
troops. This syncveusin alse took place in thy case oF the elephant and Vindyaka-Ganesa, From
the earliest tune, die pretolype of Siva was associated with animals, the elephant amongst
tbem.' The Siva Purdna (13°57) recounts kow the elephant cemen, Gajasura, who was
deteated by Siva constantly wore an elephant skin (Courtright 1985:35). Taapan has voted that,
in some contexts, the elephant associated with Siva is characterised negatively as Gaydsura. In
oliers, the ciephant is venerated as a gana of Siva Besides being appointed as the ganapati of
Siva because of his fierce character, Vinayaka-Ganesa also develops a mild nature; namely, he
acquires a cluldheed and thus funchons as the intermediary between the austere Siva and the
devotee Even watlin the Purame sources, the evolution of the character of Vinayaka 1s
noticeable The earliest Puranic references to the deity refer to him as Vindyaka, a fearful deity
who 1s ale to conquer demans.' Thereafter he is appointed by Siva as his ganapati, leading
the oops, The stories of Ganega as the son of Siva should be regarded as recent because of the
depicnon of the clephant-headed deity as a fully-tledged member of the Bralamanic pantheon
The daung of the Puranas has proved to be an almost impossible task aad so itis difficult to
establish exactly when Ganesa became associated with Siva as his son. The early medieval
period, around the seventh to eighth century CE, seems most likely.

The story recounting the glory of the ‘ity-six Vinayakas in Banaras could be regarded
as an example of Ganesa's link with Siva. Despite the fact that the Efly-six we called
Vinayakas, fora reason discussed later, they are all forms of Dhundhiraja which ts an epithet of
Ganeéa and who in the story is regarded as the son of Siva A further bond between S:va aad
the Vindyakas is revealed by the fact that the fifty-six Vinayakas are housed in Siva’s city par
excellence, Banaras, where they fulfil the function af protectors of the sacred territory

The stones regarding Ganesa’s birth can be classified into three categories: myths
narrating his parentage, those explaining his elephant head and eapianations for his single tusk.
Vhey have been widely discussed by various scholars, “ and therefore de not need to be
MsTor oldest torn of Saivism appears lo be Pasupate Saivism, describing Oe dety as “Loté ef the Animals’ Lins
cult plevatled 1 the uarth-west and the west of India around the durd contury BCE.

“ Asacleld, Ganesa the clephant-headed pod resembles the chid Krene im character. Just as Krsna became an
cutlettor the devotion of the masses. the child Ganesa added 4 different dimension to Siva worsinp ‘The ascens
Sie was revealed as a leving father, approachable 1ocgh bis son's fun losng character, Wheres Visnu und Siva
snjeyed royal patronage, mwas the child incamatien of Visnu ord the son of Siva wac were enmeasely popular
with the popu.ation etlarge (Thapar 907 524)
Sia Porsta Wd 16 and WS.21 12 18, Wardha Purine | 23.20-26
Gently C970. Coutigbt 198s). Suan Pal Nagar (9921 SoS) Subramunyaswann (1996) and in vaneas
otis wotks deahny wth aspects of Ganega such as Heres (654i Yo Xoashoen (1992) Rocaee (19923, ard
Shakuntala £1992)

63

--- Page 65 ---
repeated here, Marg germane to thy current Utesis than the mythology of Ganesa in the Purduas
:s the cansiderable iconographic smtormation that they provide

The following chronological exammation of the various relevant Puranic sources traces
the evolution of Vinayaka's iconegraphic characteristics as well as lus given names and
epuhets. This will also aid the dating of the fifty-six Vindyakas because his different attributes
were expanded at different periods. In the mitroducuon te Chapter Four further attention will be
paid to the different period styles as some of the Vindiyakas show pecul:ar fcatures, some which
have never been properly analysed by experts in Indian religious art

The Visnudharmonara Purana (3:71:13-16) dated between 450 and 60 CE describes
Vindyaka as clephant-faced, with a stila aad an aksamala in lus right hands and a parasu and
moadaka patra im the lefl hands. He tacks the lus on the ceft. has a fambodara, suff ears and
wears Gger-skin, He wears a nagayajfopavita and one foot rests on his seat. The Matsyvi
Purdna (260:52-55), whose description of the god's iconagraphy is ascribed to the sixth and
seventh centuries CE, describes Vindyaka as clephant-faced, pot-bellied and with four arms. He
wears a ndgayajnopavita, has one tusk and has large ears. In his right hands he holds his tusk
and an uipala and in dis tet hands the mudaka Sow] and a parasu. He has a large tace and
muscular shoulders and lis mount is a rat He 1s also escorted by Rddhi and Buddhi. The
Bhavisva Purdna (Brahma Parvan 29:3-6), dated between the eighth and ninth centuries CE, *
icpresents Vinayaka seated ena lotus Uene, with tour arms and three eyes. He is bedecked |
wath yewels, has ‘Ae moon on his head and wears a ndgayayiepavita, His attributes ae the tusk !
and the aksamaia in his right hands and the parase and a modaka in Ins len hands The musaia, |
the pasa and the vara are also mentioned as atir’zutes. The Linga Purdna (1:108:9-12)'" refers !
to Garanana’™ as the wielder of the istifa and the pasa and he 1s bedecked with orraments. He |
also wears @ négayajnopavita. The Padma Purana (62:2-8), generally dated berveen the nmth
and tenth centuries CE, depicts Ganese as having a huge dody, one tusk, a pol-belly and large !
eyes, He wears a girdle and the skin of the black antelope. He has a nagasayiopavita, a crescent |
moon or his head and rides a rat. He is clephant-faced, has charming ears and holds a pasa and i
an ankusa Twelve names of the god are aiso mentioned: Ganapati, Viphnaraja. Lambatunda, 1
Gajinana, Dvaimatura, Horamba, Ekadanta, Ganadhipz, Pasupala and Bhavatanaya (61:31-32). |
Tho Kailasa Sannuta (7-14-16) of Uke Siva Purana (composed not earlier than 980 CE according |
ta Hazra) (Recher 1986:225) gives Ganesa a red colour and a lotus scat He hes a huge body |
and 1s adorned with omaments. His attributes are the pasa and the ankusa in the upper hands
and the dana and a favourite obyect, Which can be a modaka, in lus lower hands. The Agni
* Havra places tis Purdnz atthe end of the eight century CE,
the dates fer thes Paxina vary between the tif and ninth ecatunes Hasta cven places t betwoes 800 and
(CCB CT. [tis known from the work of Laksnidnara that there was a version of the Linga Pusdna which was lost
anil, based on the evicerce of the Kityakalpatary, rust have unedited the twelfth century
The name Gayarana’ er 'F.ephant Face indizates the god's hick wits re e.epaant

64

--- Page 66 ---
Purana (711-12) generally considered to be composed around the ninth cenwry Ch.”
deseribes Ganega as being elephant-faced with one tusk, a curved trunk, and, in tus hands,
carrying a danda, a pasa. an ankusa and a modaka Verses six to seven give different names for
Ganesa. Ganapau, Gandidlupa, Ganega, Gananayaka, Ganakrida, Vakratunda, Ekadamistra,
Mahodara, Gajavaktra, Lambakuksi, Vikata, Vighnanasana, Dhunwavame and Mahendra The
Vanitha Purana (23:17) mentions Gauesa as being pol-beliied and weanng a nageyasfopavita
The dates ascribed to this Purdia range between the tenth and tweltth centunes CE (Rocher
1986 242) In the Skanda Purdna (iT 11:5-12), conzpused belween the eleventh and Gurteenth
centuries, Ganesa has five heads, three cyes and ten arms. The middle face 1s deser:bed as being
of fair comp.exion. His ten attributes are: pasa, padma, parasu, afkusa, agala, musala, varada
mudi, danta, aksamala and modaka pitra. He is seated in the vogdasana and has a moon
crescent on bis bead Part VIE (1:38.46-47) provides a description of Mahaganapau. The
number of his tusks can vary: one, two or four. Further he ts four-armed and has three eyes. He

| Lalds a sala in one of ius hands. His cars are conical and he is calicd ‘the hero with the staff or

‘the leader of lus army’, The Narada Purana (1:06:139) descnbes Ganesa as beng red in colour
and having three eyes, be holds a pasa and an aikusa in the upper hands whiie his iower hands
are in the abaya anc the varada mudrd. He is embraced by his consort who holds @ lotus in her
hance. Another verse of the same text (1:66°82) descripes ium as being seated with his consort
and having four hands in which he holds the pasa, the ankusa, the siidha patra and a modaka.
Providing a date for tus Purdina is difficult Rocher, who has given an account of the various
attympts to date this work, includes dates trom as carly as the ninth century to as late as the
sixteenth and even seventeenth centunes CE. It thus appears that the worl 1s a compilation af
diffrent smaller parts and its completed form is comparatively late’ (Rocher 1986:203).

The Ganesa Parana, one of the ovo Upa-Puranas dedicated to Ganess, gives various
descriptions ef the deity’s physical appearance. In the Updsand Khanda (12:33-38) he is
deser:bed as having fingernails which are red like a lotus. His red dress as like the light of the
sun and the moon adorns bis head. He holds a khadga and a khefaka, a dhanus and jas Saki in
his arms. [He has enly one tusk which is like varahadamstra (the tusk of a boar). His eyes and
crown ate described as being beautiful. A more frightening picture is sketched un chapter forty-
four (verses twenty-five to thirty). Here he has five faces and ten arms He wears the muon on
Ins forehead and has emaments of serpents and a garland of skulls Is his four hands he carries
weapons This Purana also gives the four ditterent forms of Ganesa in the tour different
yugas * The other Upa-Purdna, the Mudgala Purdna, deals with ning aspects of Ganesa (see
™ Rocker (1986.137) surrunanses the various seitclarly opiaions concernmg the cate of the Agar Purina
Altheayh some sckolars place the Agr before the net century and sone alter, because of Une Tantric elements 1
wae Purana. ‘he peneral consensus seers to be that the text onpinated carts presgot fore: around the meth century
cE
“Ly cae kefe sugit He as called Virayaka vith ten arms and riding en a hon, whereas in Ge teer yupa he ws
Maydiegvara with only six arms and cing a pezcock In the dvdpar suga he iscailed Garanana, has four arms, 1s

05

--- Page 67 ---
Appendix). Most of the iconograplucal details are im fact dhydnas, The Mudgala Purana 1:4:10-
18 describes hum as four-armed, having a large body and an ciephant face, together with a big
delly His omaments consist of earrings, a crown and a garland ef jewels. A snake adorms his
havel and he wears anklels and ndjpuras. On his chest 2» @ ciniiaam and Siddhi and Buddla are
ateither side. In another verse of the same Upa-Purdne ie is addressed as Fleramba, Ekadanta,
Surpakarna and Dhundai (7:8:13-17). 4
Textual sources other than the Puranas, such as the Agamas and the Silpa Sastras, also
provide descriptions of the god's appearance. The Ajitégama (Kriyasade 36:302-303) describes
lwo fonns of Ganega: Vinayaka and Virabhadra Ganesa. The first is elephant-faced and three-
eyed, he wears a kKaranda mukuta and hoids an axe, a pasa, a danta and a laddu. Virabhadra
Ganesa is four-armed and three-eyed. Ie carries an iron parasu and is seated in the virdsana or
the sukhdsana position, Tie Aniarakosa (L148). a Sitpa SAstra (rom aorth India, dated to the
| fifth or sixth century CE, merely describes the different names of the desty. This list of ep:thets
provides evidence that, m the early stage of Vindyaka's existence, Ute name Ganesa was not in
use. The names used were: Ekadanta, Lambodara. Gajanana, Vinayaka, Vighnaraja,
Dvaimatura and Ganadhipa. The following verse (1:1:39) describes the god with one tusk, a
Jeaanbodara and a gayanana. Despite the tong ustof the variaus epithets, {lis unusual that there is
no reference to the god's iconographic features. This might be explained by the fact that
Vindyaka had only recendy acquired lus eephaat characteristics and itis likely that there were
no agreed conventions as te how to represent him. The Aparaytaprechd (212.35-37), an
ampertant Silpa Sdstra written between 1150 and 1250 CE," describes Ganapau as ¢!yphant-
faced with three eyes and a human body (purusardpinam). Ile is also eckadanta, wears a
vvdlayajfopavita, and las a mouse as his velncle, he holds one tusk in his right hand and has ¢
parasu in lis upper nght hand. The etpa/a (lotus) is in his upper lett hand and inthe fourth hana
Is the modaka.
Two important treatises of the tifeenth century deal with the ionography of Ganesa
The first the Ripamandana which descnbes tae iconograpay of Ganesga, Heramba and
Vaxratunda. Garesa (5:15) is clephant-faced, he holds a dant, a parasu. a lolus lower and
sweetmeats in iis hands and he is seated on a rat’ Heramba (§:16-17) is live-faced and tires:
eved. He also ndes a rat. “ The attributes of the mght hand are the varada mudrd, the ankusa,
ted and his velioe ts the rat, and finally in the kali yuga ie 1s known aaider the name of Dhinzaka, Ins velucle 1s a
hurse, ate nas lwo arms and bis colar is smeky grey
" Kas Khaads, chapter fifty-seven mentions te fifty-six Vindyasas 2s tae finty six diferent forms oF Diurdh
Vinayaka Amongst the group af the £8y-six there isa VendyaXa called Hetamba ad another called Exadanta
? she Aparditaprechd isan inygontan: Silpa Sastia im the sense ‘hat if preserved the eather taditivn snd it proved
ta be @ punde for the later sculptures [twas compased just before the Muslins swept over the aoith of Inds and os
considered t2 be the fast naer art manuel of the classic perrad (Dubey (987:28).
Remarkable here is the fet tat Heramba also nées a iat Genetaly Heramba is said ty nave a un as lis
vehicle
66

--- Page 68 ---
the danta, a parasu and the abhaya mudra. In hus lett hand he has the kapala, the sara, an
aksamala, a pasa and a gada. Vakratunda (5:18) 1s pot-bellizd and has three eyes. His allribules
include a paéa, an ankusa, the varada mudrd and the abhaya mudra. His cars are said to be
beautiful and decorated with omaments. The second fifteenth-century work is) lhe
Devatimiiruprakarana which describes no less than six different lorms ef Ganesa. The first one
Is Ganesa Sumself, clephant-faced and riding on a rat. Ths attubutes are the danda, the parasu, 2
totus and the modakas (8:21). Heramba is desenbed 19 twa ways. One depicts hum as having
tive faces and three eves, riding on a rat and having ten arms with the follow:ng altributes:
varada mada, ankusa, danda, parasu, abhaya mudra, kapala, sara, aksamala, pasa and gada
{8:22-22). The other description says he is vermition ved and ‘ias three eyes. [his attributes are
the abhaya mudra, a modaka, a tanka, a Sara, the aksamala, a nurdpara, an ankusa and a tisila I
(8 27) Gajanana (8:24) 1s blood-coloured and elephant-faced, nis attributes include the raga
Aumbha, an arkusa. a parasu and a tusk. Vakratunda (8:25) is pot-bellied and taree-vyed, he :
has long ears decorated with a camara (fly-whisk), In his hands he holds a pasa, and an ankusa |
ui the spper hands and the lower hands are in the varada and the abhava mudra. Ucchista
| Vindyaka is one of the Tantuc fonns of Ganega and one of the forms worshipped by the
Ganapatyas, He is said to have three eyes and the rat as his vehicle. He wears a
nagayaifopavita, He carries his own tusk and the aksamala, a parasu and a modaka (8:26).
Ksipra Ganapati (8.28) is red and has three eyes; he wears the moon on his head and holds a
pasa, an ankusa, a kapala avd huis tusk.
The Sulparatna of thy sixteenth century 1s a sot Indian Silpa Sastra giving three forms
ef the god: Ganapati, Heramba and Vindyaka, Ganapati is described as having two eyes;
lieramba is five faced, pot-beliied, three-eyed and rides a lion Vindyaka 1s ekadanta, has a
ndgayaopavita, and is dedecked with yewellery and rides a ral. As will beco:ne clear [rem the
iconographical study m Chapter Four, the most common attributes of the fifty-six Vindyakas
are the nlodaka bowl, the aksamald, the pasa, the ankusa, the padma and the single tusk.“~
In addition to the iconographical characteristics mentioned above, a brief survey of the
lost common postures and attributes of Vinayaka-Ganesa is necessary here as at will
contribyte to the later iconographical analysis and dating of the fifty-six Vindvakas. There aze
three positions ia which Ganega is depicted. The earhest is the standing pose, which suggests
that in the eatly phase he kad not yet acquired 2 fully divine status and that ne functioned
stead as a gatekecper, standing outside the real threshoid. Later anages of the god in a
standing position can be divided inte Zour categories, depending on his stance He can stand im
(he samabhaga positon which means Uiat he has his two feet together. Then there 1s the
abhanga position in which he is shown slightly bent, the dvibhanga posture depicts him as
to the evrocucnen co the diferent sategones for the data of tag fitty six Vindvakas, toe mecinag of the
telewant altibutes will be explened cn cetal sec Chapter Faure
6?

--- Page 69 ---
Wice-bent and in the tibhanga position he is thrice-bent. More common now are the
representations of the god in the scated position. His seat may be a Uwone (asana) or a lotus
throne (padmdasana) and Ins vehicle the musaka or a lion ““ When seated he 1s generally in the
talitasana, a posiuen which depicts him with fis left feg folded and the right leg downwards
Besides these poses there are also statues of the god ina dancing stance '*

One of tie most charactenstic features of Ganesa is his elephant-head, although there
are sonte examples of a Vindyaka with a Auman head or with a dvar’s head. In general the
god Is represented with only ane head: however, there are cases in which he is represented wath
two, * Uwee, four or live heads. In his tive-headed form he 1s known as Heramba. The
Rupaniandana, referred to above, gives this as one of the main characteristics of Heramba-
Ganapati In the conceptual mandala of the fifty-six Vindyakas we find examples of two-headed
and four-headed Vindyakas. Although there 1s no stercatypica: mode for representing the eves,
they are generally situated slantngly on the slopmg surface of the face. From the tenth century
enwards, images are found in Kashmir, Madaya Pradesh, Uutar Pradesh and Bihar, denicting
Ganesa with bulging eyes and raised eyebrows (W. Reig 1996:53). The forehead of the deity
may be anointed with a Glaka or wilh a crescent moon. This latter decoration is taken from Siva
In the more modem images (eighteenth and ninteenth centuries) this crescent moon is often
made of silver. There are (wo categones of foreheads. one shows the god with a protruding
forehead from which the trunk originates and another type depicts a at forehead from which
the (unk seems to yut oul. Most unages of Vinayaka-Ganesga imaintain the anatomy of an
elephant when it comes to the cars. Sometimes, he 1s represented with his ears close to his head:
atother times his ears look like large wings or wintiow:ng baskets. In the later unages and in
the statues from south India, the image is adorned with ormaments in lus ears

In the later Puranic rayths we read how the deity lost one of his tusks, Most of the
iconographic representations of the god are faithtiil to the myihelugy and represent Ganesa wilh
une lusk, whether left or might. In a few cases the god ts depicted without any tusk. The
Narasimha Purana states that Ganega can have up to jour tusks. In carly representations, he 1s
depicted with a thick and heavy trunk, a feature which goes back us far as the Gupta period
(Redig 1996:52). From the carlicst textual sources itis known that Ganesa was perceived as
vakratunda or The One with the Curved Trunk’, However, many modem statues of the god

“Woen Ganeda is rewesented seated ona lion he is known as Heramba. This feature is typica! for tie Tantric
epresertanens of the gad
“Devangaia Desa: 1980-20-38) has devoted a whole article lu the dancing Ganesa, hs pos:turs and styles
© See, far exampie, Shanti [al Nagar 1992-77
"There are hardy any textual sources supporting this peculiar charactenste of Ganesa. However, these (wo-
leaded: Malnes seem to have been cute popular:n the Bombay region Getty COVE 14) prevides a repnutof 2 two
headee. Ganesa. cailed Gane Jayarn. She also notes that Sn Wilais Jenes dees a close comparison between the
Ganesa Javan tenn end Janus, the two-neaded god of the Romans (sce te Journal of the Asahe Socity: of
Bengal, 1806.926).

(shy

--- Page 70 ---
show him with the trink hang:ng straight dawn. There does not sccm to be a standard rule as to
which side the unk should be coiled. In the earlier figures the tunk always tomed towards the :
left side but later it also pornts to the rigat.

The early Kusana and Mathura states of the god show him bareheaded. In the Gupla
period it was not uncommon for him to wear a lotus in his har. It was anly from the eighth
century onwards that we see Ganesga wearing various types of crown. Sometimes he wears the
Jata-mukuta, a complicated arrangement of braided hair im chignon style, very common in |
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. In other sculptures lie is seen wearing the Aaranda-niukuta i
(a crown-shaped, conical basket towering upwarés) or the ratia-mukutd (a beyewelled crown)
Garesa can wear any omamentauon, ranging from bracelets, ankle rings, necklaces or garlands.
In India Ganesa 1s depicted in general clad ina dhon orm auger skin ‘The number and kind of
atrrautes depends on the number of arms the god is depicted with, The first Ganesa statues
show lum with two arms, his attnbutes at (he tine being any two of the following: a modaka
bowl, a pomegranate, a miilaka, a danta, 2 parasu or a rosary. Almost all the figures hold a buwl
with sweetnseats in their left hand while the dunk is touching them. When the god 1s depicted as
a four-arned deity, his atwibutes include the ankusa, the pasa, a musala, a niéfita and sugarcane
Quite often he holds orty three aliributes while the fourth hand, the tower right, 1s ui the abhaya
mudré. When he holds four atnibates, the lotus and the parase ave mainly portvayed im the rear
hands while the bowl of modakas and the iusk appear in the front hands. In Tantric images,
such as Maha-Ganesa, a female consort is seated on his lap and the gad has one of his arms
a:ound her (Pal 1981-$2S). From the earliest sculptures cnwards, Ganesa is portrayed wearing
2 yajnopavita or a sacred tread. However, in same ilustations it 1s a thread while in others at
is clearly a ndgayapfopavila, as is prescribed by the Visnudhamottara (belween 450 and 650
CH) and the Silparatna (sixteenth century)

The ant: of this treatment has been to provide a chronologica: survey of the evolution of
the clephant-headed god, Vindyaka-Ganesa, in both the litevatire and the iconagraphy Ore
Mnportant queshior, remams, however. “Las lunited research ita the reasons behind the de:ty’s
rise te power contrasts Wit the numerous studies attempting to expla hus origins. ICcannot be
desued that, having acquired his clepkart-head, Vindyaka's status improved.’ However, by the
eighth century, his worship was so widespread that 1 is too simplistic to argue that this was the
resuitof Vinayaka having acquired an elephanat-head, important though dus must have bee: im
terms of establishing identity and character. The recent study by Thapan (1997) prevides an

* These sir clear discrepancy between the development of Virdyaka-Ganesa im India and in tae rest of south-east
Asia where the god rever achteved the eqaivalent of tng Indian status as one of ils ‘mos popular deities Whereas
hy the cme the god nugiated, m the begimmog of the sixth century CE. be had a dual character wm india. his.
character an south cast Asa and China remarnec that of a malevoleat demrgod Vor more detailed studies on
Goasga worslnp ac south-east Asia, China and Jagan see Golly (1970, Brown £1992), Wilkenson (55929,
i ancaster 11992) and Sanfard (1992).
69
1
}

--- Page 71 ---
initial insight into sone of the dynamics behind the accelerauon of Vinayaka’s rise to the status
ofa major deity, Togetier with an examination of the theory advanced by Thapan, what follows
will seck to expitin and eiueidate Vindyaka-Ganapall’s rise to prominence

Thapan investigates Ganesa's funcuon as the ‘Lord of Trace’, a role waich contributed
greatly to the spread of his worship. Granesa assimilated seme of the characteristics of Kubera
who, desides being an umportant deity in beth Budditism and Brabmanism was also related to
Laksmi, the goddess of weaith. By mvestgating the charactenstics of Kubera and Laksmi tis
account aliempts to extend the theory by bringuig in various new aspects of the relationship
between Kubera, Laksim and Ganega. The bnef analysis of the characterisnes of Kubera and
Laksmi not un!y provides an insight into the accretion of the role of the ‘Lord of Trade’ vy
Ganesa but also, and more unportantly in the kynt uf the study of the fifty-six Vaindyakas,
elucidates the other characteristics he borrows from Kubera and Laksmi.

The inhabitants of Vedic India lived as a tnbal and agricultura! society and this perhaps
explains why there is no reference to a deity associated with trace mi the Vedie literature.
Alongside the development of society, the growth of towns and the establishment of new forms
of goveumment, Wade and indusiry preatly expanded. From 300 BCE onwards, the first
references to Kubera and Manibhadra,'” both later associated with wade, are found. The
earliest reference lo Kubetra is found i the Satapatha Brahmna, dated to the sixth century
BCF, in which he as described as veing the ‘King of the Raksasas’ (Fggeling 1963.367)
Coomaraswamy understands this utle to be an indication of Kubera’s autochthonous
character.“ However, the Bharhut stipa of the second century BCE depicts Kubera (Kupiro
Yakho) as the ‘Lord of Yaksas’ (Coomaraswamy 1971S; Banerjea 1941:275),"% thas
Indicating that the evolution from a malevolent deing to a more elevated divinity had been
completed hy the second century BCE

The character of Kubera 1s defined by his followers, the yaksas," who are regarded as
guardians and gatekeepers, as well as the protectors of the wealth of the earth and fertility

. ‘Tharan (1907) yoves at exicrsive overvlew of the relations ip between Mambhadsa and trade
“According te Coomeraswamy thes title ind:cates that Kcbera wasn aboriginal letty whe was unknown to the
Braham?! orthodexy (197 " 5}.

“tr the Bharkut representation, <ubera. “ere called “Kupira Yakho'. 1s depxted with his bands in the yous pose
wheteas many offers around lin are represented with folded hands as af te todicate ther devetian to Kuoera
There ts ccndcnce ay catly ay the Muterju-Dato sea’s wich possibly depits gods i the yous pose emi devatees
wath the hands Joided According to Bassnea (L951 275), che folded bards was the oy way to distunguish the
écvotees fron: the gods

The ward yukoe fist appears in the aunmniya Bedfimane and oceans ‘a wondrous thng! However. later yaksas
became associates with DActas They were conagcled wrh femry wersmp ard the carcest Budde
representations of vaksas depict then embracig wees Although tere ate examp.es taat some yaksts. such as
Manibihadsa, were isplesenied as “nermel deings, the marly ef Ue prksas ate tecugnisable dy thew diearish
Ravies and potbeilies. These caatacteristcs have led Coomaraswemy 1971-7) to state that ‘Ganesa is cndoubtedly
a yakse lye.

70

--- Page 72 ---
(Coon:araswamy $971:7), Kubera is equally considered to be one of the four or eight wuardrans
CUokapala) of the world, protecting the northern direction He is also worshipped as the god of
productvity and wealth as attested by his epithets Dhanada and Vasuda. His city, known as
Alaka, sit.ated on Mount Kailaga, is renowned for :ts aches and splendour. A veference in the
Mahabharata (Sabha Parvan 10:19) stating that Laksmi, the goddess of wealth, lwes in
Kubera’s palace, suggests this association with wealth (see supra). A similar reference is found
in the Ramayana (5:6:14) which describes Laksmi as seated on the chariot of Kubera, Anotier
reference to Kubera in this epic describes him as the ‘Nidhisa’ uy ‘Lore of Treasures’ (7 222).
These treasures are cight in number and represent different aspects of inaterial wealth and
prosperity (Dina. 1978:92). Further evidence of Kubera’s importance as the god of weaith is the
kaipa-vrksa (wishing tree) capital of a column found in Besnagar and dated lo the third century
BCE (Coomaraswamy 1971, volume 11:72, Banerjea 1941 114). Between the roots of the tree
are wo Inonyybays overlowing with money. Bangrica argues that this calumn must have been
or:ginaily located in front of a Kubera shone. Gupta images representing Kubera holding a cup
and a similar moneybag have been found in Rajasthan (R © Agarwala 1957 201-207). More
ind:cations of Kubera’s connection with wealth and prospenty are suggested by lus chief yakse
Mandhadra who, with Kubera, is invoked as the patron of the merchants.
|
In addition to wonographical features and the links between fertility and the vaksas as
guardians of the carth’s wealth, there is also a connection between the yaksias and water In the
second part of his study of yaksas, Coomaraswamy dea‘s in detail with water cosmology. He
argues that yakysas are associated with water through the creation myth im which creation begins
fron: the navel of the primordial man who rests upon the waters, Fram ius navel a tee, from
which everything ormginates, rises up. This primordial man is described as a vaksa
, (Coomaraswamy 1971;25-26). Besides this myth there is also an unnustakable lik belween
yaksas and water through the fertulity cult with which the yaksas became associated early on
The yaksas links with water were transierred to Kubera wha holds water symbols amang ins
eight reasures, ° It is these treasures Which iater, in the Markandeya and the Garuda Puranas,
become known as the padauatr vidya of Laksmi. kviderce that these water symbols were
associated with Kubera from early times is found in the Besnagar column which alse shows
“A vakst stalue of Pavaya (Coomaraswamy [2svoure Uplate £2, Thepan $997127) 15 probaly a
representation of Matubhacsa yakst
“Taese aight Geasures are. pada, mabspadma, makara, kacchapa, mukenda, saint: nify and sonkhe.
Comnaaswamy (971-d9, foomate 4+) beneves, however, thal te kharva reeds to be added as a ath treasure
The Markendeye Parsit (08 8) amd Che Guruda Perdia ($3 1-2) ieticr t these ch: Geasures as the pada vidya’
of the knowledge which gives al. serts ef pleasures’ Mis interesting thar iv these Puran:e seurees Laksml is said to
preside over Use ‘padini vidya’. thus reinforcing the link benween Kubera sad Laksin:. The sda can be
cescnbed as a clacodile-iike water anmgal with the head of a crocud:le, burrs, sharp teeth, four cox legs and a wri,
at first tat of a crocodile bet, m later representations, a fish ta (Coumaraswamy 14} 46) Phe auakarr ss: the
syrmpoke represertauon ef the waters and the essencs of water Varicus vassas have the makant as thei: vehicle
71 |

--- Page 73 ---
makaras and lotuses on the piilar (Banezjea 1941:114-1.5), These water symbuis provide @
dirsct ink between Kubera and Laksmi.'“
As the yaksas were also considered the guardians of the world, Kubera, as thew kenge.
becaine associated with the four cardinal directions aad consequently he presides aver the
norhera dyection Similar to the devclopment of tus Sangiton as a ‘Yuksariya’, Kubera wis not
considered ‘Regent of the North’ until the Mauryan per:od (third century BCE) dung which he
first seems to have been appeinted as a directional deity in the Buddhist and Jain texts. %
Reterenves to directional deities in the Mahabharata show [ubera, together wath Indra, as
guardian of the east.'S Bedeker considers that these references predate these describing Kubera
as the dircetional deity of the north and that he acquired his enhanced status al a later stage in
his career (Bedeker £969-1970.436-437) During the Mauryan and the post-Mauryan period
the cult and worstip of the four Maharajas or the Regents ef the Quarters’ became widespread,
as Is suggested by Panini Chetweer the fourth and the first century BCE) who reters to bhakts to
the Mehérajas (Coomuraswamy 1971 volume 1227-28) But whereas Kubera was the regent of
the northern direction, Ganesa became the protector of the south (Courtright 1985-131). There
1s no textual explanation as to why Cianesa presides over the southern direction. The south 1s |
| traditiona.ly linked to death and reincarnation and it therefore could be argued that Gancsa, i
while adopting the directional aspect of Kubera, was given the south because of his association !
with Siva, who of all the deities 1s most linked with death From the textual references it seers |
i
that orig:naliy Kubera's function as the guardian deity of the north wes inferior to his rale as the i
protector of wealth. However, today he 1s mainiy known as the regent of the north, since :
Laksmi and Ganesa have taxen over his furction as the gnds of wealth and goed fortune. Thais |
opscrvation is alse mads by Coomaraswamny (1971:26) who states that the deities of the four I
quarters, although accepted m the Brafimanical panthean, lost thei significance in the scetariar t
traditions sn which they merely function as the guardians of the world” and are referred to !
only at the end of cdicts ‘
At this point it is necessary to return to Laksma and her relationship with Kubera,
because, as will become apparent, while Vindvaka-Gane$ga's Ink with trade and wealth should
“Thee ace no literuy seurces connechng, Vindyaka-Ganeaa © water However, when mivestigating the grou of
the Tifty-six Vindyakas, < becomes clear that mest cf the Virdyakas were. and stl) are, stationed sear a
watersource, be ita pond. a well or the Ganga. Tus featare wil se exanuned further wn Chapter Five.
The fist reference to the de-tes of the four quarters is (wand my the Yanaveds (187) were Ago presides over
te cast, Yaour over the south, Savur over the west and Varuna over the north. (Coemarswany 197 Lvolune
Witty the Sadavensa and the Satapatha Hrdimana present Age in the east, Yama vn tne scuth, Varuna in the
west and Soma ar the noth
Sn the Kama Parvan (8 30-76-77) Soma is the presidiy: deity of the northern direction (Bedeker 1969-
1970477). Anothe: passage CV 1Cb S$} describes Indra and Wacé-avana (Kuhera} as the protectors of the eastern
aireenen
Today the eight fokapdias of guardians off che world are: Kuera un the noth, Sosa er the northeast, Indra in
the cast, Agiuin the southesast, Yara im the sath, Surya cn the south-west, Varuna on the west ang Vaya in ‘he
mor west (Frederic 1987073),
72

--- Page 74 ---
be considered as the direct result of the assimilation of Kubera’s characterisiics, the Wiangular
relation between Kubera, Laksmi and Ganesa further developed this aspect. It is i the context
of this relationship that the character of Laks needs to be examined.“ Here the concentration
ison Laxsci's associanions with Kubera and Ganesa, her representations as (raia-Laksnu, and
the relationship with e:der sister Jyestha, also known as Alaksmi
From the earlizst textual references to Sn-Laksmi, it is clear that her assoviation with
wealth and good fortune were already estabiushed. In the Sri Sdkta , the earliest hymn in praise
of the goddess, she is invoked for bringing prosperity and tame, cattle, horses and food. She is
also worshipped for keeping the evil powers of ber elder sister Alaksmu at bay, The hymn also
associates the goddess with fertility as she is described as ‘moist’ (mantra thirteen), 'perceptble
through the odour in the harvest’ (mantra mine) aad ‘dwelling sa cow dung’ (mantra nine). It
weds to be pointed ont that im the Srt Sakta, Srv and Laxemi are two distinct goddesses Stiis
tivoked for mental and material welfare, Laksmi for matenal welfare only. While the Sri Sakta
estavlished her lnk with fertility, the goddess consequently became associated with other
fertility symbols such as elephants and the lotus flower, resulting i representations oF Sri-
| Laksmi flanked by elephants or sitting on a lotus. It can be argued however, that, although there
'sa reference in the Sri Sakta which invokes Sr to br:ng abundance and prosperity, it was her
direct assaciation with fertility and agriculture witch led her to become the goddess of wealth
and prosperity in the agrarian society of ancient India. Because of the common link with the
rams Laksmi and the elephants were strongly alfihated, thus creating the mage of Gaja-Laksim.
The early Gaja-Laksini representations were later supported by Puramic matenals which are
adaplavious of the ongimai myth of the churning ef the ocean. The Visna Purana (1:9:103) tells
of how, when the goddess had nsen out of the ocean, she was sprinkled by the elephants of the
four quarters with water from the Ganga and the other sacred rivers (Dhai 1978:102). The Inks
between the elephants and Laksmi continue in recent iconography of the goddess where she is
depicted between the clephants although, instead of being showered with water, she is often
showered with gold corns. The evolution of the Gaya-Laksini represe:tations reflects the
development of the goddess trom a deity connected with fertility worship to the goddess of’
wealth. It can be argued, however, tat the concept of wealth was indirectly linked with
agricuitural success. Later depictions of the motif show the goddess Manked by attendants
which Aave teen identified as yaksas, thus suggesting an association with Kubera (Taplyal
1970.112). That the goddess of wealth becanie affiuated to trade 1s attested by coins dated to the
second century BCE which represent a goddess holding a totus flawer in her hand On the
reverse of Qhese curs are elephants with riders holding goads (Thapan 1997 151), The vlephant
goad is one af the symbois of the merchant classes." Although there is no specific inser:ption
"For a cetailed study of Lake's ongins and develepsicot in Hinduisi, sce K:nsley (L987) and Dkal (1978)
Ip the ‘aren conograpky Ganega is also cep-cred wel: a gead, thus establshing the fact that be too was linked
wath feo tradiag community (Thapan 1997 151)
1B

--- Page 75 ---
establishing the identity of Laksmi:, the stand:ng goddess figure and the elephants or the reverse
side leave no doubt chat these coins, used by traders, represent the goddess of wealth.
The sccend aspect in the symbolism of elephants 1 the Gaja-Laksim portrayals is the
prestige and royally shey represent) Some scholars have argued that the Gaja-Laksmi
representatians actually depict royal consecrations, thus explaimug the tem ablusckha-laksmi
which is sometimes used instead of Gaya-Laksimi (Banerjea 1941:164-165). During. the
abhisckha ritual the king was showered by elephants (Kinsley 1987'22, with reference to i
Gorda 1969;7-8). |
Because Kubera and Taksmi are both associated with wealth und trade, an obvious i
reason for thew affiliation is their common roots in fertihty worship. Kubera, being. the |
“Yaksaraya’, presides over an enlourage of yaksas who are considered to be the guardians of the
vat(l’s wealth and thus of its ferulity. Early representations of yaksas and yaksis show them
entwined around trees, thus suggesting a vegetative connection.’ References to Laksmi as a
vaksi ave found on the stipa of Bhariut (second century BCE) where the names ef both
Kudera and Laksim are mentioned.“ Another indication of Laksmi's links with yaksa worship
is found in the Suikalakanni Jataka which names Laksini as the dauphter of Dhataratta who 1s
mentioned as a yaksa in Bharhut (Dhal 1978.91). Althougi the clephant is the most common
attendant of Laxsmi, yaksas also feature im the carly representations of the goddess. A pillar
found in Lala Bhagat (Uttar Pradesh), dated to rouglty the second century BCE, shows a
Laxsmi figure Nanked by a pilaster emerging fren a pot which is held by a yaksa type
(Baneriva 1941:117), Sunierly, seals depicting Gaja-Laksmi sometimes feature two attendants
who throw coms from a money bag placed in front of shen: The money bag and the tact that
the attendants are yaksas establishes two connections between Gaia-laksm: and Kubera. A
contemporary indication of |.akgmi's association w:th Kubdera hes in the Divali pija, During, the
mght of Divali, commonly referred io as yaksaritrt, Kubera is worshipped after sunset. This
pija is the most important one for the merchants, who then close their old accounts and oper:
ther new ones (hal 1978:179-180)
In the [pies the relation between Kubera and Laksimi is further emphasised In the
Mahabharata (2 10:18} she fives in the palace of Kubera, and in verse 3164/13 she as further
associated with kin. Whereas the Fyics do ot explicitly state that she is his wife, the Narada
Purina does refer to her as the wife of Kubera."* Because the general delief is that this Purana
™ Coemasaswamy (197) hes included anple examples of yaksas and yaksis holeag an te tees and d:arches
Tae examples chide panels fiom the stupas of Bharat, Sanch.. Buslhyaya and Admarivat:
 Laksini ts refered ta as "Yak (Coamaraswanty (971-8)
the Minda Pusdieis generally consideicd to be a late work Wisan atgues that the text could x dated ta the
sixtecnh cr seventeenth centuries CE Hazan. Lowever, selieves that sarre scchous were composed between 875
and 1OQG CL while others are described as ‘telatively late’ (Recher 19%6.203)
74

--- Page 76 ---
is of late crigin, however, this is more suggestive than conclusive (Dhal 1978-91). References |
in the Markandeya and Garuda Puranas further suggest an affihation between Kubera and
Laksmi. The two texts describe in deta: the padmini vidva or the "Knowledge wluch brings
aout Pleasure’, a cellscuon of (reasures (ridhis) representing the different aspects of matenal
wealth, Earlier it was stated that Kubera is the Lord of these eight tWeasures (Coomaraswamy
197 L-volume 1149, footnote 4, Dhal 1978 92) However, in Purani¢ sources these eight mdhis
are the basis for the padnuni vidva whose presiding deity is Laksimt (Banerjea 1941 211)
Despite the fact that there is  cnough textual and icunographical maternal suggesting a
reiavorsh:p between Kubeva and Laksim, there is no early iconographic evidence which depicts
them together. “Tt has therefore been argued hy Bloch that this relanon should be regarded as
purely hypothetical (Banerjea 19412210), However, some Gupta images depicting Ganesa
together with Kubera and Laksnu not only confirm the trangular relationship between Ganesa,
Kubera and Laksmi, dul also undermine Bloch’s argument (V. S. Agarwala 1929 10-151),

There ts a further factor which needs to be taken into account: the worship of Jyestha or
Alaksmi. Although the worship of Jyestha is less developed than that of V:nayaka-Ganega, one
finds parallels between the two deitics, net only in then maivevelent origins bul also in their
appearance. By way of illustrating a development similar to thet of Vindyaka and because of the
close links with the Laks:m worship, the cuit of Jyestha is further elucidated bere,

The cult of Alaksmi is very old and developed patalie! co Sri-Laksmi worship. The
Atharva Veda (7.1. 8:1) refers to two aspects of Sri-Laxsmi, one is the denevolent aspect cailee
Panya and the other is Papi Laksmi, the evil-deer The idenuty of Pap: Laksr only deveioped
after Sn-Laksims had become distinctly identitied The carly mantras in the Atharva Veda
describe Papi Laksini as the one who can ward off the evil forces of the demaness Niet: (Dhal
1978:130-131). Later references to Pap! Laksnii show that she became identified with the evil
Nat: herself, Her power to bring misfortune and musezy is suggested by a reference m the $11
Sukerir, which Papi Laxsow is called Alaksmi and is considered to be the elder sister of Laksmi
whe drings about imsery and misfortune In te mantras her blessing is sought and the Sr:
Sakta wes regarded as a incans of warding her off. By the une of the Brahmanas they were
established as sisters since both were said to have onpinated trom the head of Prajdpau
CTasturiva Brahmana 2:1:2:2). The Linga Purana states that Aiaksmi was created first by Visnu,
and that he created Laksini afterwards. The Raindyana (1.44) explains that Jyestha was also
created when the gods chumed the ocean but when she rose to the surface they decided to send
her te st in inauspicious places. A study by Karfel conceming the Puranic paricalaksana has
“VS Apanwala. referring te 2 couple of images in the Math. museura, 1s of the apa: thet: Kubera anu
paksvt are after depicted copether, Coomaraswamy (L971 volume (14), however, contradicts this atguntent by
Powting oat that these snages are in fact represemations of Rice as Pane:si ane Hara. the Budélist goddess et
shuclpes In Buddhas: legends Hanu scame ciesciy associated with faksmi. dence the coufusion.

7S

--- Page 77 ---
shown that noue of the ‘ur-texts' of the churning of the ocean reter to Alaksm! It therefore has.
Leen suggested by Karfel and Dhal that Alaksim only rose to fame when she was tinked to
Laksuii, whe had by that ime become a major deny (Dha! 1978137). The tact thet in the
creatiun inyths Alaksn is always said to have been created first gave her the epithet Jyestha
The Baudhavana Grhya Siitra, generally dated between the sixth and the third centunes BCE,
describes her worship in the Jyestha Kalpa. She is described as being hasumukha (3:9:4), hea
epithets include Aumbhi, which refers to the forehead of an elephant, varadd and vighnaparsada
or ‘associated with obstacies’ (Leslie 1991 118; Dha 1978:145), The Suprabhiedagaina
menuons her as being gayanana or ‘elephant-faced’ (Leshe 1991.1 23). Other textual references
to :canographical characteristics do not expheitly mention elepbant features. In the
Amsumadbheddgama she has a long nose and big cheeks, a large belly and pendulous breasts
Wer skin is blac or dark (Dhal 19782159, 1 ASG. Rao 1981 volume 1393). Leslie (19912113)
mentions that unages of the goddess in south India indicate that she enjoyed some popularity im
the seventh and eighth centuries but that the cult had apparently died oul by the tenth century
CE
The resembiance between Jyesthd and Vindyaka is striking. Both are characterised
| Inualiy as evil demons and are said to be hastunekba In addivon, Jyesthad :s aisu linked with
obstacles as one of her epithets is wighnaparsadd (Srivastava 1972:165-170), Although sie
apparently enjoyed reasonable veneration as an evil goddess, she suddenly disappeared around
the tenth century or did she? In this context it might be useful to draw allention to another
voddess who shares iconographical features with Jyestha, namely Vaindyaki. Since there is
atde published o2 Vainayaki, the rellowing discussion is merely an attempt to explain the
common characterisucs between Jyesthd and Vainayak:. The earliest mention of the goddess
Varndyaki is found in the Matsva Purana in which she 1s described as ‘belonging to Vindyaxa!
This Puranic source, which hes been dated te around 550 CE by Mundkur (1975:293), does
not refer to her iconographical features, thus making it difficult to state whether she was
represented with an ¢lephant-head. The reference imphes that because she belonged lo
Vindvaku, she may have been his sak. A Bengali version. of the Padma Purana (between 600
and 1100 CE) mentions a goddess Vighnegi who 1s probably the sakt of Vighnesvara or
Vindyake However, no eaily Puranic source provides evidence of Ganesa's link with a female
consort. The carhest attested material pomting to this 1s found in the Agni Purdna,'” compiled
around the tenth century. But the text mdicates that the asseciation of Ganesa with [omuale
consorls was purely conceptua. as there 1s ne reference to the iconegrapnical features ef any of,
the Sakus. Vhis is supperted by the fact that these saktus do nol appear im the list of sixty-four
Yoginis of the same Purana
“On the chapter dese ding the Ganapetya rel, the female divinities are invcked atter the prygrs to the gad acd
they are seated a group of eight circled around she duane of the ninth. Tis listol ning Sekt, however, dacs not
Let Vainayaki amonyst ther, (Mundkir 1¥% 293).
To

--- Page 78 ---
When examining the iconographic representations of this goddess it ts noticeable that.
aut from a first century terracotta plaque found in Raia (Rayasthan),'” there is no material
evidence unul approximately the tenth centuny. Since Mundker (1975) and B. N. Sharina
(1970, 1972) have studied these later representations of Vamdayaki, there is no need fo review
the maternal here. The appearance of the Vainayaki statues in north India runs paralle! with the
chsappearance of the worship af Jyesina who was also deserbed as hastmukha From the
previous discussion regarding Jyestha's characterises, tis known that besides the elephan:-
face she is alsa supposed to have had sagging cheeks, pendulous breasts and a poibelly
However, pictures of her statues published by Rao show her as a nurmal goddess with an
clepkant head and a slight belly, net as the ugly creature she is supposed to be. Because the
weonographic material on Jyvatha and Vaindyaki is scarce, it would be premature to reach any
conclusions but 11s possible to argue that Jyestha and Vaindvaki orginally developed as two
different poddesses, Jyestha bemg associated with Laksmm worship and being described as
elephant-headed, thus connecting her tcanvgraphically with Vindyaka. Except for being
associated through iconography and function (Vighnaparsada) wilh Vusdyaka she was never
linked wih the god, neither was she ever considered his sakt, Vamdayaki on the other rand
seems to have been a saku of Ganesa for much of her early existence and lexts referring to her
ui this way do not even suggest clephantine fcatures. However, with the decline of Jyestha
warship around the tenth century, Wainayala, as the unidentifiable consort of Vindyaka, may
well have taken over the goddess’ iconograpiaical charactenstics. Because of her links with
Ganesa, the assimilation of features wou.d not have created a problem

The previous discussion dealing with Kubera and Taksim serves to explain the
dynamics berind Ganeéa’s elevation as one of the maior Bralunanic deities The Gupta peziud
representations of Vindyaka-Ganesa with Kubera and Laksmi provide evidence for the
beginning of his association with these wo deites of wealth. Since Mathura was a Mourishing
lade centre with a large concentration of Jama merchants, it has been suggested by Thapan that
these early sculptures were Jain (1997-152). She further argues that at this stage Vindyaka was
hot yet associated with trade but was merely invoked to remove obstacles, Her findings are
based on a seventi-century inscription from tae Jaipur area. Tt was the merchant community
who began the practice of invoking Virdyaka at the onset ef any undertaking, Thapan
(1997:182, footnote 40) provides a short overview of the practice of invocations in the eight
and ninth centuries, which leads her to convlude that even in the ninth century Vinayaka-

Fs place is desorbed by both Mundkar (1979-292) and Cohen (2992 018) bal, whereas Muadkur snerely
provides a descr ptien, Cohen: ackis tha Ge sigaviewtee and the icentity of clus plaque ere not ckecr aunt that ics
Increto:e doubttel whether tus as really a representation of & goddess wt an elephant head

“The Saktar Stanc fnscription (642-654 CE) reseres the cansiuction of a manda tev the godcess Sankar by
sleven Mutaers In Che cavecation Ciee gods are sailed cpen. Ganapat, Candika ant Dbanada. The imvocatcon to
Ganapati acxs him to remove the obstacles, Canthha as asked ta bestow prospe:ty and DhkSnada is asked tar
netection (Tlaesen 1997 162).

V7

--- Page 79 ---
Gangsa was not yet systematically invoked first. Vinayaka-Ganega's association with trade first
secs to have occurred 1 Rajasthan in the ninth century. The Ghatiyala inscription of the
Jodapur Prauhara Kakkuka (861-862 CE) gives evidence of the establishment af a marketplace
where a pillar topped with a quadruple Vindyzka image was placed (R. C. Agarwaia 1963:235-
236; P. K. Agarwata £977(b):152)."" The inscripuon invokes Vindyaka alone and from the
context :t becomes clear that Vinayaka was believed to ensure material welfare in the region.
The tour Vindyakas, depicted back to back, represent the four cardina: directions Whether or
hot Us quadiuple image supports the theory that the four Vindyakas mentioned in the Manava
Grhya Sutra also represent the G:rections 1s net clear since Us statue 1s the onty one of sts cand
eadis ofa much later date than the Grhya Sita However. this peculiar vepresentation suggests
thatthe devly had some affihauen with Uke four directions, probably through his association
with Kubera, the Regent of the North. The suggestion of Vindyaka's affiliation with the four
direcaons in the Pranhira region will later prove to be significant as the fifty-six Vinayakas are
said to be located in seven circles, eight Vinayakas in each direction. Thapan detieves that
Kakkuka constructed such a pillar for Vindvaka because of the economic power of the Jain
community inthe region. However, as discussed in Chapter One, the Prathara rulers
cemonstrated an interest in other religions by constructing temples and shrines ter Jains as weil

| as for Hindus. Another interesting aspect of the Ghauvyala pillar is that the inscriptioa is
speasored by the Maga Bralunins, who were originally associated with Sun worship.'* A later
inser pion (960 CF) from the same region indicates the importance of Vindyaka in the wading
comznumty. This inscription gives evidence ul taxes bemg used for the mumtenance of a temple
anda Vindyaka shrine. The grant is made by a certain: Mathanadeva, who claims to belong to
the Pratihara dynasty, but itis more hkely that this Mathanadeva was a vassal of the Pratihara
king of Kanay.

Vinayaka’'s associahon with trade and the Jain commumity cn Rajasthan supperts the
theory that the deity's real rise to prominence was linked to ais re.ationship with trade and to his
ussnmlauon of Kubera’s charactenstics as one of the patron gods of wade Kubera, and
Man:shadra were yaksas who were waditunally regarded as the guardians of wealth and
fertility Vindyaka, however, 18 a much more complex character, His yaksa appearance enabled
lun te be linked with Kubera and Mambhadra and gave him Ins enginal status as a demi-god,
Although his body affilated him to Kubera, Is elephant-head lent him the status of an
clephaul, regarded as a sacred animal, symbolising the rains, fertility and wealth in the
iconegraphy of Laksmi. Apart from being associated with fertiity, his elephant character also
“Tis teat of tie asscriguon relates that the rca had beer made vasafe by the Adhira chia Kaksuka had
conquered the area and bad estabhshed marsetplaces m Rehimsaka and Maddodara, afer whick ae populated the
area Wk pegple of ditterent castes (EL LX ne 38.277-281)

The Magas were ongina.y foreigners who kad licks wut the Sun warsh.p. In the early centuries they were
legerdsd with suspicion but the Gietyaa inscription shews iat oy the ninth century they kad 2cemred: sufficient
status to be employed by the iuhag éyeasty of Che area (Tapas 1997 1 Sy

78

--- Page 80 ---
prevides a necessary link with the directional deities, who were represented as elephants in :
eatly Buddhism and Bralananism, and provide a more specific ink with Kubera in his |
directional aspect |
Aithougir it was suggested carlier that the assimilation of the elephant-head and the |
yaksa body took place in the Mathura region, stsel? an important centre of trade, the dezty’s
relationship with trade was probably developed further west, in Gayarat and Ravasthan. Both |
Kubera and Manibbadra occupied an important position in Jaws beliefs as both were associated !
with trade Since the Jains are mainly tradevs, the worship of Kubera, Manibhadra and Laksmi
comes as no surprise. Both Kubera and Mambhadra nave an elephant as a vahana and Laksii
is represented being blessed by nwo elephants. The clephant assuciation ef these diree gods
probabiy ensured the acceptance of Vinayaka inte the Jain pantheon. As is indicated in the
seventh-ventury inscription, the carly invocations te Vinavaka-Ganapau do not yet link fm
woth trade but regard him as the ‘Remover of Obstacles Gradually, however, Vinayaka
assumialed (Cubera’s characteristics as the deity of wealth and it can be argued that the rise of
Vinayaka and the decline of Kubera's status in north India are linked. There are several reasuns
for luning towards Vinayica-Ganesa as a replacement for Kubera: bot share the yaksa
connection and as an clephant-headed deity Vindyaka’s identity is automatically intertwined
with the symbottsm represented by the elephants, both in ancient Indian art and mythology and
in the Gaja-Laksini symbolism. Further, Vinayaka became patronised by the Jain merchant
community thereby providing further impetus to the deity's rise to prominence. Vindyaka's
association wilh wealth and trade is cventually reflected in the Puranas and in the iconographic
representauons of the god which depict him with an elephant goad, the emblem par excellence
of the trading caste
Thapar mainly focuses on the god's relationship with the (radmg community of the
Jains and Ins assimilation of Kubera's identity as the ‘god of trade’, thereby neglecting the other
characteristic Vindyaka took over from Kubera, siinely Ins association with the four directions
Kubera was known as ‘Kegent of the North’, although Gapesa is known as ‘Protector of’ the
Southern Region. Closely tinked to the dirscuonal charactenshe is the fact that Ganega is
considered ly be the Lord of the Threshol¢’, protecting the gates and doorways of sacred as
well as secular places Although Kubera never exercised tins fanction explicitiy, since he was
considered the Yaksaraja, it was inherent in his nature since the yaksas were reparded as
protecters and guardians. Apart trom Puranic references to Ganesga as a directional guardian,
the ninth century Ghatryala column shows four Vindyaka figures protecting the iour directions.
‘This colunm should be considered as evidence of the uansinission of Kuberas qualities: to
Vinayaka-Ganega, as the inscription on the columa states that the structure was erected by a
Pratthéra king in order to give protection to the merchants, thus alluding to Vindyaka’s
assvertion with both prosperity and the directions.
79

--- Page 81 ---
Although no supporting evidence Nas been found so far, the identification af the
clephant-headed yaksa with Vinayaka might alse nave been determined by Laksmi's
te:ationship with her ciéer sister Jyesthd whe ts described as hastunukhd and vighnaparsada
Although her worship never reached great proportions, she was linked with Laksmi unui the
tenth century and invocations wo ber guaranteed 2 successful Laksmi para, thus providing
anotier indivauon to her simuarity will) Vinayaka in his early slage as vighnakarta, Ganesa
provided the means ta continug Laksni's links with an clephant-headed deity, while at the same
tume the character of Vindyaka-Ganesa would have been able to suppress Jyestha. The
associaton of Ganesa with Laksii ts farther evidenced dy the joint wership of Ganesa and
Laksiaiin Divah, by both Hindus and Jains (Laidlaw 1995:chapter 17),

A final indicanon of the transfer of Kubera’s characterisucs to Vinayaka-Ganesa 1s
Rddht who the Mahabharata is considered to be one of the wives of Kubeza and who loday
Is considered to be one of the two consorts of Ganega. Cohen (1992/1232), who intemiewed
numerous Hindus about the wives of Ganesa, came to the conclusion that, mamly in Uttar
Pradesh, Ganesa ts regarded as being married to Rddhi ard Siddhi: that this is a more widely
held belief :s confirmed by Laidiaw’s stacy of comtemporary Jams in Rajasthan (1995374)

Avthough the adopiion of Kubera’s ané Laksmi's characteristics appear to have been the
pumary influence in Vinayaka’s rise to promimence, another sigmficant factor in promoting
Vinayaka as a major deity is the rise of the Ganapalya sect and their consequent intluence ar
the paficopasana pijé There has been lide research on this sect,"’ and scholars who have
investigated the Ganapatyas have ail based their theories on a medieval (ext, Lae Sankaravyaya
of Anandagun.” This work suggests that by the tenth century, the Ganapatyas, who were
divided unto six separate sub-sects,'" were an established group in Indian. society, Why
Vinayaka-Ganesa became the ob:ect of sectarian worslup sull remains unanswered but it may
have been the result of Vinayaka-Ganesa's iielusion within tie pafcopasana pi which
probably developed under the Prauharas. The Smarta Ganapatyas appear to have been the
i . paly Pre
driving forge behind the wwo Ganesa Upa-Puranas. From the contents of the Mudgala and the

~ The Udtupatya scols were Ernst mentioned dy Bhardackar (1G 14 147-0803 and Getty (1971 20) Later studies:
walude Rassat(5984:65 83), Court got (1985.21 7-226) ak Thapan (1995) Research on seme af the sub-seets
bas beer Gane by Bannematin (1988, 1989}

* Coutnght1985:218) briefly expiams the content of the Sunkeraviaye asa hagerrapine text which celedrates
tae debate of Sankaia with varous religious and philasyphical upponents The sux cieaps of Ganapatyas ae
nsmtened, sch with thes own icnnograp ic represertatians ot Ganesa and teu rituals.

“The six sects of the Ganapatyas are Handa. Mahigenapati, Samtana, Navanna, Svar ail Ucchista and
Usramba Ganapatyas The last two sects seem to be considered as one grouy since det: are of the Tantus schuol
ach of these sects worshipped Ganega under a different namie, with a differeat munis and uv a different fem
The Ganapatsas al) had the symbol of Garesa branded en ther ans and foreheads:

xO

--- Page 82 ---
Ganesa Purdnas it appears Chat the Smarta Ganapatyas were prominent in Banaras,“
Maharashtra, Kamataka and Andhra Pradesh. Vhe assimilauon of Kubera’s and Laksmi's
features as weil as the appearance of Vinayaka-Garesa among other majar deities ot
Brahoanisin in the Degunning ef the tenth century ¢stublished hima as an imdependent and
significant ged in Hindinsm

In conclusion it wili be helpful to summanse what is a complicated and sometimes
dense account. The creation and development of Vinayaka-Gianega was the outcome of the
convergence of several najor elements. The first and most visible element is the elephant. ‘Lhe
prestigious status of the elephant from the period of the Indus civilisation is an established fact
In carly Buddhisin the elephant acquired a sacred status Unroagh its links with the Buddha's
birth and the Jataka storics. Elephants alse received a place in cosmology as the diggafas or the
‘guardians of the world’, thus associating them with the four cardinal directions. The prestige of
the elephant in Buddhism was matched by the evolution of its image in the Vedic and
Brahman creed. Indra’s velucle Airavata was an elephant linked with the rain clouds. It was
the connection with rain and water which made the elephant ar abvious symbol of fertility
Numismatic material dated to the second century BCE and found in Afghanistan provides the
first representation of the clephant as a probable deily. A second clenient in the development of
Vindyaka-Ganega ts to be found in the association with Laksmi and Kubera. Laksmi. from the
catliest uines the goddess of wealth and fertility, became associated with elephants from the
second century BCE, a link which is allested by the Gaja-Laksmi representations. As. the
poddess af wealth she also became linked with Kubera who had rsen to the stais of “Treasurer
of the Gods' and was considered the patron deity of the merchant classes Tt was in. this capacity
shat Kubera, together with Ins chief general Manibhadra, was adopted and worsh:pped by the
Jains, attested by the various Pratihara remains.

Taking these first Qvo elements, the elephant and the significance of Laksini and
Kubera, inte account, itis easy to understand the rise of an elephant-headed deity with the body
ofa yaksa who was the guarantor of good fortune and wealth However, Vindyaka-Ganega 1s
also associated with darker forces. The earlest Hindu reference to a Vindyaka appears in the
Manava Grhya Sttra in which the Vindyaxas, four in number, possess the ability to bewutch
people and are to be propitiated by an elaborate pad. Authough the text is a Vindyaka Sanu
indicates the beginning of one of Vindyaka's most characterstie features, that is, the
requirement that he be propitiated before the goddess, who in the text is associated with sever:
good qualities, and before the Sun Thus early link between the Vinayakas and the goddess may

Stas tallewing, chapter et well be seer that parts of the Ganesa Panina were Seheved to have been weten in
Banatay The apprexcinate date of drs Purana is stil a much debated subject, act atc oe argued thar the parts.
releuing to Banazas were composed ata late stage. maybe even as late is Lhe eighteenth century. Althaugh there is
no deubt that the Garapatyas were active 1 he religious cfe of the ety there is. so far na single adscatinr tat they
were Cre cnving force Delund the establ:siiment of the y:oup of the fity-siy Vinayahas,

KI]

--- Page 83 ---
welt have been (ae reason belund their representation m Saptamatrka panels The text of the
Manava Grhya Sitra is also suggestive of Vindyaka as the ‘Lord of Beginnings’. Tae
parallehsin between the proprtiation of Vinayaka before approaching, the voddess for good
fortune and the worsiup of the elephant-headed Jyestha-Alaksmi prior to Laksmi pid is sa .
st:king hati might also be suggestive of causation, especialy as Vinayaka-Ganesa now |
replaces Jyestha-Alaxsimt in the Divali rituals. Although the Grhya Siitra docs not refer to ie
ohysical characteristics of Vindyaca, there are some indications that there may have been some
association with the four directions. The later Yajfavalkya Smit: provides evidence of tie
evoluton of the four Vindyakas inte one Vinayaka who was appointed by Rudra and Brahma
as the Ganapali end who was clearly associated wich Ambika A fourth and last clement which
needs to be taken into account is the Siva connection. The Vinavaka Kalpas of doth the Grhiva
Sta and the Smrn belong to the school of the Black Yayurveda, she school which was primary '
responsib‘e for the adomiuon and cultivation of Siva. I: a later Parvan of the Mahabharata the
Vindyzkas are linked with the ganas as they are described as Ganesvaras-Vinayakas who are
considered the ‘Lords of the Worlds’. The association with Siva is fully claborated
inyihologically in the Puranas and the deny evolves from bemg a ‘Ganapati’ or ‘Leader of the
troops’ of Siva to Ganesa, the son of Siva

While there is no difficulty in imagining the creation of an e:ephant-headed deity as a
composite of die symbolism of the elephant with the characteristics of the yaksas. :t is more
d:flicult to see how the fun-loving Vinayaka-Gaaesa vl loday origiated from the evil-spizited
Vinayasas. So far no evidence has been found as to why these Vinayakas are represented with
an clephant’s head. Aithough there ts a visible increase in their status around the begining of
the Cormon Era, the association of Viniyakas and elephants based on the relationsiup between
Kusmandarajaputra and Virudhaka end the four Vindyakas as representations of the four
dipgijss, 18 stygestive though not compelling. A reference in the Mahabharata and tice
clephant-headed yaksa staiues from Mathura, all dated between tie first and the third century
Ch, provide evideace of the existence ofa deity with an elephant's head, but there is no way of
ceterminng whether Gus was Vindyaka-Ganesa or not. These mages were produced during the
Susana period un: the Mathura region. Whether the Kusana artists simply produced an elephant-
headed yaksa which the Brahmins of the Black Yajurvedic school chose to idenufy with
Vindyaka, or whether they produced this imaue as a deliberate representauon of Vinayaka will
never be known. The brilliant success of the association of Viniivaka w:th an clephant-headed
yaksa, however, 15 attested vy history

Once Vinayaka acquired lus eephant's head and a striking visual identity, his rise to
prominence was ensured. From the Gupta perio€ onwards the number of Vindyaka-Ganega
statues, together with the Matrkas or the Nava Grahas, gradually increased and he became a
proumuent deity in the Brakinanic pantheon. In the paticopasana pij4 he became ore of the five

82

--- Page 84 ---
iam deshes. The reason behind his elevation, it has been argued, was his connecttons with
Kubera, the ‘Lord of Wealti in Saivism and Jainisin Although further research on this topic is
needed, Usere are sufficient indications that the Jain community supported the you's acceleration
through ‘us affiiiauen with Kubera and Laksm! The Ciinapatya sect developed a Tantne aspect
to Vindyaka-Ganesa worship, In his Tantric ferm the deity spread over the whoie of India and
abroad, although the first appearance of the god in south-east Asia and China occured as carly
as the middie of the sixth century. In south-east Asia and in China, Viiayake never acquired the
benevolent character he deve.oped in India
The chronological survey of the different Purdnas, Agamas and Silpa Sastras and the
numerous sculptures of the god ‘n India provides evidence of the canurual elabaration af the
character and attributes of Vindyaka-Ganesa. Tocay Vindyaka has become the name least used
) and the deity is mainly invoked as Ganesa or Ganapati. His appeal is cnormous: he 1s the ‘Lord
of Beginnings’, the “Lord of Odstacles’, the ‘Protector of the Southern Region, the ‘Guarantor ot
Success, Good Fortune and Wealth’. Students invoke hun at the beginning of their exams and
merchants pray to him when starting a new account year. Because of Ins association with wade
and wea'th, he also is invoked with Laksmi during the annua! Divali péyd.. His image decorates
every Hindu househo:d and every doorway as lie is also celebrated as the “Guardian of the
Thresho.d’
83

--- Page 85 ---
CHAPTER THREE

Sources for the Study of Vinayaka-Gancsa in Banaras
Thus chapter analyses the various iconegraphic and literary sources, relevant to the worshup ef
Vinayaka-Ganesa in Banaras.” It is a necessary pre.immary to the investigation of the fifty-six
Vinayakas wluch are desurryed for the first ime in chapter fifty-seven of the Kasi Kanda, The
description of the fifty-six Vindyakas in the Kasi Khanda of tie Skanda Purana is placed within
the comext of the stery of Divodasa, described in Chapter One. This chapter therefore begins
with a chronvlogical analysis of the versions of this story in eazher Puranas, providing aot only
a background for the tater Kasi Khanda story, but also casting light on the evoiution of
Vinayaka-Ganesa in these stories, and thereby further clarifying the role of Vinayaka-Ganega in
she Kasi Khanda

This is followed by an :nvestigation of Paitca-Vinayaka worsiip, the earliest evidence
far whieh 1s found in Banaras. The twelfth century Krtyakalpataru is then considered both for
inforination concerning Pafica-Vinayake wership and also lo provide a picture of the religious
situation in| Banaras durmg the Gahadavaia period. The cenual element of this chapter,
however, 1s. an analysis of the Kasi Khanda. The Mahaunya has proved to be problematic ‘oe
date and therefore a bret discussion of the various posstule dates precedes the analysis of the
contents af the Shanda. Finally, various other relevant Nibandhas and Mahatmyas which
follow the Kasi Khanda are discussed.

The earhest refevences to the myth of Divodasa are found in the #ralmdnda, ie Vayu
andthe Harvamsa Puranas These three Purame sources are mentioned together because their
versiuns of the myth hardly differ from each other In vduditon, scholarly consensus accepts thal
the Brahinanda and the Wayu were orginally ong Purana and that they were separated te
establish (vo independent warks (Rocher 1986.17, Hazra 1940.18: Pargiter 1922:23, 77)
Hazra (4940213) writes The Vaya is perhaps tie oldest of the extant Purd:as' thus suggesting
thal Ue Brahindnds originated from the Vave Purana. In tie Vayu Purdaa veneration, for Siva is
cmpkasised and the Parana describes how 2 number of folk’ deities were brought cader the
umbrella of Saivism. Diksiitar claims that the Vayu was compiled between 350 BCE and 500
CE (1932:53) but most scholars investigating the dates of the Puranas prefer the later date. For
example, Farquhar (1920:145) considers the tourth or fifth centuries CE as an approximate

“Tick (988, 1993} givesa detailed account af the textual saurces for the study of Banaras
84

--- Page 86 ---
date, which 1s also supported by Winternitz (1963:455) Kane (1962 907) places the
compilation benveen 350 and $50 CE. The dates suggested for the Brafunanda differ. The
varhest cate 1s again proposed by Dikshitar (1951255) who dates ut to the fourth century BCE.
Kene (1962:895-896) places it between 400 and 600 CF [tis Hazra's contention (1940: &)
that, based on the dynastic accounts given in both Puranas, the separation of the Ovo took place
afler 328 CE and probably no carlier than 400 CE '*

The version of the story inthe Mrahmand: Purdna (2:3:67:30-72) can be summarised as
follows.

The saintly king Divodisa lived in the flourishing city called Varanasi (31) ‘This was at
the ume Mahesvara (Siva) marned Parvati. After their mariage Siva's mother-in-law urged her
soa-in-law to find a suitable place for her daughter (32-37), Siva decided to take up residence
on garth and he heard about the city af Varanasi, which was occupied by Divedisa (38-40) He
called nis Lord of the Ganas, N:kumbha, and told dim to evacuate Varanasi by non-violent
lacans (41a-43b). Nikumbha appeared in the dream of the Brahmin Mankana and toid hum to
instal aa image on the outskirts of the city With the permission of the king, Mankana installed
the static (42-44a). The Lard of the Ganas was worshipped every day aud he granted
shousards ef beons lo the citizens of Varanasi. The cueen, wanting & son, alse prayed to
Nixumbha bat her wish was not heard (44b-50). The king became very angry and decided to
destroy the statue of Nikumbha, after which Nikumbha cursed the king (52-55). Nikumbha
said: Despite my faultless presence i your cry you have destroyed my shiriue. Now your city
shall decane a deserted wasteland’' (56) Atter the curse Varanasi became empty and

N.kumbha brought Siva and Parvati to the city (87) 7

| Tu this myth Nikuinbha is represented as the Lord of the Ganas’ although the king calls
hin: a bidita, therchy suggesting that he embodies 2vil characteristics.

‘ tn the sarher Vayu Purana (92:27-55) the story is identical except that Nikumbha
reveals fumself net to a Brahmin but to a darber. Both are named Mankana. In India barbers
belong to the lower social classes but they are umportant i marnage ceremonies and in the
deati rituals in which they are responsible for washing the corpse before itis cremated. The
reference lo the barber in the Vayu Purana is possibly an mdication that the "Lord of Ganas' was
propitiated by the lower orders of the population. Hither the ‘lard of the Ganas’ had sen in
slatus in the period between the compilation of the Vayu Purdua and the Brahmanda Purdua, o1
he was favoured for same other reason within the miliew which produced the Brahimdnda
Purina. Frou, these two versions itis clear that Divadasa was forced ty leave the oily duc to a
curse puton hin by a gana

“The cause for Che sepaialion was nest prozably sectana Secause the orentavan of the Brthinanda os
Varsnavite whereas the onentation of the Vira ts clear.y more Saivite
“ Brahmanchs Parise, AITM volatne 24, part [11 883-855
85 |

--- Page 87 ---
The Harivamsa and the Brahma Purana, which follow these two Purinas
chronaiogically, perceive King Divecdasa differently; he is no longer Ure protector of dharma
but an evileminded King. The Harnvamsa or the “Genealogy of Har’ is a poem of epic
proportions. It consists of sixteen thousand sfokas and is considered to be a supplement to the
Madvibharata. Vis work is dated to the filh century Cl. The Harivamsa version (Appendix 1,
no 7, 87-140) of the story is summarised by Doniger (1976: 290) as follows

‘Divodasa was a famous king of Benares. At this ume, a réksasa named
Ksemaka entered the empty city, for it had fornnerty been cursed by Ganega to
become empty fora thousand years, and for the durauon of that Curse Divodasa tived
in the charming cit¥ on the Gomat, on the border of the kangdoin. [The sages ask:
Jlow could Ganesa who is the very soul of dharma, curse a hoiy place? The bard
contuwcs j

‘King Divodasa lived in the city of Benares. Now, at this ume Siva married
Sati and lived with his in-laws, but his mother-in-law, Mena, said to Sati, "Your
lasband does not behave properly in my preseace. He 1s very poor and does nothing
but sport with you.” Sati begged Siva to take her to his uwn AoMe, and so Siva
‘voked over all the worids and chose Benares as a pleasant place to ive. But when he
saw that Divodasa was living there, Siva summoned Ganesa and said: “Go to the city
of Benares and empty it Use gentle wiles, for the king is very mighty" Ganesa
established a shrine in the city and the chief queen of Divodasa worshipped there and
asked fora son again and again. But Ganesa did not give her sons, dunking, "If the
king becomes angry at us, | will achieve my purposes”. After a long ume, the king
cid become angry at Ganesa for failing to give lim a son, and the evil-minded king
fookshly destroyed the shrine of Ganesa, whoni he reviled as an ‘evil-minded,
glutionous maker of abstacles’, Then Ganesa said to tie king, “Sinee you have
destroyed my shrine when | had not offended you. your cry will became empty’.
And sv Benares became empty, and Siva came and dwelt there with Sat!

In this version itis the identity of Ganesa which needs iv be scrutnised. Although i
could be argued that the reference to Ganesa refers to the elephant-headed god, the investigation
of the names of the god i the previous chapter indicates that, in the (ith century, the elephant-
headed god was known by the names of Vinayaka and Ganapati. Thus the reference above
vould ncan that either the story im the ffartvamsa should be dated later than the fifth century, or
that ‘Ganeda’ is not the elephant-headed god but is a ule given to an amportant gana in Siva's
entourage. The latter explanation seems to be the more likely ene.

The story in chapter eleven of the Briuma Purdna is similar to the version of the
Harivensa. Whe Brahma Purana, consisiing of wo hundred and forty-five chapters, occurs lirst

86 |

--- Page 88 ---
T
19 the list of the eighteen Maid-Puriinas, hence the name Adi Purana. Most scholars agree tat
the present Brahina Purana is a composite of various segments belonging to different periods
Hagra (1940.145-146) further claims that the present Brahma Purana was onpinally an Lpa-
Purana of the same tide, written as late as the sixtecuth century CE Hazra (1940:149-150) also
provides an analysis of all the passages which the Brahma Purana has in common with the
Hlarivainsa Based on this he argues that the apocryphal Brahma Purana is mndebted to the
Tartvanisa, suggesting that because the Harivanisa preceded its composition, the apocryphal
Bralune Purina was not compiled earlier than the tenth century

The version of the story in the Brahma Purana’ is further contused. It recounts how
Divodasa, the son uf Bhimaratha, lived en the outskirts of Varanasi because at that time the city
was uninhabited due to a curse put upen it by Nikumbha, Only the raksasv Ksemaka lived in
the erty!” The city of Varanasi had originally belonged to Bhadrasena but he had been killed
by Divodasa who had destroyed all Bhadrasena’s one lendred sons except the voungest,
Dardama. This Duréama fought Divodasa and won back lus heritage. The Purana then
introduces the character of Alarka, wha is the xing of Kasi, and who is truthful in speech and
favaurable to the Brahmins. Towards the end of his life, he siays the 1aksasa Ksemaka and |
lives again in the beautiful city of Varanasi Alarka's successer is King Ksemaka. Sohnen and H
Schremer suggest that the sentence in which the raksasa Ksemaka 1s ‘illed refers to King
Divedasa (1989-28-29). Despite the confusion conceming the different characters, their
penealagy and their deeds, itis clear froma the text that Divodasa is not a righteaus xiag in this
ehapter. The character of Nikumbha is not properly explained but the fact that he cursed
Divodasa and expelled him fron: the city suggests that ne was a malevolent bempe. Kscmaka is
described as both a raksasa and as the successor-icng to Alatka. The sumilanucs Selween the
Brahma Pordna version and that of the Hartvamsa lies m the character of Divedasa who 1s an
ev:L kuzg in both stones, Because of his misdeeds he ix banned from his city and lives on the
bank of the Gemt river. Whereas in the Harteamsi it is Ganesa as the ‘Lord of the Ganas’ who
proneunces the curse to expel Divodasa, in the Bratuna Purina itis Nikumbha. If one considers
the name Ganesga as being the name of the ‘Lord af the Ganas,, the use of the name Ganesa in
the Harivamsa could im fact refer to Nikumdha, who was part of a gana of Siva

Domiger (1976:174-204) offers an interesting interpretauen of the Divoddsa myth,
inking, it to the wiumph of Saivism over Buddhisin. The dubious character of Divodasa in the

~ Brodrsa Pertnt, ALTM volume 33: chapter ¢1

“fh connection with the appeatance oF the vixsasas, Parniter’s view (19222292) is soleresting He suggests thal
the eeference to the ciksas: Ksemakas occupancy of the cily could incicate that the country was so devastated by
the war that if was taxen over Sy uncsvilised! trbes tion: the focests (5922.263). The Harhayas were known to
Lave caned the perth of ladia, He also makes seference to the term riksasiin the Kammyana in which rt denotes the
vhaotants ef Ceylon and tae Gadavar, valley Pargiter concludes that eremmes were uengmally tamed cnto savages:
n thy tater recensions of the cnyths, the differences ‘between the varius kinds of evil be:nge having been
hauscerdes, and the single nogn ciksssa being used

a7

--- Page 89 ---
Harvainsa and the Brahma Purana seems to have beer borrowed from references to the King in
the Reveda, where ae is known as ‘Destroyer of Cities’, and in the Mahabharata, where
Divodasz 1s the King who look away the sacnficia? fires from a city (Doniger 1976:191). The
Epic provides a story simular to d:e one in the Bradma Purana: “After lus fataer destroyed the
cily, Divoddsa became the king of Varanasi ™ He rebuilt it and :made it prosperous. Thea thy
city was cttacked by the Hashayes and Divodasa suffered great losses and sought refuge ina
hermitage. The resident sage there performed a sacrifice which gave Divedasa a son,
Pratardana Having come of age, Pratardana returned (© the city and killed all the Haihaya
princes’ (Mahabharata 13:31:15-58, as cuoted by Doniger 1976.91) According to Doniger
(1976,174-204) this story apples to Divoedasa characteristic attrivutes of a Buddhist avatdira.
The king makes the city wealthy and prosperous, hus cormpeting with the gods, but, by taking
revenge on iis enemies, he wanspresses his dhamia Varanasi is a likely city for such an
interpretation because it 1s the city of Siva situated near Sarnath, @ sacred centre for Buddiusts |

In this context it :s legitimate te anticipate the loter Kass Kanda to find further support
for Doniger's association of Divodésa with Buddhism. When Vinayaka-Gunesa is sent to
Banaras he takes over the role of Nikumbha and Ksemaka in the earuer Puranas by deiuding
Use people of Varanasi, and thereby preparing the way tor Visnu to persuade )ivodasa to stand
down, Ganesa, in the form of a Buddhist astraleger, uses lis maya to affect the dreams of the
people which he then explams te them in terms of a dreadful future. In their dreams the people
see a tightful man ciad m ochre robes. Accord:ng to Kane (1968, volume [:187) this could he
interpreted as an allusion to Buddhist monks. The first reference to a man im ochre robes
appears in the Vindyaka Sant of the Manava Grhyva Sitra where it :s a hallucination created by
the Vinayakas (see Appendix, page 3). The character of Divodasa who. if one avcepts
Doniper’s argicnents, 1s associated with Buddhist cn the /Jarivansa and the Brahma Purana is
further deveioped in the Aasi Khanda where he is no longer regarded as evil-nindsd but as a
virtuous king, living by the rules of the Baddhust dharma. [tis Ganesa's role-playmy as the
Buddhist astiologer and the nightmares of the population ef Varanasi thal carry (ie connotation
of the evil nature of Buddhism in the Kasi Kbanda, thes allowing Divodiisa to be restored to
virtue, [his interesting that the sndyd of Garesa includes many of the spells which were put on
people dy Vindyakas in the Grhya Sttra

Although the Matsva Purana docs not give any account of the Vindyaka cull in Banaras,
tis a valuable source for an carly perspective on the religieus life of the city. Chapters one
bundred and eighty tw one hundred and eighty-five of this Purina form one of the best known
short Manatmyas on Kasi and at describes the yaksa cultin the myth of yaksa Harixesa (see
inffa) (Rocher 1986:198). The story about Kasi, here only referred to as Avimukta, 1s narrated
™® according to the stoy, te city was situated benween the north bark of the Ganga ana the seath bank of the
Gom

$8

--- Page 90 ---
by Siva and Parvati. The reason why ts Purdna is of importance here will hecome clear trom
the analysis of the Kas Khanda If the chapter on Banaras in this Purina is net considered to be
later than the eleventh century then it seems that in this period Avimuxta was the presiding aeity
of the cil. This provides textual support for the seals excavated in Rajghat which show that.
between the eighth and the Oveifth centunes, Avumukta was the presiding deity.

The last Purana which needs to be considered is the Padma Purina. It also has
mauncrous references to the sacred border oF Kasi in its Patala Khanda The Padma Purana is
one of the more extensive Puranas, existing in bwo Cifferent recensions: a Bengali one in five
Khancdas and a westerm version in six Khandas. Itis generaliy accepted that the Bengali version
vs the older of the wwo (Rocher 1986:206-207, Hazra 1940°107-108). Although Uus Purana
docs nul provide much information about the Vinayaka cultin Banaras, 1 Goes mention the site
of Dehali Vindyaka at the western gate of Kasi. There is a Patala Khanda in both the western
aad the Bengali version but neither of the two contains the Mahitmya on Kasi, in which Siva's
superiority is claimed (Rocher 19862210). Scholars are agreed thal Usis is ene of the latest
Puranas The Padart Purana has been dated between, 1200 and 1400 CE by Doniger, dut Hazra
has suggested that sume seginents may be as old as the tenth century. If Hazra is mght and if the
reference to Dehali Vindyaka does belong to the tenth century. then dus would be indicative of
an eariy cate for the emergence of Dehali Vindyaka in the religious life of the city. Since the
present mdrt of Dehalt Vindyaka 1s recent this would give some proof that Dehali Vinayaka
Was established well before the composition ef the Kasi Khanda

In this chronological survey of the sources relating lo Vindyaka-Ganega in Banaras,
alention now moves ‘rom literary sources to the iconographic sources of Pafica-Vinayaka
worship The group of the fifty-six Vindyakas 19 Banaras 1s unique in the Indian subcontinent,

j In other places one finds smaller groups of Vindyakas, such as eight Vinayakas around Poona,
«ix Windyakas in Ujjain, and five Vindyakas in Pur. Paica-Vinayaka worship is an aspect of
Vinayaka worship which 1s litle discussed execpt by art historians who have described the
various Pafica-Vindyaka panels found over the north of India The general attitude of these
schotars is that there is no Literary evidence to suppart the iconagraphic material and therefore
bot much canbe said about this form of worship. expect for the fact that il existed as carly as
the ninth century CE. The carkest of these panels is found near Laksint Aunda in Banaras and
thus suggests Uhat Patca-Virayaka worship was prevalent 1 Banaras The following
lconogiapine examination will teat not only Parica-Vinayaka panels, but also the
tepresentations of the five Vinayakas in other sculptares.""!

. |
“Las gratetic to Professor NP Jost wha drew iny aileauon to Parca-Vinayakxa worship in Banaras
89

--- Page 91 ---
Earher in this thesis a representation uf five elephant-headed figures in the Mathura
miuseum was mentioned, VS. Agarwala (1982:106-107) suggests that these form the earhest
representations of Ganesga,'? whereas Po K. Agarwala (1977:139) argues that these figures
coukl be five gayasirsa yaksas and therefore could be considered as a prototype of the five
Vinayakas. The carhest stone pancl representing the Panea-Vinayaka concept was found in
Banaras and was first deserived by P. K. Agarwala (1978.72-73, 1977:139-40) (see Appendix,
Fiz 1) The panel is about one metre wide and fifty-two centimetres in height. Itis carved on
both sides, with the Patica-Vindyakas on the upper face. According to Agarwala there is a
representation. of Visnu sleeping on the snake on the underside of the panel. Five elephant-
aeaded ligures are depicted, of whieh the first (hree and the fifth are Vinayakas and the fourth is
an elephant. Whereas the Vindyaka figures are silting in the dala position, the elephant is
standing with its (unk curved towards the nglv. The Vindyakas cach have a ndgavamiopavita
wid two ans [na ther lef hands they are holding something which looks like swestneat bul
their ght hands are damaged. Their trunks tur towards the left and seem to touh the
modakas, Itis the elephantin the fourth position, however, which nas attracted the attenton of
svhoiars, as will be seen. This stone panel belonged to an carly Gurjara-Pratihara temple which

| brings us date to about 800 Ch.

A replica of this stone panel is found in the same place. This was discovered in a
miniature shrine which 1s stylistically dated to the carly tenth century. This replica as in red
sandstone; ils height is nimety-six and a half centimetres and the sides of the square are Uyrty-
five and a hal? centimetres On the four sides there are representations of Hindu deiues. On the
side that points towards the north there is a panel depicting four divinities: Siva and Parvati are
s:tuated in the centre; on the leftis Ganesga with four arms, his two upper arms holding a snake
in the airy and on the ngat side is a figure so damaged that it cannot be identified, However, the
atlioute of the abaya mudia and the kaimandaiu (ascetic vesse.) suggests that it could be
Skanda and that this panel depicts the “oly family", The lone honzonial panel on the same sile
shows the Panica-Vingyakas. There are some minor differences between the first math-century
panel and this one: the most obvious is that here the four Vindyaka are sealed 11 a row, agen mn
the falita position, and the elephant is standing, at the end of the I:ne on the right The Vinayakas
are four-armed and are holding parasus and ankuSas in their upper hands and sweeuneats im
their lower right hands Their trunks, which are curved towards the ieft, are touching the
modakas. The elephant is agai shown ina frontal perspective and the trunk 1s curved towards
the left ((P. Ko Agarwaia 1977:141-142)

" Ras-telief (12x23) carved with thtce hor.zenlal bands The second hand consists of sta horseshoe arches,
cach octween beo dwar! pilusiers and containing the bust af a warshipser with a garland. In the thid band there
ate five elephant-headed yatksts, showr:y the earhest represertation of a Ganesa Ryure cn Mathura art, perhaps en
offshoot of Kubera iconograpay The Mathura scuphives belong, tothe Kusina period!
“ Gunac-P:athara architecture twas not unusual to make miniature versions af oa existing temp which
were called srvalas (PK Agarwala 1879 140)

90

--- Page 92 ---
Representations of Pavca-Vinayaka pancls found im Razasthan and Madhya Pradesh
indicate the extent of Pafica-Vindyaka worship. The earliest scuplture outside Banaras is the
Jamaroh panel which is dated to the eleventh century CE. There are four Vinavakas, al) in a
dancing stance, and one elephant. The elephant is the second trom the right. It is interesting that
the figures are represented with haloes behind their heads and stand on lots flowers, The four
Vindyakas are represented with a mouse or rat near tre mght feet. Tne elephant is depicted
trom the side ut with its head tumed towards the front and its trunk coiled to the right (RoC
Agarwala 1971:107). The other Rajasthan) panel is found m the Somesvara temple in Karadu
(ses Appendix, Fig 2) “R. C. Agarwala places ts tableau in dhe eleventh century but Dhaky
beleves wt should be dated a century later. The Pafica-Vindyaka panel is found im the
rangamandapa oF the temple and it depicts five seated Vindyakas. They are all two-armed and
aold various attnbutes. The first one seems to hold a task in his right hang. Ths feft nand is
damaged. The trunk coils towards the right. The secand in the row holds a inodaka bow! in his
lef hand and his night hand ¢s also damaged. His (unk also turns towards the right: the tusks oF
the other three, however, are turned towards the lefi. The thud holds an axe in his right hand
and someti:ng which scems ike a modaka or a pomegranate un tis lef. The fourdh is also
depicted with a niedaka put im aus ‘eft hand bat the right hand is damaged. The jast one is
somewhat peculiar in that lis night arm is in the air and he carries a knite. lo his left hand he
helds modakas (R.C. Agarwala 1971.107). Another Pafica-Vinayaka panel depicts the Pafica-
Vinayakes af Kadwaha in the Guna district in Madhya Pradesh. The panel is rather damaged
and disticult to date. The five Vinayaka figures indicate that it 1s probably from around the
eleverth century. Although P. K Agarwala (1977-151) has daled it to the tenth century, the fact
Uhat the figures are not wearing clowns could pussibiv date it earlier, At each of the feet is a
mouse, The first Vindyaka is shown facing towards the front and in the falita position but is
badly damaged The second Vinayaka turns his head towards the central Vinayaka and his
body ts in an odd position although, because his iegs are damaged, :C:s not possibie to. sve
whether he is dancing or not. The cenwal Vindyaka 1s depicted in a uibhaniga position and he
wears a migayajfopavita. The fourth firure is turned towards the central one and seems te de
the reverse of the second Vinayak. Although Ins arms nave Gsappeared it can be seen that he
is dancing, He also wears some omaments around his neck. The Afth Vinavaka is again facing
forwards, his trunk turned towards the left (see Appendix, Fig. 3)

Another example from Madhya Pradesh is the door lintel of Surwaya.”” PK
Agarwala dates this panel to the eleventh century. The five Vinayaka figures are seated in the

“ATES. negative no $4870
* Dhuky ives a bref description of the Someivara temple and dates cae temple between 1129 and 1179 CE
1967 41-43)
MSA LIS. negative no 82.74
MALTS. aggaave no. $2.20
91

--- Page 93 ---
duit pos:von and in their two hands they camy an axe and a bow] with modakas, On the
extreme right is aman with a human tace.'* A sunilar figure is found in other groups of five
Vinayakas, to be discussed later. Apart from these panels, which are 1 good condition, several
broken panels have been found in diferent areas of Banaras In many cases the elephant
statues, which are exact copies of the elephant in the Laksmi Kunda panel, are separated fou
the Vinayaka statues but are also smeared with vermibor. paint

‘The existence of these Pavica-Vinayaka panels implies some form of cult worship. The
caraest panels found in Banaras belong to the Pratihira period. Mus date, and the areas in
which Pafiea-Vinayaka panels are found, suggests that the Prauharas were responsible for
fostering line form of wurslip and chat ut developed further wmder laicr ruters such as the
Kalacuris. These pancis also give direct evidence of a Pratinara presence in the city, as was
suggested in Chapter One. That the Pafica-Vinayaxa concept aad become well estabiished 1s
demonstrated not ony by the panels but also by the devapattas and si/papattas which represent
holy cities in terms of their divine populations The sepapattas of Banaras clearly depict five
Vindyaka tipures, thus confirming that the cult was a vecopmsed reliprous element in medieval
Banaras.

A devapatta from Tewar in Madhya Pradesh" shows Siva balling the demon Andhaka
inthe mam panel Around this representation is a group of five Vindyakas, sitting in two rews,
ons above the other. The first fleure of the upper row is Bralima, sinse he 1s depicted wath a
topknot and carries a circular lotus tn his hand Tae five Vindyakas are two-armed and their
tanks are tumed towards the feft and touching the modaka bowls, which are held in their left
hands. On top of We panel the fourteen syotringas are represented above the twelve Adityas.
On the horizental bands at the right side of the panel thers are eight Devi figures (see
Appendix, Fig 8). Another devapatta shows Visnu as the main god in the centre." He holds
his solar disk and a lotus in his upper hands and a club and a bow in his lower hands. This
panel is broken, although seven of the fourteen Jyotilingas in the upper band and five Vindyake
figures i the lower one are recognisable. They are depicted in tannhar positions, This stony:
panel, now :n the Lucknow Museum, 1s dated to the twelfth century (see Appendix, Fig. 6)
“eS Aganeala (1977 191) has vanous suggestions fa: this sigh Syure seated in the ress. with the Ganap ates
{see Appendix, Fig 4) ‘Dace be represent the humar-face Jom: af Garesa annseli? Oras ae a Skanda unage
eppeauny wth the fivefold mcufestation of his brother, or sovic deity”,

* Remains of a Parca Vardyzka pavel were found in the sane of Sena Vinayaha, dose by Martkariha Dest on
Scumint phat A scumar statwe of an elephant isto be found at the back of Lembedata Vinayeka oo Lal ghde close
lo Slinseandra ghd Near ta the Parcakrogi temple in Gela galt is a sbre in which ther are three seated
Viseyakas Although the statues are covered with paint isis clear tha, they belonged te a larger panel. Other pancis
ay dificult to locate sineg they are scattered all aver the alleys of Hanaas

TALES negative sin $9.94

"ALLS. negative no. 16.67

92

--- Page 94 ---
More relevant to this survey are the silpapanas of Banaras. * A distinguishing feature
of the ¢/papattas relating to Banaras is the Ganga which ts represented flowing through the
pane) Panels depicting other oly tirthas replace the river ay anvther god. The Gwalior slab
from Badoh"’ depicts a river flowing vertically through the panel. The river is full ef aquauc
animais, all swimming with their mouths upwards. The slab is divided honzentalty into four
vands, each separated by a narruw strip. On the upper band fourtecn Siva siigas are depicted.
Underneath there are seven Stirya figures on the right sige of the nver. On the lett, the band 1s
divided and shows Wenty-iive Hingas, placed in groups of five, on yonipithas. The third band
has tweive standing Visnus. The lower band Aas five Vindyakas, sealed in the falta positian,
wth their trunks towards the left, On the left across the river Chere are two worshippers with
gariands :n their hands, followed by five others. also with gazlands (Josh! 1992:155-136). Uns
Supapatta is almost certainly a representation of Banaras because of a descripuon of a simular
panel found in the Aparajitaprecha, a work generally dated to the twelfth century (Tiwari and
Gan 1%6:xn-xiv)."* Another characteristic of the representation on the Gwalior panel is that
the nver seems to flow towards the north, The aquatic animais are depicted swimming
upwards. Banasas par'ly stakes its claim to holiness on its location at the place where the Ganga
flows towards the north. The panel 1s dated to the eleventh century CT:

Louking for @ possible explanation for dus concept, “ P. Ko Agarwala turns lo the
Ghatiyala pillar, earher described in Chapter Two. The pillar, dated V.S. 918 (862 Cli}, was
lopped by a capital consisting of four figures of Ganzsa facing in the four cardinal directions
On the capital there is an inscription in which Vinayaka is invoked (R. G. Bhandarkar
(965.212, L volume 1X:277 ff. Bo Krishna 1989:36, 44). Bhandarkar considered that the
pillar constituted proof of the existence of 2 Vindyaka cult as described in the Vindyaka Santi of
the Yajhavalkya Smit: in which four Vindyakas ate considered ta be manifestauons of one
stigle Vinayaka. However, P. I<. Agarwala (1977:152) believes that there was a fifth {gure on
lop of the capital which was missing at the time Bhandatkar visited the site; this fifth figure was
probably ar elephant in conformity with the cazhest independent representations of the Pafica-
Vindyakas. A photograph of the column reveals just one af the Vinayaka figures but
Agarwala's hypothesis that there were five cannot be confirmed since te statue is loo damaged
(RK. C. Agarwala 1963:285-287), What is striking about the Ghatyala piilar is that like the five
Vinayaka panels of the early period, it bot depicts four Vindyakas and belongs to the sume

"For ts study of devapattas im Banaras | am agai indebted tw Drotessor NP Joshi

co Pathar: slabin the Gugan Museum Ciadaar, ao 288

The Aparantaprecha staics that m 2 paltaSiid of Banacus the paddess Gang’, in padiismnia. is the centre
Other denies such as the Adstyas, the Siva Hngas. the five Vindyakas, and the Matkcis are posted alouad the ceate
rere i tosht 1992... 36)

(1 tke corelusier, to his survey on the Pafea-Vindy akas, Agerwals (1977 182) writes “The Paitea-Canresa
teprescntation, row avacdable a mote than a dazen examples on reliefs Irom: Varanasi, Rajasthan and Madhya
Pradesh, ebviously poses a myth:cal as well as an iconographic preiern as to the mcuple fans of Ganga ard
the Rxauon of ther number es five. However, we are yet lo trace ary deSuute textual authority describing cleany
ts cucous aspect, evidenced dy amtistic portrayals

93

--- Page 95 ---
styltsuc school, namely that of the Gurjara-Prauharas. The numerous statues of Vindyaka-
GaneSsa dated to the Pratihara period indicate that the worship of the god was widespread

Unie now at has been argued by act historians dealing with Padva-Vinayaka
representations that there are no textual sources describing the worship of tive Vindyakas, and
hatat is therefore difficult to regard these panels as providing evidence of cult worship. The
reference in the Tuthavivecana Khanda of the Krtyakalpataru, however, may suggest otherwise.
It is therefore necessary to examine this text in detail,

In Ins preface to (he Tirthavivecana Khanda Avyangar (2948:1) deseribes ig
Kityakalpatary as ‘the oldest work of the type extant and one of the varaesi of the class It is
also one of the iargest as well as the most comprehensive’. The impressive scale and style of the
work is attributed to the personality of Laksmidhara who was ¢ Bhatta Brahmin and probably
the nija gure of Govindacaneéra, the mast inportant ruler of the Gahadavalas. His function as
the main advisor of the king 1s assumed trom the praise with which Laksmidhara describes
Gowndacandra."* The Gahadavalas represent themselves as the protectors of the holy places
and the revivers of the rehgious tife of Kaé1, With this Nibandha Laksnudhara aimed to pive a

| complete overview of diximma as it was interpreted in the owelfth century. It can be assumed
from various indications within the text that the author af the Nibandha fed a strict Ife
according to the rules he promulgated for others. Later Nebandha writers show preat respect for
both his knowledge and bis logic in the compilation of this digest.” The Krtyakalpatara 1s
Gwviéed into fourteen Khandas but despite its size if is not diffuse. * The different Khandas all
deal with various aspects of dhannasasira."”

The Virthavivecana Khande is the first extant maror work dealing with the subject of the
urthas Because the text made use of all the existing Pardnas of the time, its references are an
mpertant ingication of works that are ne longer extant, such as the oidest version of the Liga
Purana, The first section of the Tithavivecana Khanda is entitles the firthayatra and introduces
the various ways of expiating sins, for example by pilgrimage Laksimidhara provides the reader
“ln the Réadharma Khanda, Laksinidham clans tit Gevindacandsa ts a benevolent miler whose wide
CONGUESIS Were Cue (ats ows advice as a tncmster (Aryangar 19d axis)

” Laksrsidhara supposed that the ceaders of ais digest were farnhar wih simple rebysous terms and customs
Wale this was the case cn Laksmidhare's own era, aller the Musi iwasions and durng Muslim rile a cot of the
Gaditurs were last and priests could ro ‘enger be assumed to be leatned. Later euthers of Nibandhas Lave
therefore given filler comments uad guidance to mec! this new situatica.

* "nthe introduction to the Dana Kaasda Laksmidhara Linsclt expzesses is intenbor lo be concise Any arya
C4@ introduction) wntes: Of chentics on an cdenneai top:z, 2 text us given in one pkece and ancthes area
willerent contest, as is tequred by cts purpese; what is founded an correct knowledge 1s declaed and whats.
aased en .grorance, ever: of popular, is rejected. arcbigeiuce are charred up, and only what 1s accepted by all
aatherags sully is stated, ane where controversy has been endless, | aksmidhira has given a decision,

The Kityakalpatans kas cxdered the diiterest Khandas according tu the stages sf life (agsanas) tke Kiaida on
tie tithayatd follows those whieh deal with ronal ichgious dates, the igelations conceming, fs. anc. pan
vAryangar .948 xxi}

94

--- Page 96 ---
with comprehensive information concerning the perferniance of yatras°* The central subject of
the second part ts pilgrunage to sacred places such as Kasi, Prayag and Gaya, together with
various rules and customs which need to be observed before attending a trtha?" The
Ceser:ptons of the holy places begin with an account of Kasi which had become the foremost
piace of pilgrimage in India.“ In lis account Laksmidhara names three hundred and_ forty
shrines. Aiyangar is of the opnnion that Laksinidhara provided a complete list of all the sacred
places in the cry of his time, thus suggesting that any umnentioned sile was probably
constructed later, However, given Laksmidhara’s own words that ‘opinions, even popular,
constucied on ignorance are to be rejected’, Atyangar’s assumption must be open to question. If
seenis nest Likely that Laksimdhara knowingly omitted places of popular interest because they
were nol described in the Purgnas he consulted and hence tacked authority and authenticity. in

addition to this selectivity, most schoiars who have studied the Tirthavivecana Khanda agree
that Laksinidkara's own geographical knowledge was far fron: complete “* However, some
scholars in Banaras believe that a man of the status of Laksmidhara wouid have been very well
cnformed about his own territory and :ts boundaries. This becomes a contentious issue because
Laksmidhara did not mention the Paiicakrosi Yatra, the curcumambutatory pilgr:mage rouie,**
in his work. The explanation tor this, however, is unlikely to be ipmorance but rather because he
was not prepared ty include a pilgrimage which dic not feature in any major Purana”

A description of all the tirthas :nentioned by Laksimidhbara is beyond the scope and
purpose of this thesis, but 1t is impartant to note some of the mayor deities whe are included, as
well as those ignored. The digest of Laksimdhara provides hterary support for the evidence of
the Rajghat seals which reveal that Visvesvara only became the city’s main deity from the early
Uurteenth century onwards. Vigvesvara is mentioned only three times in the entire dipest: once
"he pradakwnd, the custem of making nemaskara fo a tata, and treaty the Grfia as a dyecory are among che
presenbed rttals (Atyangat 1948 hv-ly)
~ Batung, vows, phuyers aca rituals for ancestors ate a recommended part ot tre performance at every tinha
tAcyangar }O4R- Isi)

7" The erty had slready gained tus farce by the eleventi century CL wher the Muslin taveller Al-Birenr visied
ic region He noted tit Kasi was the preemer aitha of India (2 Sacha 1988 (1910; 146). ‘The supremacy of
Kasi was already known in south India rom the tenth: century emwards Oae af the ascuptons besang this
wnteumat.on. states that ‘the deadliest of all sins .s the killing us Beaks and cus ny Kasi (Altckar 1947 28)
7 One cramps yaven by Atyangar (1948 xhi) supports this In his account of tithas outside the Gahadavdla
singdem Laksmidhara describes the Cauvery iver iba chapter abet the Narada river.
“* Thc Paheakres: Yatra os a pilgrimage route cf five krosis cscamambuiatng tae sacred city Qn the icute these
azeune hundred and ayit shires, eleven of whien are Vinayasa shnites Fer mare detared vformation about this
pegrimage. cls sigmfcance and sytboues, see Rana PB. Smgh (1987, 1988, 199) and 1994)
°C The Past reference to the Patcakrsg Yatra 1s found in the Marithi work ef the beyinning of the sixteenth
sentry. the Gurucania A ful descupuor of the plgnmage does not occur in tre Paranas wb) the severteent1
sertury wher at was included in a pan of the Brahzravanvarts Parse, The dete cf this Purana, however, os
disputed and mvght be late. Skul (1977-211) believes thet there as ong reference to the ydud on the Tisthawvecesa
Kianda. Io tie Nanatrtha Mahatmya of the Vainumna Purana (as cesenbed in the TVK:237) itis wutten Is the
month of Migha. after having visited the ditha cf Prayay, wo te Kadi. Take a hath at Dasaévamedha ghar and visit
the ccraples, thea circumambulate the cry and do pai tor Avunuxtesvaca’. “lais: statement dees not necessarily,
unply Cat the circurtanbulation was around the Asetra of Kasi. [tes possibie dat Laksmiddara had the Antazgrhe:
Yatra m iurd, whies: is the pilgrimage ot the nest nportant sarines an the centre of the city Tor more details on
the Amargitia Yatra, see RP. 3. Singh 1992:52

95

--- Page 97 ---
1s probably an interpolation and in the other two cases it refers once to the ‘Lord of the
Universe’ and once to an ordinary linga. In Laksmidhara’s tme the chief deity was Avimukta
(TVIK.93, Motichand 1985-190), The Virthavivecana Khanda only mentions twenty-four
important Devi shrines. Of these, nine shrines ave devoted ta Candi and nine to Durga. OF the
temples dedicated to the Sun only Lolarka is mentioned The later Kasi Khanda refers to twelve
Aditya temples. The cult of Kala Bharrava seems lo have been unknown or unimportant to
Laksmidhara since there is not a single allusion made tv it. There is then a significant
discrepancy between the tinted number of shrines referred to by Laksmidhara and the much
larger number of sacred spots and deities present in the Kasi Khanda

Returning now to the previous discussion af the Paiica-Vinadyaka cult, Laksmidhara’s
Nibandha in fact mentions five Vinayakas in contrast to the more than fifty-six named in the
Kasi Khanda. Unfortunately, cither because of textua! problems in the nianuscripts or in the
Alyangar edition, or because the Sanskrit used in medieval Mahaunyas fell far short of te
uigorous standards of classical Sanskrit, the few Slokas dealing with the Pafica-Vindyakas are
far from clear. Rather than dwell on what is most certainly a corrupt text, 1 1s sufficient to say
that the text refers to Pafica-Vinayaka (pafica vinayakah), that three are named, Dhundhi, Kona
and Sindira, and that the five Vinayakas should all be seen and sweets given in order to attain
the preatest success and good fortune. Since apparently Laksmidhara based his entire Nibandha
on Puranas it can reasonably be argued that the reference to Pafica-Vinayaka worship features
in one of the Purame sources which has since been lost. Et can certainly be seen fram these four
Slokas that in his Puranic source the concept of the Pafica-Vindyakas was well esiablished. This
cult of the Pafica-Vindyaka, which begins in the ninth century in the Pratihara period and
region, Was represented in both ils imtial and evolved torms in Banaras and is attested in
Laksmidhara’s text. That this concept lived on in perhaps wo different forms will be seen later.

Having dealt with Pafica-Vindyaka worship and also the Tirthavivecana Khanda of
Laxsmidhara, 1t 1s now necessary ta turn to the most prominent and extensive Mahatmya
dealing with Kasi, the Kasi Khaada, which is particularly significant in the present context. A
tull discussion of the composite nature of the Skanda Purana and the problem of the dates of its
various parts is given by Rocher (1988°:228-232) and to Racher’s treatment now needs to be
added the mere recent findings of Adnaensen, Bakker and Isaacson (1994). Neither of these
sources, however, makes the dating of the Kasi Khanda possible, The terminus a quo must be
Laksmidhara's Kriyakalpataru of the tweifth century Laksmidhara quotes from a Skanda
Purana but makgs no reference fo the Kagr Khanda Vhis suggests that the Kas: Khanda 1s later
than the twelfth century. The terminus ad quen must be 1440 CE when the Kas: Khanda was
“Tom epygraphic material of the Gahadavdia dynasty we know thal the Lolarka shrine wes situated at the Assi
sanga and that it was consicered to be an important tatha as the queen bad bathed there.

96

--- Page 98 ---
rendered mlo Telugu by the poet Snndtha.® Lek (2980:84) believes that although it as
unthinkabie that the Khanda would have been composed before the tme of Laksmidhara, it
dees not make sense that it should have been written in the troubled times of the Maslin
period. She therefore believes that the Khanda may have came into existence during the guldes.
age of the Gahadavalas, but that its final compilation was later. While Eck may be right, ct 1s 1
possible that she 1s too ready to see the peniod of Musinm rule as upiformiy negative. In fact
there weve periads both of destruction and of revival under Muslin: rule, as demonstrated in
Chapter One. The Kasi Khanda is not only a gionfication of Kaéi as a sacred place Sut also of
Vigvanatha, the main deity of the city. There 1s evidence ef donations for the reconstruction ef
the Visvanatha temple during Mus!im rule The vonstracton of the Padmesvara tempie at lie
door ef the Visvanatha temple took place nm. 1296 CE It has also been suggested tha, the
Atuaviresvara temple on Manikamika ghat was constructed in 1302 CE. There ary therefore
ample grounds for considenng that withm the period 1250 to 1350 CE not only were Hindu:
developments within the city permitted bat that they were possibly also encouraged. It is
therefore not unreasonable to attribute the composition of the Kasi Khanda oy its final
caumpuation te this period.

At imtial exammation of the Kasi Khandi™ reveals that the Mahaunya was a
ealogisation of Kasi, its shrines and Visvanatha, and that it should be considered as a blueprint
of the cesmologisation of the cily as a sacred centre. Tt was Eck (1986), however, who first
drew atcution to the cosmalogisation of the city in the form of a conceptual mandala , and to
the confusion concerning whether the grouping of tie fifty-six Vinayakas constitute a mandala
orno. Tins will be discussed in Chapter Five,

Having estabvished an approximate date for the Kasi Khanda :tis vow time to turn to
tie conten? of Uns Mahatmya. The following analysis ef the Kasi Khanda will provide evidence
that the text was chrongiogically structured and that the whole text can be considered as a
casmolog:sation of Kas: with the glorification of the new Lord of the city, Visvanatha, as its
aun

The Khanda consists of nvo books, the Pirvardha and the Civaridha, each contanmng
fitty chapters. In order to taciitate the analysis of the Kas? Khanda , the content of each chapter
wil: be summarised below.

*"Srindtha wn fact adapted only a snall gat of the Kasi Kanda in is poem Pecsenal commiunicatier with
Prefessa: Rag, Beraras Hindu Un:versity, 1997
*™ bor convenence ef reference tie KaG Ahande -s availaole in tansaton an Bagh a velunes fifty-eight und
tily-sine of the AITM serets (19961997), and at Hinds up te chapter seventy-five. i6 Tripathy £996)

9}

--- Page 99 ---
Parvardha of the Kasi Khanda |
1. Because the Vindhya mountains were jealous of Mount Meru, they grew higher and higher
and obstructed the Sun.
2 A description of the satyaloka and of certain places in south India “" Fhe problert of the
Vindhya mountains locking the rays of the Sun is related to Brahma who decides to send
Agastya, the guru of the Vindhya mountains, to solve the problein,
3A description of the hermitage of Agastya in Kasi.
4 Apastya is told of his mission to tame the Virdhya mountains and his wife, L-opamudra, 1s
sulogised by the gods as being a Caste woman, whereafter the characteristics of chaste women
are detailed.
3 The merits of Kasi are narrated and Agastya and Lopamudra leave for the Vindhya
louatains. Agastya subdues the mountains and then they go to Kolhapura, where they worship
Mahilaks:m
6 Agastya namates to Lopaniudra the merits of the seven sacred piaces granung salvation”
7 ‘The story of the seven holy cts is narrated through the story of Sivasarmnan. a wealthy
Brahmin hving in Mathura who, at the end of his life, makes a vatra to all seven holy places and
dies in Haridwar,
(The foliowing fourteen chapters descnbe Sivasarman’s journey through the different worlds
after nis death and on his way to salvation in chapter twenty-one.)
& The world of Yama
9. The regions of the celestial maidens and the Sur
(0. The worlds of Indra and Agm
11. The world of Vahni.
12. The worlds of Nirrtt and Varuna.
13. The worlds of Gandhavau, belonging to Varuna, and Alaka, the residence of Kubera.
14 ‘The world of Soma
IS The world of the stars
£6. ‘The world of Sukya (Venus)
+7 The worids of Mars, Jupiter and Saturn
18. Description of the world of the seven sages and a short nymn of praise for Arundhati.
I¥to 21. The story of Diruva, the pole star and son of King Svayambhu Manu. Dhruva cs a
devout worshipper of Visnu and because he outshines his brother, his stepmother bans him
from the palace, after which Dhruva performs penance to Lord Visnu. Visnu graats him a beon
“A roomote in the English translation of the Kas) Kianda sugyests shat the Poraia writer was a southermer
“There are atfectionstc references ta places inthe south of India ane also -eference is made io Manarasbtrans, who
at the bene of Che compastian of the Kasi Khandia oust have been gu estabkshed communty ull 10}
*P Kad, Kann. Maya. Ayodhya, Dwarivet;, Mathura and Avavtkii

OX

--- Page 100 ---
aud he becomes tae pivot of the enure universe. The end of chapter cwenty-one gives a short
hyma of praise to Kiisi as the city of Visvesvara
22 Brahma praises Kasi. In this chapter the extent of Kasi is said to be five krosas
23. Acthough there are seven holy cities granting salvation, itas only im Kasi that salveton is
certan:. The end of this chapter states that there is ne dilfererce between Siva and Visnu
24, Sivasarman is taken to Vaikuntha, trom where he is born as King Nandivardhana At the
end of his Efe he renounces all lng wealth and travels to Kasi where he worships Visvanatha
and attains saivation
25 Agastya and his wife circumambuiate the Srigir1 mountam and proceed to the forest in
which Skanda resides. Agastya and Lopamudra incct Skanda and aller prostrating themselves,
the sage asks Skanda to narrate stories of Kasi.
26. The chapter begins with the creation of Avimukta which extends over five krosas Visi
elogises Avimukta and Siva wants Visi to stay there forever Description and glorification
of Manixarnika
2? ‘The story of how Anandakanana became Varanasi and a description of the greatness of
Garea.
28. Continuation of the story culogising Ganga
29. The thousand saines of Ganga
30 The greatness of Avimukta. Another description of suing of the topographical features of
tke Avimekta Ksetra and the praise thereof.
31. The snanilestation of Bhatrava and the story of the Kapalamocana,
32 The manifestation of Dandapani. How the vaksa Harzkega received the boon tom Siva and
Parvati to stay in their vicimty.”
33. The glory of Jitana Vapi: how the well came inte being and the story of a Brahnun gil who
worshipped the weil, was kidnapped by a demon and became a queen named Kalavati who had
visions of Kasi .
34. Continuation of the story: in her dreams the queen sees all the urthas af Kasi, the last one
seg Jfana Wapr whick ts considered to be unique and superior to all dirthas
4S. Anatier culogy of Avinukta, Skanda narrates the sadacdra, the corduct of the goud, ta
Agastya and Lopamudra.
36 The rites and cuties ofa religious student
37. The characteristics of virtuous women
38. Contiauation of the characterist:cs of virtuous wemen
39. The manifestauon of the Lord of Avimukta and the explanation of way King Divadasa lad
te conte to Kagi.
40, Description of the duties of the householder
41. The path of yoga.
“The content of th.s story 2s acapted from the story of yahoat Haukesa in che Mateya Purdna (80)

uo

--- Page 101 ---
42. The characteristics of a dying person and the means of escaping from Kala.
43 The character ard virtues of Divodasa are described.
44. A descnpuon of Kasi and Siva's longing ter Ais city Parvau urges Siva lo invent some
tricks to occupy the city agam
4S. The arnva! of the sixty-four yeginis in the city.
46. Description of Lolarica, the Sun god.
42. Description of Uttararka, in the north of the city
48. The greatness of Sambaditva.
49 Description of Draupadaditya and Mayukhaditya.
50. Description of Khakholaditya.
Uttarardha of the Kaéi Khanda
51. Description of the other Sun gods who settled in the city,
32. Brahma goes to Kasi and asks Divodasa to pertumm len asvamedhas: descripuon of
Dasaévamedha as a ditha
33 Siva's attendants, the Ganas, go to Kasi.
$4 ‘The greatness and importance of the Kapardisa Jinga and the story of Pisaca. The greatness
of the Pigscamocana ttha.
SS. Ganesa goes on a umssion to Kasi
$6 The manifestation of the maya of Ganesa
$7 The manifestation of Dhundiavaja and the cesci:ption of the fifty-six Vindvakas
SX. Visnu goes ta Kags and manages lo wick Divedasa Divoddsa attains salvauon. A
description ef various Vaisnava drthas 1 Kasi
59 Haw Paiicanada came into being and the greatness of that urtha
60. The manitestation of Bindumadhava.
61. The greatness of the Vaisnava trthas.
62. The armval of Siva in the cry and the explanation given by the gods for not rewming to
Mount Mandara. The glorification of the Kapila drtha.
G3. The story of Jyestheswara,
64, The secret of lyesthesvara. The Brahmins come to the city and install digas.
63. Manzfestation of the Paragaresvaradi finga, the iga to the noth of Jyestheswara.
Deser:ption of another five thousand /ingas situated around Jyestiesvara
66. Sarlesa Anga and other important hagas
67 The praise of Ratnesa linga
6x. The origins of Krtuvasa haga.
69 The assembuing af the sixty-eight holy places of India within Kasi
70 The establishment of the deities: thirty-six Devi shrines are described
71. Vhe exploits of Durga,
100

--- Page 102 ---
72. The victory of Durga over the demon and the enumeration of the different Saktis mio which
Durgi divided herselt.
73. The greatness of Omkara.
74. The greatness of Omkara (continued)
78. The manifestation of Trilocana
276 The power of the Trlocana tutha is sung by the birds 2nd the Naga gzrls
27 The greatness of the Kedara dirtha
28 The greatness of the Dhaimesa fnga, established by Dharmaraia (Yania) to the cast of
Visvanatha linga
80 The vrata Manorathartiyd is narrated by Siva to Parva:
SL The ‘egend of the Dharmesa dirt and the greatness of tie Dharma kipa.
82 The exploits of Amivant form the background for the preataess of the Viresvara Haga.
83) Manitestition of Viresvara told by Amutrajit's queen im narrating the wala she performed
From verse sixty onwards the trthas from the Assi saga up to Manikarmka ate listed in
sequence from south to north
84. The urthas Irom the confluence of the Varana down to Mamkamnkd are enumerated.
RS The ascetic Durvasas is granted a boon by Siva and estabhshes a hiiga
86. Tne manifestation of the Visvakarmesvara Jinga
87. The sacritice of Daksa
XS. Sati casts off her body.
89 The manitestation of the Daksesvara finga
90. Te story of Parvatisvara
OL. The greatness of Gangesvare.
92. The story of Narmadesvara.
93 The manifestation of Satsvara
94 The man:festation of Amrtesa and other fiigas.
9S The story of Vyasa, now he eulogised Visnu as the greatest god in [kasi and how his arm
became paraiysed. The establisnment of Vyasesvara.
G6. Vyasa is reieased from a curse.
97, The lingas in Kadi as tirthas.
OR. The story of the arrival uf Siva in the muktunandapa (pavilion of salvation’)
99. The yrealness of Visvesvara: Siva is culogised as Visvandtha
100 Details of pilgrimages to be performed in Kasi to approach Visvaniatha
Apart trom the clear division ito (wo books, the Pérvardba and the Uuardrdha, it can
be suggested that the first (wenty-five chapters aiso form a separate unit. Ths first quarter of
the text therefare needs to be examined first. Chapters one lo five introduce Agastya, the guru
of the Vindhya mountains, and his virtuous wire, Lopamuadra, Chapter six gives an overview af
the vanous sacred places offering sa:vation and concludes that, of the seven sacred cities, six
101

--- Page 103 ---
offer access to Kasi (Kasida) while it is Kaét that offers salvation itself (moksada). From
chapter seven to chapter twenty-four the various directional devies and their worlds, the world
of the stars and the world of the pole star, are described through the story of the Brahmin
S:vagarman who, at the end of a virtuous life, decides that he should visit the seven sacred cities
af India After dying in Hardwar he arrives in the world of Yaina and ftom there liv makes a
journey through the various other heavealy worlds (/okas) While the dialogue in this story is
delween Sivasarman and the attendants of the dizterent worlds, it is actually Agastya who
narrates the story to Lopdmudra. The purpose of these chapters has been well expressed in
Beck's analysis. She writes (1986:51), ‘In this multi-levelled siniverse which we tour with
Sivasarma, every foka. right up to the Pole Star, is linked divectly to Kashi [sic]. Every Lord
received suzerainty over his realm by virtue of devotion er fapas in Kashi. In this cyele of
starigs, nat only are the regent-Lords of ome end space linked to Kashi in their affections and in
their origins, but even the other sacred cities of Baharat are linked to Kashi, even the ones
proclumed to be the most powerful are said to de but steps to Kashi, which is the crossing-
point lo moksa. As the ‘centre’, Kashi anchors all the powers of the universe — beth vertically
through the fokas, and horizontally in reiavon to the other holy places of ths world’ In the
context of the Kas? KAgnda boing a cosmologisauon of Kasi, this section should be considered
as the representation of the cosmos. The shrines, temples, fingas and deites described in the
later chapters of the Khanda have to be plaved against the cosmological background sketched
out in the tirst twenty-five chapters. The description of ull these shrines, deities and liigas
should in this context be considered as the description of the cenue of this cosmos, Kasi,
Chapter twenty-five introduces Skanda who, banned fram Kasi,?? resides on. the Sregiri
mountaiy Ths chapter can de considered as a ansition between the first quarter of the text and
the remainder since, tron: chapter twenty-six onwards, Skanda takes the main role as the
storyteller of the Khanda while Agastya is the one who poses the quesiiuns. It is this sudden
change in the dialogue which contributes further ta the clear distinction between the first
twenty-five chapters and those that follow.

The distincuon between the first part of the MahZunya ane the last seventy-five chapters
is further emphasised dy the chronalog:sation and tie cesmologisation of the text: Whereas the
main characteristic of the frst part of the Makainya was te represent the cosmas in which Kasi
as the centre, the most obvious feature of the iast seventy-five chaplers is the chronology ‘The
cescription and summing up of the various deities, fitgas and shrines 1s not comeidental, for it
28 One of the reasons for Skardas exile fem Kasi es the struggle bervcer hioy and Ins brothet Ganesa Wren
their patents decided that they would find a scrable partner for the ons wae could crcuniambulate the word
fastest, woth the breathers set off or ther vehic.es. Skanda crossed mountains, nesans and cvers ot his peacock,
whie Ganese circumamhulates his paren’s, explanmy that Siva acd Paral ave the warld $:sa und his coasort are
se enchanted by tre sun's catecect that they marred tanto both Rddin and Buddbt By the tare Skanda comes:
hack Som his courney around the word, the marmage of Ganesa isalwady performed Angry at this, Skanda ther:
decices t leave Kasi forever (Siva Purine 2 $19 18-20, 26, as quoted oy Courtrigst 98 § 122-124)

102

--- Page 104 ---
18 characterised Sy a clear hustosical sequence. The following examination draws the attention to
thus chronology, thereby making reference to the histor:cal material provided in Chapter One

Chapter twenty-six maps Avimusta as tie Xsefra or Siva, as the ‘Never Forsaken’ It
Mentions that Anandavana was the name of the sazred territory before it became known under
the name of Avimukta, thus indicating that the relationship with Siva was established in a later
period. The extent of the whole territory is desciibed as being five krosas, Although Siva 1s the
pation deity of the cily, Visnu ts eulogised as well and the Mamkart:ka artha, considered to be
one of the oldest and foremost trthas, 1s aiso described. The fallawing chapter then explains
low Anandavana aiso became known as Varanasi, lying at the westem bans of the Ganga The
Ganga 1s culogised and its thousand names are listed (chapters twenty-eight and (wenty-nine)
Chapter thirty ts again a glorification of Avimukta, situated between the Assi and the Varana
rivers, thus providing evidence of its extent at an early stage ut its Mistory This chapter also
narrates the story of a merchant whe wanted to commu the bones of his deceased mother to the
Ganga in Kasi, for itis there that one attains snoksa. Thus story islustrates the insportance of the
city for death rites.?* Chapters thirty-one and Uusty-two refer to the early religious lite of the
city Kélablairava 1s considered to be one of the early forms af Siva and the reterence to the
Kapalamocana urtha as the artha where even the greatest sinner can obtam salvation inay be a
direct indication of the existence of the Kapalika sect. The story of yaksa Harikesa is adopted

| from: the Matsya Purdie (chapler one hundred and cighty) and suggests early yaksa worship 74

Chapters thitty-thice and thirty-four culogise Jina Vapi, the sacred well near to the
present Vigvanatha temple. The history of the well ts uncertain as there 1s no direct reference ta
ttan the Krtyakalpataru,™ but the Kas: Khanda icaves no doubt that it was of great sanctity and
near the main shrine of the cily. If the reference tn the Artvakalpataru is any indication, then it
would explau that the Jfiana Vapi weil was considered of great antiquity as it was situated near
Avimukta, who used to be the ‘Lord of the City’ Chapters thirty-tive to forty-two deal with the
** Accerding to Pary, the city Sesame a place for liberation (inexset Gon the ight century onwards. At that
tine, however, Man.karmka was not yet specifically associated with the butaing of the dead, and death atuals
coer to have Geennsd within the entire saceed space (1994 44).
ip Chaptct Two attertron has been paié to tie vaksas as the guardians of the eath's cehes aad fertdity: Frain,
iweaograping evidence Wis cleat chat Chey oecepzed a pane vositun in Buddhism, However, iis not xrawn
wheter or nel they found thes way inte the urbar: rebynous “fs of Hararas at such an early stage, because the fret
fipuess of yakses found on the Raypbat platean are dated wi the Gupta period (Aystwala and Metchasdra
Tue0 200) [world be expected ther yakars world have been situated. met on the Rarghat plateau, but on te
Anandayans ang oat in Sarsath since these were the areas of early Buddlust occupation Aganwala and Mot-chaend
wee the opin on that there are still severa) indications to Grs carly yaks wors'np my the Banas area. Nearoy in
the village of Bhabhua, 2 deuy called Barzani is worshipped oa 2 chtum of platform, Taese cheurs are considered
te 9c one of the earlest forms of a shave ef the local divimties (ic ties cuntext sce also Coccan !98G and VS
Agaiwala 2970 18>). A second indication of the stil picsalent vadea vadition us tke tery be whist is applicd to
some of the yaksas. Cocca: (1986; 1992: 130-146) Las researched extensively on th.s topic
The Rityakalnacary refers to AVirmiktesvara deny, located in the vicinity of a sacred wel. possibly the Jaana
Vapi The text ceserdes haw three digas spang up in the heart af the devotee who drinks the water from the well
ATVK:1SS-L10, as in Sukul 1997 730-1363

103

--- Page 105 ---
various aspects of leading a ite of righteousness. ‘These cnapters, which: do not exphenly
Gescribe the religious life of the city, refer to the Dharmasdstras and the Yoga Sdua of Pataiyal:, |
for the yoga as described in chapter forty-one 1s that of Palanyai:. The continuity of these 1
chapters is disrupted by chapter thiny-nine in which the virtues of King Divodasa are related
together with the exptanation of ue name of Avimukta as the ‘Never Forsaken’.

The story of King Divedasa and his rule over Banaras continnes irom chapter forty-
(eee onwards and actually sans to chapter fifly-cigit where the king is transported to heaver. It
has been suggested by some schoiars (Halpenny 1966-67; Domger 1976), and discussed
above, that the intervention of Divodasa is a reflection of the Buddlist period in Banaras. ‘the
story of Divodisa appears in other Puranas*’ predating the Kas: Khanda, and a comparative
study between the variations of the story shows an evoluuion in the charavters of Divadasa and
Ganesa, Doniger argues that the proximity of Samath could be the reason why Banaras way
chosen as the city of Divodasa (1976 191). The Buddhist community, nowever, was not limited 1
ty Samath as Doniger scems to imply, but was in fact spread all over the city on the Raghat
plateau and in the Anandavana, as suggested by the travel accounts of the Chinese pilgran
Mien Tsiang and the archaeological findings of Sherring (see Chapter One). ‘The coming of
D:vodasa atthis paint of the Kasi Khanda further strengthens Doniger's argument: The reles of
Ganesa and Visnu symbolise the victory of Brédhmamsin over the Buddhists, a victory which
was certainly accomplished by tke seventh century, as is clear from the accoun: of Ewen
‘Tsang. If the assumption thal the Aasi Khanda offers an account ef the religious history of
Banaras is conest, then Divodasa must be taken as a syinho: for the Buddhist penod of the city

The central myth of the Kasi Kanda is that Siva sends in turn the sixty-four Yoginis,
the Iwelve Adityas, Brahma, the Ganas, Ganega and Visnu to the city to persuade Divaddsa to

; fave so that he can retum to Kasi” Everything poits to the order of these various deities
bemy chronological, at least as conceived by the Brahmins who wrote the Khanda. Stirya
worship is evidenced within Banaras at least from the Prauhara period.’* ft is highly hkely that
the Yoginis were regarded as symbols for the cass of female village devatds which are known
from the seats of Rajghat to have been prominent in the religious hfe of the city from an early
period. The intervention of Brahma appears to symbuiise the place of Vedic sacrifices for
which Kasi was well known in an early period 7” The early association of the Ganas with
28 Fhavaniga, appendia ), no 157-1480: Brahindnds 2-3 6740-08, Vayu 2.30 22-85
lbs myth, as presented m the Kd Khando,:s given in summary fare. n the Appendix
“S Eck (1993-180) states tat the history of San worship ur Kasi was prelevant Sour the fourth unul the durteest:
century. Apart Bom a vast amount of textual ev:dence, there is a goed deal of uichacological and jganagrpae
evidences A few Sun discs are esplayed m the Kale Hhavan Musernt Elsewhere i the city, one finds simular
dices neat Sonya Kunde. an rnportant place tradionally for San worship. In Chapter Five the story ¢F the pyc
Adiyas and then shtcaes wall de festher examined
” Retire co Jayaswal (19233, Tee (1994297) argues that the carne of the ghar refers to a ‘dadigvaniedha’
performed there in the second ceatry CT: by the Bhar Siva Nagas, a revivalist Hindu dynasty
104

--- Page 106 ---
Banazas 1s known from the Puranic stones of Nikumbha and Ksemaka (see anffa). The worship
of the Pafica-Vindyakas is evidenced by tie panels found belonging to the Prauhdra period in
Banasas™ and can be regarded as present in the city’s religious Life from 800 CR onwards
Visru's association with many of the trthas illustrates developments within the religious fife of
the cy betore the Muslin conquests. Ag discussed m Chapter One, Kasi ranked as the third
foremost Grtha in the seventh century, whereas by the tenth century Kasi had surpassed the
other Wo sacred piaces, Pravag and Gaya, in terms of preemimence. Parallel with tis evalution
is the rise to power of Avimukta, the Lord ef the city. But whatever the mmportance and sanctity
of the positon of Avimukta, the Visnu cult remamed powerful. As discussed earlier (sec
Chapter One), the muling Prathdra dynasty did not discriminate against any particular god: their
coumienisin ts Hlustrated by their support of the paficayatana paya in which Vignu :s worshipped
ax one of five de:tes. From: cpiysaphic material is known that the Pratthdras were also Sun
worshippers. The successors of the Pratihdras, the Kalacuris, may have been ardent Siva
worshippers, Dut, apart from Jending greater support to Avimukta, this did not affect the
existing Visnu cult. The Gahadavalas, under whom Banaras winessed us golden age, were
Vausnavas, as is shown by epigraphic material. Considering all these historical factors itis chus
unsuprising that various Vaisnava shrines are culogised.

Chapter sixty-three proclaims the breakthrough of Siva as the main deity of the city. Lhs
arnva: is celebrated with appropriate pomp and splendour and he is culogised. This is followed
by ax account of the Brahmins coming from all the corners of the country to instail Lingas as a
confirmation of the glory and power of Siva in Kasi. From here on the Kasi Khanda provides a
dewailed description of some of the great and important Siva dnigas, bul the order m which these
fingas ave culogised is pocuiiar. It is considered that in Banaras there are three cateporics of
Tourtcen Hagas each The first category comprises the most important and sacred digas such as
Onkiira, Trilocana, Krttvasevara ete.?’ The Kasi Khanda disregards Uns ranking as a criteria
and mentions the Jyesthesvara Jaga, belonging to the third category, the Pardsaresvaie, the
Saniega and other Jingas before referring to the Ratnesvara (first category) and the Kitovasa
inga (first category). The Khanda does net account speciically fo: this order, and itis certainly
swt based on location. In the context of the Khandé’s attempt to provide a chronological history
of the rchgivus development of the city, itis possible that the order in which these Jinwas appear
reilecis the contemporary understanding of tie historical evoluuon of the ety, rather than the
tanking nuportance of the individual Igas.””

| “The ercatment m the KAS! Khanda of the fifty-sta Vingyaka proupeng wall be dealt with co detail mt Chapters
Pow and Five,
An ovetvic of te feustgen inost important hayes and meu lecaton in Bavaras is found a: Eek (1993388) Ia
addition to the fourteen foremost bagas, she also lists those of the ulin {xe categones although she does nal
provide their locahor.
“Already i chapter fourteen, the Candresvaia finga vs mertioned. which is sataned west cf Sankala Devi cot
lar from the present Madhyancegvara temple. Chapter thuty-rine celates the story cf the estadushiment ot
Avmmiktesvara. The rest of Ure fourteen peat fiagas are listed fron chapter sixty-one onwards.

105

--- Page 107 ---
In chapter sixty-nine, a list of the sixty-eight hohest sites :n India is provided This is
done in the context of Nandin telling Siva that whatever hoiy shrines there are in the three
warlds capable of bestowing salvation, he has brought to Banaras and associated with
particular Jingas or holy places. In thts way Kasi thereby contains within itself Une sacred
geography of India The sacred ficthas are located im relation lo ene another and to some
Vinayakas, thus confirming that by the time the Kasi Khanda was composed these Vindyaka
shrines*? were well established and their position was not disputed. The mapping of’ these
suxty-erght urthas reveals that the religious topography ef the erty at that ume was concenuated |
in the north of the city, with some big clusters around fnlocana and Manikamika vhdats, the :
Matsyodara area and the area arouad Visvanatha and Dagagvamedha ghats It should be noted
that there are hardly any tirthas south of Dasasvamedha

Chapters seventy tu seventy-two intertupt the listing ef the fingas with three chapters
revating tu the drthas of the different gaddesses and the exploits of Durga. Concerning the Devi
shrines the same location pattem occurs as with the Jifga trthas, Chapters sevenly-one and :
seventy two tell the slury ef Durga slaying the buffalo demon In the framework of the :
chronologisation of the Kasi Khanda, it 1s uot entirely clear why these three chapters are placed :
at ths stage of the Khanda. The biographical records of Pantha (eighth century, see Chapter
One) give evidence of a Devi cult at the tune of hus visit. In chapter seventy itis explained that
the diferent goddesses are mentioned because they ‘were posted in Kasi for the protection of
Avimulta’. Whereas it can be assumed that all these goddess shrines were already functional in
the religious fife of the city before Kasi became an important tirtha, the new status of Kasi also
changed the functian of these shines. Instead of being simple folk goddesses, they were
upgraded lo lunction as the protectors of Avimukta

Fram chapter seventy-three the list of the great Lingas continues with the description of
Omkara, followed by that of Trilocana, Kedara, Diharmesa and Virega. The second part of
coapter eighty-three provides a list of all the tirthas s::uated along the Ganga from the Assi
sanga up to Manikarmka ghat chapter eiehty-lour gives the dithas fiom the Varana sanga
down to Manikamika. Chapter cighty-five explains the creation of the Durviisesvara Haga, a
fiiga which does not belong to the forty-two great fagas Chapter e:ghty-six describes
Visvaiarmesvara, a finga north of Trilocana and considered as one of the first tourteen Jangas
ibe folawong shrines are mentened Dhundainaya (11). Vinavasedvar. (67) and Ganddhyaksa (S58)
Considering tie .ocation of the shines ican be a:gued thet these we names were further epithets for Dhundhirya
Veoc EAy-ume refers to DantukGta, Lartoedaia is mentioned in verse soverty-one, Vakratiaéa in seventy-sia.
Kiitadanta in seventy-seven, Lkadania in seventy eight, Tumukia o. verse severty-niie Kharsva Vindyaka (6),
Atke Vindyaka (981, Dea Vindycka (102) and Uddaada Vinay ak (104-105) are alsa ineotened

106

--- Page 108 ---
Chapters cighly-seven ta cighty-nine agai provide an interruption, with the stery of
Daksa's sacnfice to which Siva is not invited. Theze 1s a parallel between this story and the
story of King Divedasa in that, in both cases, Siva ts excluded from the religious acuvites of
the culy. Itis arguable that the story of Daksa, placed as itis here within a clear chronolog:cal
seyeence, could be taken symbolically to represent the Muslim) invasions which seem
historically to constitute the main reason for the decline in the status of Avimuktegvara. There 1s
sev upplied reference here tu the performance of sali by many Raiput women during the period
of the Muslin invasions which can be seen, through the sacrifice of Sati in the Daksa story, to
be the religious cause for the continuing presence of Siva within the veligious life of the city. If
Uns suppos:tion 1s correct, and certamly the logic of the analysis suggests this to be so, then tus
must be one ef the most unusual applications of the Daksa story im any Puranic text The
chapters on Daksa are followed by six further chapters on specifte Lingas In chapters minety-
five and ninety-six there is another somewhat unexpected cntervention: the story of Vyasa
Vyasa comes lo Banaras and begins to culogise Vista as the main deiy of the city, in
consequence af which ius arm becomes paralysed. Only when he repents, establishes a figa in
his own name, and Visnu himself intervenes, is his zrm restored Insofar as the arm is par
execlience a symbol of military might. the unplication is clear that it was because the
Gahadavala dynasty was Vaisaava that the Musiims were able to overthrow the cry and that
only a return to royal patronage of Siva would erable Hindus to restore the ery te its fonner
glory. The next chapter, ninety-seven, provides a dist of Siva fingas as if to demonstrate the
superiority of the Saivas. Fhe wlumate glorification of Siva comes 21 chapters ninety-eight and
ninety-nine m which he reaches the Mukumandapa and is culogised as Visvanatha, the
protecting deity of the city. These final chapters not only proclaim the superiority of Siva over
¥isnu but also explain the dechne of Avimukta and the rise of Siva as Visvanaiha. The very
‘aol chapter details the pilgrimages that should be undertaken in order to reach Visvanatha wha
wl guarantee salvation.

The culogisation of Siva as Visvandtha concludes the chronological process in the Kasi
AAhanda and it gives further support te the suggesuon that the sacrifice of Daksa could be
textual code for the Muslim conquests. The seais examuned by Pathax (1975), the references to
Avimukta and the Avimukta Ksetra in the Jabala Upanisad (G1); Olivelle 19922142) and de
Dasakumaracarita (Kale 1966°84) cleariy suggest that the Avimukta cuit existed between the
Anh and the eleventh centuries CE. After the first Muslim conquests of the region, there is
suddenly no trace of Avimukta although material postdatng the Muslim raids mentions the
name of Visvaniitha as the most important deity of the city The pomp and splendow with
which Siva is honoured as Visvanatha and is welcomed ito the city proclaims his superiority
withnn a historical context, The culogisation of Viévanatha in the last chapters couid therefore
= Sovar ta the metapher of Daksa symbolising Mushm nie an Banares, are che ceferences wo niksasas i che
inedheval Ramayanas of nurth India (Pollock 1993}

(07

--- Page 109 ---
De vonsidered as the ultimate reason for the chroneiogical sequence displayed throughout the ;
enure Mahkatinya.
t
|
Atthe beginning of tie analysis it was stated that the Kasi Khanda, apart from being a |
chronologisation of the religious iistory of Banaras, represents the cosmologisation of Kasi.
The first wenty-five chapters have already been anaiysed and are considered to represent the
casinos of which Kasi is the centre Whereas in the first part the cosmotygisation is Lie maim
characterishe, itis less obvious in the last seventy-five chapters. In summary, it appears that im
the first quarter of the Kast Khanda Kast is established as the centre of the cosmos, whereas in
the later chapters the vanous deities, Grthas, shrines and Jingas are established within the Ka$i
cosinology
The cosmologisauon of Kasi starts by the demarcation of the Ka$i cosmos. Chapter |
twenty-six narrates: the creation of the Avimukta &setra, extending over five krosas. The j
evlogisation of the Mantkarnika drtha in this chapter suggests thal us sacred place had a very
important religious value in the carly history. Following this is the description of the area inside
the five kroga boundary, the Varanasi ksetra and tne Ganga river. Having glorified Avimnukia,
u: chapter thirty the Avimnukta Ascua is described When these live chapters are considered, it is
clear that the tree cifferent &setras, namely the Kasi ksetra, the Varanasi ksetra and the
Avimikta ksetra, are deliberately set out, thereby offering a yeu-cosmolopical background fer
the next chaplers. Vhe deities, Hngas and tirthas descnbed in the following chapters (thirty-one
ty sixty-eight) afl lend cacour to the Kasi Asetra. Because of their presence the Kai ksetra is
what itis’ the most sacred of the ksetras. In most af the chapte:s the notian of sacred geography
| is present, Not oniy are some of the deities direct!y linked lo particular frthas, but there also are
many geographical indications, For instance, Dehalt Vindyaka is said to be stationed at the
western gale of the city (KKIL 30:23), the geographical locations of some of the Adityas are
given as well as some of the iocations of the fifty-six Vindyakas (see supra), and Jina Vapi is
described as bemg close to Avimuxta. The cosmologisation is very prominent im chapler sixty-
tae, in which sixty-eight holy places of India are listed. Thess places are ail represented as
ditthas in Kasi, thereby tavitly indicating that Ka$: is Ute centre of the cosmos as it encompasses
afl the sacred spots within 1s boundaries.
lrom chapters seventy to vighty-two, there are further descriptions of the various holy
characters within the Kasi cosmos. Chapters eighty-three and eighty-four are somewhat
peculiar in that they provide a systematic lusting of all the firthas from the Assi sanga up to
Mamkarnsa (chapter cighty-three) and tram the Varana down to Manikamika (chapter eighty-
four). The systematic account oxtines once more the importance of Kasi as the microcosm
within which all tiese rthas are present. By using Manikarmka as the central reterence point
Tor the Lstng. the importance of this trtha is once more eniphasised. From chapters eighty-four
los

--- Page 110 ---
lo ningly-six mors sacred places are listed and situated within the Kasi cosmos Chapter ninety-
seven Cuptions all the aforementioned Jiigas. The reference to Kasi as the mukdimandapa in
chapters mnety-cight and nincty-nine acknowledges the supreme position of Kasi as. the
supreme trtha for salvation with Siva as Viswandtha as its Lord. At the end of the Kast K handa
Visvanatha is mtroduced as the centre of Kasi, and this role is further emphasised by the
relerences to various pilgnmages in Kasi which iead to uuficaton with Visvanatha

Maconchision, it can be stated that all che chapters in the Kasi Khanda contribute to the
creation of the vonceptual Kasi cosmos. First the universe, with ats heavenly bodies and

directiuns, is created. Ther. Kasi is established as the centre of this cosmos. Thereafter the !
different smaller casmin with Kasi ave described: the Kasi ksetra, the Varanasi ksefra and the
Avimukta ksetra, until finally the centre of the Kadi cosinos, Visvanatha, is revealed
i

Having established that the sequence of the text 1s chronological, that the Mahatmya is a :
vosmologisation of Kasi and that the underiying reason for this is the culogisatior, of
Visvanatha, it is now necessary to examine the place of the fifty-six Vinavakas within dus
chronology and cosmology of Kasi.

The story of the fifty-six Vindyakas is found in chapters fifty-five to fifty-seven. These
chapters form part of the Divodasa story. In chapter fity-tive there is a reference to Ksemaka
who is referred to as ‘the Lord of Ganas'. It 1s a’sa mentianed that Ksemaka is still present in
Banaras and ineditates daizy on Visvegvara. As Siva comes to terms with the fact that all those
who were sent to Kas: will not return, he cals Gajanana (the clephant-faced) and asks bin to
¥o to Kasi as well. In this chapter Ga:anana is addressed as ‘the son of Siva’, In chapter fifty-
six, Ganesa takes the form of an old astrologer who predicts dreams and cdeludes people's
minds. King Divodasa comes to know about this extraordinary astraloger and asxs lum to
foretell the future Having praised Divodasa for his noble qualities, Ganesa predicts chat
vighteen days later a Brahmin will appear who will give the xing advice. The king is advised to
obsy the Brahmin so that all his wishes will de fulfilled. Chapter fifty-seven features the
Dhundhi stot, which is a culogisation of Ganesa, and a description of the fifty-six Vindyakas.
It clearly states that Cie Vindyakas are established to protect the Ksetra

Wahin the story of Divodasa (chapters forty-three lo fifty-eight), the chapters on
Ganega and the Vindyakas succeed those on the sixty-four Youinis, the twelve Adityas and the
Pisdcamocana drtha. Bearing in mind the chronological sequence of the Khanda, itis therefore
poss:ble to assume that the presence of the Yoginis and the Adilyas in the city predates tiat of
Granesa and the Vindyakas Assuming that the Yoginis werg probably the Brihmamsed female
local deities, present from the earhest period, itis hkely thet they predate the Vinayaka-Ganesa
cuit, The twelve Adityas are clearly remnant divinities from Sun worship, which was prevalent

109

--- Page 111 ---
in Banaras until the thirteenth century, The earliest origins for Siirya worship in Kasi are
unknown, and ever the antiquity of dic twelve Aditya shrines has never been properly

investigated, thus making ‘it impossible to provide any date. However, these shrincs

definitely predate Vinayaka worship, The Pigdcainocana drt iy affiliated with the worship of

the pisacas. From the varhest of references to Vindyaka, it 1s ciear that the Vinayakas

themselves were often associated with the pisacas (Mahabharata, Sanu Parvan, Appendix 1,

number 28, lines 421-423, sec Chapter Two of this thesis). It can thus be suggested that Ge

Divodasa story respects the chronological sequence.

The chapters dealing with Ganesa and the Vindyakas are placed 1am interesting content
with regard to the content of chapters fifty-five and fifty-six. The reference to Ksemaka as ‘Lord
of Ganas' in chapter fifty-five provides the background for the following verses. Whereas
Ksemaka 1s called “Lord of the Ganas', Ganesa is called ‘eiephaat-faced’, and is referred ta as
‘ry son’ by Siva. Itis clear that the clephant-faced son was somehow affiliated with the Ganas,
as he features mm the same chapter. The verses in chapter filty-six, describing the calamities
which will befall the kingdom of Divedasa, are similar to the verses of the Vindyaka Kalpa of
the Manava Grhya Sta and the Vindvaka Santi of the Ydinavalkya Sinrti”* The ‘men in ochre
robes who create horror and fear in the people’ of verse eight is sunilar to verse ten of the
Vindvaka Kalpa*” Toe fall of the kingdom in chapter fifty-six, verse ten corresponds with

| verse fourteen of the Vindyaka Kalpa, and verses eighteen and nineteen of chapter filty-six
describing the animals preying on the city correspond wilh verse eleven of the Vindyaka Kalpa
In analysing of the place uf the chapters fify-tive and fifty-six, itis also important to refer back
lo the actual appeasement of the Vindyakas as described by the Vinayaka Kalpa and Vincivaka
Saati, Tae Vinayaka Kalpa includes an invocation ef various gods, whom Thapan (1997:92-93,

Appendix, footnate 3) considers to be associated with Buddhism, after which the various
personifications of the goddess are described. Only thereafter is Sun worship mennoned. The
last verse of this text mentions that both Vindyaka and Ambika need to be appeased by an
offermg prioz to the worship of the Sun. The Yajiavalkya Sirti refers to Amluka during the
Vinayaka worship. but again, both Ambika and Vimayaka aced lo be worshipped before the
Sun, In Chapter Two :t was sugeested that the appeasement of the Vinayakas was indirectly
hnked to the wership of the goddess and of Sirya. This atfilation is sill present im the Kasi
Khanda. A cross reference to the Vindyaka Kalpa and Vinayika Sant indicates that: the
Vinayakas were of less mnportance than Sirya, siice they needed to be worshipped first, thus
"Sta Chagter Five the Siirya shines in Banaras will be further exenuned or: corjunction wath the work of Rana P.
A Singh
See Appendix
“Kane (1968-74 volume (187) has styytested that the reference to people oo icd ad oclre robes may be
velerence to the Buddhists The recurring reference to nen oshie rabzs at th:s point af the Klanda remforces: be
acgument wnade by Danger (see unfieg and alsa indicates taat, considcimg te Caronolopisal: tneftanse ef te
Suapters, the Buddiusts were stu present when Vinayaka iad hus entry onto the edly

0

--- Page 112 ---
estadlishing the greater antiquity of Sdrys. This aniquity 1s translated in a chronological manner
m the Khanda dy referring lo the twetve Adityas before the lifty-six Vinayaias,

For the Yogin:s, the matter is slightly different. Earlier 1t was estadlished that these were
probably Brahmanised village goddesses. The links with Ambika are tess obvious, however, as
doth were considered femaie goddesses and as Ambika seems to personify all the powers and :
gualities of the different goddesses. Why the Yoginis are mentioned first in the Divodasa story
is unclear. However, 1t1s possible that the presence of Amb:ka in the Vindyaka Kalpa and the
Vindyaka Santi mdicates that her pusitan was already well established, as was her antiquity.

Chapter fifly-five introduces Ganega into the Kasi Kanda, and chapter fifty-six
recounts his exploits as an astrologer deluding peoples ininds, Chapter fifty-seven now needs
to be scrutinised to see whether or not its content is also to be considered as a chronological
sequence. Verses one to fifty-cizlt make up the Dhundhi stetra, cuiagising Ganesa as
Dhundiiraja. The foliowing verses, fiftv-nine to one hundred and twenty, mention the sever:
circles with the fifty-six Vinayakas The last verses, ene hundred and twenty-one lo one
hundred and twenty-six, reter lo seme of the other Vinayakas present in the civ. Although this
chapter seems to focus more on cosmological aspects by providing detailed informahyn on the
seven circles of the Vindyakas, the chrono.ogical sequence is casy to detect.

The Dbundht stotra which introduces this chapter eulogises Dhundlu and explains that,
In order to protect the Ksetra, Dkundhi set humself up in fifty-six forms, This thus explains why
Daundh: 15 considered to be the origin of the Vinayakas. The character af Dhundh was, as
Caks:nidhara stated, the tirst and the foremost of the Pafica-Vindyekas. Farlier in this chapter
the PaficasVindyaka cult was examined with regard to the relevant: material evidence. The
different Padiva-Vinayaka panels and depictions suggest the conclusion that the cult existed by
800 CE. The first textual evidence ef this is [rom Laksmidhara and dates to the ovelfth century
CE. However, knowing: that Laksmidhara took this account of the five Vinayakas from a lost
Linga Purana, itis certainly possible that Dhundht may have been the first and foremost
Vinayaka of the earliest Pafica-Vindyaka cult. In order to respect the chronoiogical sequence,
Dhundhi was eulogised first, not only because he was of greater anuquity. but because of his
promitent positon within the religious life of the city.

In the following chapter of this thesis, the fifty-six Vinavakas will be examined in detat
as to their iconographic characteristics, the place, and their date. It should be noted here.
however, that their treatment in the Kagi Khanda is by iogation and not dv chronology. The last
verses (ane hundred and twenty-one to one hundred and twenty-six) make reference to more
Vinayakas. [Cis equally meaningless to scrutinise their position in terms of antiquily, as it is
clear trom the text that they merely provide some examples of the multitude of Vindyakas im the

eal

--- Page 113 ---
city, The fact that they are mentioned at ail probably mercly means that they had some
nnportance in the city

In terms of the Kass Khanda providing a cosmologisation of Kasi, chapter fifty-seven
offers some Valuable maternal. Chapters fifty-five and fifty-six do not constitute any cosmo.opy
rather they sketch the background for chapter fifly-seven which can be regarded as a
cosmologisation within a cosmologisalion. The eulogy of Dhundhi establishes him as the main
Vinayaka of Kasi, as the origin and the centre of all the fifty-six Vinayakas. From verse filty-
ning onwards, thers is a description of the seven circles on which these Vinayakas are situated.
‘This account (sce Fig. 10) provides a very structured plan of how these Vinayakas ave situated
in Kasi. Along with the Vindyakas of the first and outer cire‘e, the four cardinal directions are
:nentioned The other Vingyakas are described in relation to ore another. Whether or not tis
structure constitutes a mandala will be discussed in Chapter Five of this thesis. Here it is
sufficient to say that the account of the fifty-six Vindyakas cicarly gives a representation of
casinology, the outer boundary of Vindyakas corresponding with the Kasi ksetra.

Tae reasons the authors of the Khanda opted for seven circles ly represeal the Vindyaka
cosmos can be saplained in several ways. Seven seems to be a sacred number occurring
threcghout the entire text. Chapter seven describes the sever sacred cites, followed by fourteen:
chapters dealing wath the worlds of the directional detes and the worlds of the sages The
chapters deal:ag with the moral lite are seven m number as are the steps taken by Siva to expel
Divadisa trom his city.” Seven 1s also the sacred number of Siva. It thas could be argued that,
by using seven circles, the authors wanted to emphasise Kasi as Siva's ey Dhundh:, the most
important Vindyaka in Kasi, 1s thus considered as the centre of the cosmos Verse forty-three m
chapter fifty-seven, referrmg to Dhundhi as seated south of Siva. links his status directly to the
power of Siva, who is the central figure of the Kasi cosmos

In conclusion it can be said that chapler fifty-seven reinforces the cosmologisatian of

; Kasi in the Khanda. By depicting a network of Vinayakas inside the ciy, the emphasis is once
more placed on the Kasi ksetra as the most sacred piace, a place which requires protection
Dhundht's role in this process was to be the fountainhead and the centre of this Vindyaka
stuctize By bemg pasted south of Siva, he indirectly draws attenuon to Siva as the ceatie of
the Kasi ksetra. It should be remembered that the Siva reletred tom these chapters ts still

: Avinukta, as Viswandtha only caters in tie very last chapters of dic Khanda. This is aise
“8 Le weven steps are the Younis are sent, then Surya, Brahma, the Garas, Pigicamocana. Ganeéa and te fifty
stv Vinayakus, end Visnu go to Kasi. An adrdgeé version of the story of D.vodisa as desenbed in the Kast
Xhands and a complete teprodiczon af the chepters rifty-six and fity seven, desing with the exploits of Dhuadhy
and the [ly-six Vindyaxas, 18 giver in the Appeudex

1:2

--- Page 114 ---
supported by the reference to Avimukia Vindyaka who “destroys all the evil of the Avunukta
ksetra’ (S7:114)

The Kasi Khanda has become the mos: acclaimed work dealing with Kasi, Inthe
centuries after its vompilation it became the principal seurce from which medieval Nibandha
writers cblained their information on the different deities in Kasi, The Tirthacinttinant of the
fifteenth century, wntten by Vacaspati Miéra (ca 1480-1480 CE), was the first Nibandha to
quote from the Kasi Khanda, thus providing evidence for the Khanda’s existence in the middle
of the fifteenth century.

No svhoiars dealing with the literary sources ef Banaras have hitherto reterred to the
Gurucaritra, a sixteenth century Marathi religious text”* composce by Sarasvati Gangadhara.?”
The main bul of this text 1s devoted to the miraculous Ife of Narasimha Sarasvati, the founder
of the Dattatreya cult (Tulpule 1979;352-353, 430). In the context of this thesis the text is
important because it provides an account af various pilgrimages m Kasi and of the Paficakros:
Yal:d, aus providing the first ever reference to the vated. Although it is possible that the author,
about whom ide ts known, never visited the cy and relied upon other sources for the account
of the pilgrimages, the enumeration of the various shnnes shows that they were well
eoablished within the retigious life of Banaras.

The Tristhalisetu or ‘The Bridge lo the Three Holy Cities’ was compiled in the sixteenth
century by Narayana Bhatta, a Brahmin Jiving in Banaras As mentioned earlier Bhatta was
very actve in the refigious lite of the city and he reputed-y convinced Todar Mal to reconstruct
the Visvanatha mandi For most of tis life Bhatta saw his city in ruins and the advice he gave
to pilgrims was Cal when the azthentic finga had been destroyed or carried away, they could
sill do reverence to the place where the actual finga had been (T. Po Verma 1984-200; Tick
1980-99). Hs Nibandha consists of two parts, one part dealing with the general characteristics
of a yatra and the second one devoted to the three holy cities: Kag:, Pravag and Giava. Included
among the main sources for the digest is the Kasi Khanda, which scems to have acquired

| considgrable prestige by that time. It is quoted seventeen times in the introduction and
numerous Umes in the section about Kasi Although the description of the holy places starts
with Prayag, it is Kasi which receives the most attention. In his account af Kasi, Bhatta quotes
all the Puranas dealing with the tirtha. Afer an inveductory Mahannya he relates the difterent
aspects of the religious lite of Banaras, paying part:cular attention to the atonement of sins. This
:$ followed by a survey of the various Urihas in Banaras and also of the divine inhabitants of
the city, Then follows an account of the different auspicious uses and festivals, and the
Hots Tulpule (19793523 and R. PLB. Singh (1993) sta that the text was composed ov [538 CI However,
hater mons wark ‘Talpule mennons that the Guracarita was wiitten around 1588 CE (1979-4203
“ Cangachan caimed that Maraiht was vot his nother tongue (Talpuke 1979-3521

113

--- Page 115 ---
description of Kagi ends with < discussion about atonement and death in Kasi? In his :
description of the fifty-six Vinayakas in Banaras, Bhatla copies the Kasi Khanda, admitting, as

much at the beginning of the chapter.”* There are some shpht varatons in the names of the

Vinayakas which will be discussed later.

Ia the seventeenth century, the Tirthaprakasa or the ‘Light of the Tirthas' is, lke the
Fithavivecana Khanda, part of a larger digest on dharmasastra, the Viramitrodaya, which was
compiled by Mitra Misra? The firthaprakasa begins with a general discussion about
pulgremage and the faith of the pilgnm. Thereafter follows a description of tirthas, which starts
wah Kasi. For the other tirthas he follows the same order as Laksmidhara Among the sources.
for his diges: are the Kyivakalpataru and the Kasi Khanda, as wel as several Puranas end the
dabala and Ramatdapaniya Upanisads (lick 198099). Mitra Misra mentions the fify-six
Vinayakas but he quotes the Kasi Khanda as the source of this chapter (TP 209-210). There 1s
one slight difference with the Khanda: instead of inemioning Stty-seven Vinayakas he omits
Miva Vinayaka in bis digest.

The other Mahatnya whick focuses on Kasi as a major tirtha ts the Kasi Rahasyam""
The present version of the Kasi Rahasyam :s regarded as the third part of the appendix of the
Brahmavatvarta Purana, but the attribuuon of the Kasi Rahasvam to tus Purana is disputed by
many schotars because it is net found as a part of the Puraniv text. The Srahmavatvarta Purana
itself is considered to be one of the more recent Puranas although it ongima!ly may have deen
composed in the eighth century (Hazra 1940:166)?* Rocher (.986:163) agrees with a lale date,
stauing that intemal evidence of the influence of Tantrism and Ca:tanya points in this direction
In his introduction to the Kasi Rahasyain Vyasadeva (19872) refers to a quote in the
Trsthalsetu, a Nibandiia which was writicn in the sixteenth century, that this work already
vousidered the Kast Rahasyam as a part of the Brahmavarvarta Purana. Fok suyeests that the
late date of the Purana made it possible for additional material to be added to it. Chapters nine to .
eleven describe the Paficakrosi Yatra, the circumambulation of the holy temitery. Many scholars :
believe that this is the first textual refcrence to Uus piigrimage and conciade from this that the
Sted is a recent phenomenon. However, the exammmaton of the Marathi wark Gurucaritra of
hy te last part about death and Wcraton in Kadi, Narayana Kertts intervenes i the role ef a comnzentator (ick
ISSO L0G)

* Narayana Bhatla Trsthalisetu, in Arzmadagramne Sanskrit Series. ne 78, Poona, 1928 (98-200
“Rita Missa belonged toa Rinily flen. Gwator and his cipest was composed at the court of the Bundelkhand
tulers
Mery Ralarsyain consists of tventy-six chapters and seems tc be an attempt to establish: Kast as a commen arth
fer both Siva avd Visn.., Unlike the Kast Khanda, the Rahisyaii contains uttle geoptaplic information and it dags
nel descube the vanous fitgas and tithas separately, The tle of the book, KAM Rahasyanr ot The Secret
Teachings of Kas, suggests the inore esotencal’y spiniual nature of ties composton The Kase Rahasyar 260
Quses questio.1s avout sip aod abot the alerement of sins communed mm KAS and elsewhere
*S Hlasm (1949) 266) quotes Jogesh Chandra Roy, whe has examined this Pena caretilly, aml cone aded that ‘It
Was ist composed cnast probably in Oe eelth centay Ck. Fron abeut che tent) cepl.cy it began fo be changed
by the interfer:og hands of the Bengal authors who recast tte #8 form and contents 19 the sixteertia century

lls

--- Page 116 ---
1838 CE contradicts this Similarly to all the previously menuoned Sanskrit treatises, the Kasi
Rahasyam also describes Dlhundht and the fifty-six Vindyakas.*”

The last work whieh deserves attention in this chapler is the Ganesa Purdna which
dediwates severa, chapters to the expions of Vindyaka-Ganega in Banaras.” The problem of
ss Purana with:n the context of the group of fifty-six Vinayakas is largely one of dabng
Hazzva pomts out that severai factors indicate that the Purana is of late origin. As evidence be
noles that the Purana is nowhere meationed among the list of the eighteen Upa-Purinas
Internal evidence such as familiarity with the days of the week and the term ford, the popularity
of the paticayatana piija end the contert of the Ganesa Gita, wach has adopted most at is
docizine om the Bhagavad Gita, support lus theory Furthermore he points out that there js a .
reference to Agamas and other works of a late date. Hazta (i981 96) believes that the Purana
vammot be dated before 1100 CE and belongs within a band between 1100 and 1400 CR. He is
also melinee to believe that ths Upa-Purana was later than the Mudgala Purana since it includes
‘iy-six forms of Ganesa, whereas the Mudgala Purana only speaks of thirty-two and fifty-one
forms. Hazra (1951-98) acsu concludes that tie work was probably weitten m Banaras.
Farquiar (1967 206, 270) places the Ganesa Purana between 900 and 1350 CE and believes
that tics Purana was earlier than the Mudgala Purdaa which he dates to 1100 CE or iater
Stevenson dates the Ganesa Purana to avound the seventeenth century. His reason is. the
reference to the sacred place Moresvara m the Upasana Khanda** ‘The date Stevenson
proposes was also suggested by the Marathi pandit Syair. Bapat in Banaras.” He Suggested
thatthe Ganesa Purana was very recent, as late as the eighteenth century. In the introduction to
the tanslation of the Gancsa Gita, whici is cncluded within the Ganesa Purana, Yoroi (1968:7-
9) concludes that the possible date for the Ganesa Gitd is the ninth te the tenth century. On
balance Stevenson's date appears to be the most likely. The significance of the date of the
Ganesa Purana will become apparent when deaiing with Dhundhirgja in Chapter Five and when
- The e.ogy of Dhundlusaza starts on page two hunched and tauity-five of te 198? edinen
(87 overview of the Gitnesa Parisa an) a cnmslaten of the relevant chapters 1s provided in the Appencix
everson states (1848 319); The fouzner, called the Upadara Khana of the Purina, could scarcely aave deen
written aefore the seventeenth century of our et, as Moresvara is mentioned as 3 great dithe of Ganesa, but ull
Mo:adhatta, who Souusked in the toner part of Cat century, gave it celebrity. and onginared the Chinchore
incamare Ganapats. twas a plave atogetiet unknown to fame’

Interestingly, this penefit slated that the Ganesa Parra wes cadeed wutter @ Banaras. a fact which wes
contadiced by myst other pandits who were intensigwed
Ws
Po

--- Page 117 ---
ciscussing the discrepancy between the names of the Vindyakas given in the Kasi KAanda and
those given in Une Ganesa Parana
116

--- Page 118 ---
1
CHAPTER FOUR
The fifty-six Vinayakas
Central to this thesis is Che invesugation of the fifty-six Vindayaka group. Chapter One provided
asurvey of the lustory of Banaras, preparing the ground for the eventual dating of these
Vinayakas. Chapter Two traced the evolution ang development of Vinayaka-Ganesga and
Chapter Three examined the various iconograpme and hterary sources for Vindyaka-Ganesa in
Banaras. [his chapter provides a detailed description of cach of the fifty-six Vinayakas, ther !
names, ier locations and their iconograpluc characteristics. Before beginning the invesugation,
however, it is necessary to look m peneral at the three problems which arise un the analysis of
the statucs, thei present condition, their locauon and Geir dating. :
The firs: problem involves the present condition of the statucs. Although most cf the :
Vinayaka figures are obvious representations of the clephant-headed vod, the details are not
always clear. This is because the statue has been damaged or because layers of vermilion have
blurred its contours. Of the existing fifty-six Vindyakas statues, over thirty post-date the Kasi
Khanda wm which tiey are all mentianed. These later statues are replacements from various
reriads, While the loss of the onginal statues is often dlamed on the Muslims, tis is prabably
1 Ss) y
ani exagyeration. There are other possible explanations for their loss suck as the expansion of
the modem city, accidental damage*” or the effects of weather erosion, Currently, of the Lull
fitty-six, one, Heramba, is missing and two are so damaged as to be undatable.*
Tae second problem: concerms the location of the Vinayakas. The location of the
Vinayakas is based on those given in the Varinasi Vaibhav and Pailcakrosatmak Jyotlinga
Kasimahatmya. The authors af these works, Kubemath Sukul and Kedarnath Vyas. have
taken their information fram previous guide bogs for pilgrims. Besides old guide books on the
differen: yitrds in Banaras, Vyas also made use of a map prepared in the beginning of the
| iventieth century by a retired Bengal engineer. Unfortunately tis map has not been found. The
* A good example is Heramba Vinkyaka who ‘disappeaied’ dusmag tae morsoar of 1996, ‘The foundations of the
fermple cr whieh Ie was situated collapsed and the whole structure came down When revisiting tke ste in
Deversver 1997 the pundit tespansible for the temp. decided to rebuild this temple on a slightly diferent spot
The Sva fingare, the eniy ter whieh remained mere or less inte aer lie collapse, wall be rarstalled Heranba
Vinycka and other mirns were broken and the pandit therefore cee:ded that once the new tamp’e 1s Erishec be
wil tty to pet the money for new statues ft arethe: place a water pipe rans over the legs of Sthila-angha
Vevayaca on Mer phat, while Gayakama Vindyaka was evectualy found belund trays of sweets at tie back of a
pect Stop
“These las tyo Vindyakas ate Sesti and Moda Vindyaxa, discussed jatar
B Kedamath Vyas was bom te a finaly ef pandis whe garded pilymes toreayl the mave cf sinres and
cormples He iccenved his tea:eing from hes matemal grandfather, wae, accoreing: to bis own account, knew every
sige temple, shrme and jinga in the ery Pandit Vyas is ane of tne ast pasdits who sull: has a thoreugh
koowledge of the secred poography of the erty
Ne
|

--- Page 119 ---
Kasi Khanda itsel? offers geographical details about the positon of same, but not all, of the
Vinayakas and Uns information is general and limited to descriping one Vinayaka in relation to
anolier. The actual locauen of a number of Vinayakas 1s disputed. Whereas Kedamath Vvds
lity lumself to fisting the different shrines and their location and, where there is a conflict, he
provides two addresses, Sukul mukes a vase for which position he censiders to be the correct
one. His arguments will be dealt with shortly but it should be noted that because some of the
aiguments he advances are based on the accounts of the locz! residents, they should be treated
sui caution. :

The third problem concerns the daung of the Vinayakas. This is litherto uncharted :
terrtory, Although the Vindyakas are a'l mentioned and named in the Kas? Khanda and in other
Mahatmyas and, although there 1s a Vindyaka yatra described im various local pilgrimage
guidebooks, the fifty-six Vinayakas are not well-known m Banaras Most of the Vindvakas are
iovated in private houses, in the corners of temples or are housed in insignificant small shrines
along the ghdts. Because of the chequered history of Banaras and the constant evaluuon of the
city, many of the original shrimes and statues have beer. destroyed and consequently replaced by
moerg recent martis. It is unfortunate for this investigation thar any ef the late medieva! aud
modern murts have not attracted the attention of art historians, for the simple reason, that
iconographically they are net much of a challenge.

Cheve are many gaps in the acadenue schoiarship concerned with Hindu an of the
medieva! period, that is the period when north India was under Muslim rule (from the late
owelfth unnl the early eighteenth century). The general consensus is that during these centuries
Hindu art and cultural expression was supressed and therefore non-existent. So far. no study

‘ has examimed the artclutectural and iconugraphic cemains of this period iy north India with
sufficient attenton to detail, Were such a study to be camed out, itis prodably that it would
emerge that, far from coming to a stand stil, Hindu art instead took on an entirely different
form. It would also tilustrate that throughout the listory of Muslin: rule there were periods
when there was a considerabie arustic freedom“ The lack of attention to the work of this
period may also be as a result of the fact that the mats produced curing the Mush peried are
het very visally appealing are therefore ef no snterest to most art historians.“ As. only
approxinately eleven Vinayakas can be dated to the early period (between the seventh and the
lwellth century), the analysis and dating of the majority of the Vindyakas has been a
considerable challenge! Overall, | have classified the Vinayakas as falling into four broad
8 Ie was Professor M.N. Tawar wiia pointed out to me that so far no thorough academic rescarcit has been dune
ah the aiza of medieval iconography. He atso admutted that cn the custeut politcal cianate, suc research would be
(ypilenate ast would indeed show that duriag the Mast peried there were several periads of rovivai

In the recent work by Marttin-Dubost there are ony few of the Vindyaka statues reprodused and thes manny:
pecause of ther rare an pecusar features ‘eg Dvinsukha Vindyaka, Pafeasya Vinayake) In a) persona
commen cation with the auther (Novermber 19971. he eaplaned Gat actinly none of the statues had any
ieoreyttephng Value for him
118

--- Page 120 ---
periods, The critcna for assigning any given Vindyaka to a penod are thom stance, that is
whether they are standing or seated, their attrbutes and emaments, and the shape of their head
and trunk.“ One further criterion is the presence or absence of Mexbiltty or plasticity which
also plays an important role u: determining their date

The first category of Vindyakas are those which can be assigned to the peried trom the
seventh to the twelfth century, a peniod which is uke best dacumented by art tustorians, thus
providing ample references for the Vinayaka statues, ‘These are perhaps eleven in number **
The most important rulers of this time in the north of India were the Guryara-Pratiharas, wha, as
discussed in Chapter One, encouraged Hindu art to flourish. Briefly, the main characteristics of
‘hei carly iconography (seventh to ainth century) was the tlesliness and exquisite detaning of
the statues. From the ninth and tenth centuries onwards there is a notable spread of the Gurjara-
Pratundra style throughout mach of north India, as weil as a marked change in sculpture in that i
nvich of the animated character and softness gives way to a less Hexible form (Huntington |
1985-452-489)

Considering the Vindyakas more specifically now; theit main charactenstics of this
period are their stance, number of arms and plasticity. Vindyaka figures representing the ged im
a slanding position belong ty this early period. Wher standing. the body 1s sughUy bert in the
dvibkanga or tibhanga position, as is the case with Kala and Jyestha Vindyaka.*" The slanding
Vindyaxa often leans on a club or an axe (Awasthi 1967°38, Redig 1996:49; Yadav 1997 plates
77 anal 79, Martin-Dubost 1997:208). Sumular examples of these standing Ganegas are found 1m
the statue of Sankisa, Fatehyarh, Uttar Pradesh (A) Banegi 1993211), and in the terth century
Gane§a statue of the Dhubela museum (A, Bane 1993:13). Many of the standing Vinayaka
figures found in the north of India depict the god with only two arms. One hand rests on a club
or axe while the other hand is folded. More common than the standing representations of the
god are the statues depicung him ina seated position, When seated the god usually has four
zrms and lus mast common attributes are an axe, a noose, a Tusary, a modaxa patra. his tusk
and @ lotus Tower.

Another feature which is typical of thie earliest penod is that in some of the
representations the bridge of the trunk projects further forward than m images belonging to later
*Wacs the exception of Sthaladaata, Manga’a and Moda Viewyaka al the Vanavakas are churaeteused as
clepianteneated
“ Kharva, Kusmanda, Vikatadvya, Ekadaata, Varada. Modaxapnya. Abhaya. Ciatiman, Jyestna, Kala. and
Gaasama Vinayeka
Mite wages of Kava aad Jyestha Vinayaka ave very sinmiar to a two anmed Virayaka. siatue presently in the
Dkubela nrascum This statue is dated to the late tenth ceatury {A Banen: 1993-13, plate 6b
“The Vismudharmotara,a Siloa Sista dated between 460 and 050 CB, presenbes the paragu and the akvandis
as the attributes far the right nands and the modaka pita and the !ems for the tet hands (Visnudharmotiara
$7) la-l0)

119
Oe eeeeeeSeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSFSFFNF

--- Page 121 ---
periods. Cintaman: Vinayaka, half covered by a cloth, 1s a good example of this. Similar stames
have been found as cariy as the seventh century “In the statues of tus period Vindyaka wears
a minimum of ornaments. Larly texts such as the Visnudharmotiara, the Bhavisva, the Linga ;
and the Padma Purana mention the yatiopavita as an essential ornament of Vinayaka-Ganesa
(see Chapter Two). Early Vindyakas do not wear a crown but a bead band ot a topknot) The
features of is head are very clephant-lixe, with raised temples and slanted eyes and a slightly
protruding forehead. According to Suvaramamurt (1950°23-24) Ganesa is represented with a
very elephanune head till the Chola penod (south India, wwelfth centary) :

‘The main feature of this early period, however, is the plasticity of the statues. The body
is depicted with an unsurpassed flexibility and a unity of limbs, as opposed to later medieval
figures nm which the second set of arms seem to be disconnected from lie body. The grace of
the body is further emphasised by the trunk which suggests motion and clegance. The
Vinayakas of this period have thei trun curled towards the lett or, when the Vinayaka is
depicted ina standing position, hanging shghtly curled over the potbelly. Plasuicity is an
outstanding feature disunguishung statues of this peviad trom those of later pennods.7” While
the use of such aesthetic judgement renders the dating methodology mors uncertain than would
mechanical inmumeration of attributes, 1t1s no less valid for that

The second categary of Vinayakas are those which can be assigned to the period from
the twelfth to the fifteenth century, a period which was transitional in the sense that it combines
a variety of styles. It is possible to assign seven Vinayakas*" to this period. These statues are
evidence of a decline in the plasticity and grace which characterised the first period aithough the
complete rigidity as found im the next period is not yet fully developed The characteristics of
the early period are especially visible im the head and the trunk whereas later miedieva.
characteriscs express themselves in the hmbs create the impression of not being connected to
the vedy. In the existing hterature references to such Vindyaka statues 1 Banaras or elsewhere
<n north India are rare since art historians have taken a simular view to Rediy who argues that,
‘Images of Ganesa datable from the thirteenth to the fiflcenth century CE are very few and no
image af ths period bas been published from Madhya Pradesh, Uuar Pradesh, Bihar and
Bengal because of the Muslim invasions’ (1996:76). Moreover, the recent works dealing with
ae Very suvalar te the insage of Cintaniam Vinayaka is a lazge image of the god at Biccavolu The sttue does not
luve any omarmen:aton, +s seated in Jabsisana and the trunk bone protmices CA Barer 1993.07) Both Martn-
Dubost end Yadav previde ample examples of eatly Ganesa statces with a protrading trunkbone. eg. Maran
ODubost (1997 127, plate 9, 134, plate 22 and 23; 208, plate 26, 206, plate S) an Yaday (1997 plates % 10, 12 aad
32)
Mh later smes whew artists thed ( represent Vondyaka as an antique wage, its actual date is revealed oy a lack
of plasueity and meaon An excelent example ts Pscindila Vinayaka, which, despite all its ancient: chauacteristics,
evks the flan of the carher statues

“Avda, Pasapans. Lansbedara, Munda, Yeksa, Dyas an Stmukina Vinayaka.
120

--- Page 122 ---
the elephant-headed god by Martin-Dubost (1997) and Yadav (1997)? hardly discuss any
GaneSa figures froin north India dated later than twelfta century. None of the authors gives a
reason for this but it could be postulated that because of the lumted number and the
Iconograpaically uninteresting style of these statues, they were excluded. In the sources
consulied for this part of the thes!s there are only few references to late medieval Ganvsa-
Vinayaka statues in north India.?* However, 8. 1.. Nagar (1992:plate 70) has included a photo
of a Ganesa from Bunci, Rajasthan. Although rone of the Banaras Vinayakas resemble this
mit, (he almost geometric looxing ears, the eroded hathke crown and the stiffness af the
Innbs provide confirmatory evidence of the features of that period. When analysing the fifty-six
Vinayakas iconographically, there were a number of statues which could neither be assigned to
the first periad because they cleariy lacked requisite plasticity, nor could they be classified t the
thisd period because they were not rigid cnough [twas Professor M. No Tiwart who pomted
out that, net onty in Banaras but also e-sewhere in India, Hindu statucs of the early medieval
period (twelfth to fifventh centuries) have survived, aithough often 1a dilapitaled state. Their
condition explains why they have aot been included in’ works dealing with the god's
leonography. The discovery of these seven transitional Vinayakas in Banaras thus suggests that H
the assumption, made se boldly by Redig, needs to be revised.“

The third categary of Vindyakas consists of these which can de assigned to the period

from te fifteenth to the ciyhteenth century These number fitteen”™ It car. be assumed that the
majorily of the statues in ts calegory are datable to the later haif of the sixteenth century and
the first half of the seventeenth century, which, as indicated m Chapter One, was a period
lnarked by greater resigious tolerance. ‘The Vindyakas of tis period are easy to distinguish from
the earher periods. The clegance displayed by the images ef the first period has completely
Gsappeared and wt scems as if the Vindyukas statues are a uncoordinated assemblage of imbs
and a body, The arms arid tegs of the Vingyakas de not show the muscularity and Nexbility of
the earlicr images. Some of the images ere depicied in the dalitasana, whiie otaers are seated 10
“Yadav cs an exception, menuonng fous mages fon Banaras which caw be dated to the hile medieval perod
Paicr Virdyaka in Vesvanath gah, Yaxsa Vinayaka wath che fe faces. Paiicisya Vindyeka ond Dvimukha
Vinayaka She dees rot specity what she mears by ‘Tate medieval and docs ret attempt te clarify the dates of these
Vinayakss cite: (1997 37)
* Generally speaking, wien studying the olastic att of remh India, there are very few statues fio between the
twelfth ane tie seventeenth century which {ave a place wy cconogmplucal works One reesor is becatise, goimpured
with the art fiom medieval south India, there is litte matezial ava:lable, cad 2 second reason snay be that whatever if
ef isaf atte artiste value for inclusion m suck works. Professor MN. Tiwart agrees and beeves that a stucy
deaing wrth the medieval at cf noth Ine:a would sked mere hight on the histaica) developments of Uke whole
pica du:tag that tic,

Wah icpard ta the statement that oo images between the thirteenth ard. the fifteentr cemurces have survived. €
should ke remembered tat sixteenth century Hiadu Iestortans, such as Narayana Baatta. have suggested tet many
cf the undges were pet destroyed by the Musicns but were fiddesa in bascucsots or thrown ints walls These
deste measures. ken in tines ef uarest and chaos, 16 alse 2 possib.e explunanen for why so many unaes of that
tone ave isappeaied The fet that they were hidden dass net necessary imply that they were sec unsecrated
afterwards

Bhineansk, Udeanda, Avimuxta, Caterdanta, Pranava, Vakiauids, Gaja, Paicasye, Xseoraprasadana,
imuxha, Datahasta, Sthiladanta, Kalipsya and Mangala Virdyaka
121

--- Page 123 ---
she loius position. Anather, somewhat unexpected, pese is the ‘balancing pese! in which the
Vinayaka ‘balances’ above a mouse or rat. A good example of this is Bhimacandi Vinayaka
(Appendix, page 49). All the images of this period are represented with four arms with the two
back arms seemingly unconnected to the main bady, giving the impression Cat they were
carved after the rest of the image was compicted.”” Whereas in the previous periods the head
was characleristically elephant-like, the third period is marked by the lack of Uns characteristic.
The Vinayaia's head is often more slender and the protruding temples and trunkbone are
sometimes missing In some cases, the only feature which gives the Vindyaka an clephant
appearance is the wunk. The wunk, which is sometimes curled towards the right, sometimes
sewards the left, is uo longer gently curved but has sharp bends of ninely degrees in several
paces In some of the statues hetonging to this penod the trank falls down over the potbeily
and is omy curled at the very end Another peculiar reature noted in some of the statues is the
contnuanon of the trunkbone over the whole forehead as far as the top of the head, An cxample
of tus is Paticisva Vinayaka (Appendix, page 66), where the five trunks constitute the top of
tne head. In the fourth and last period this feature alsa appears im Trmuakka Vindyaka
Depending on the image, the ears can be obvious and large, fanshaned or they are merged wil
the background panel. There dees not seem to be a convention for the shape of the cars
Another obvious medieval feature is the presence of a crown The base of the crown is shaped
in the form of flower petals, The top of the crown resembles a helmet with soometimes an extra
decoration on top. Professor M,N. Tiwari, in a persenal communication, argues that the
presence of this top decoration is typical ef the later medieval period (the seventeenth and
eighteenth centunes). The maiority of te Vinayaka images da not wear any ornaments except
for ankle rings and bracelets. There does not seem to be a convention about the yasfopavita as
few of the third period s:mfirtis wear one. The only change in the representation of the attributes
Is their shape; the oullines of the petals af the lotus are sharper and so are the contours of the

: axe. I the existing art history titerature there are few references ly late medieval Vindyaka-
Ganega statues in north India Yadav (1997-38) reters to four ‘peculiar Vinavaka statues.
two of them belonging to the group of the fifty-six Vindyakas in Banaras, as does Marty
Dubost (1997 177)

The tourth and final category of Vindyakas comprises hose at the modern penod, dated
between the cightzenth and the nventeth century. These are seventeen in number.” These
slatues are of two types, the first type which attempts to reproduce the stylistic features of the

| “© There isa lot of simlanty between these Vinayake images and te Hacurdn statues of te same period Bot!
seen: to be ile more than raugh cullies against 2 background sone “Tere 1s ro plasticity or Fexibility: ia the
disp ay of the Simbs and die image :s often represented against a stone slab
“See foctrote 262

! ° rom the references Martin-Dubost provides it is clear that be hes based lumse:f entire.y on the amcle of
Aparwala (1977 139-185)
Durga, Dehal, Siddhy, Katadlanta, Rareputta. Tcukha, Vigheadvya, Katutakss, Picidiia. Uddandamunda,
Naresa, Mar:sama, Aga. Stvilajangha, Duenuxha, Ganandtna ecé Joa Vindyasa

122

--- Page 124 ---
frst period and the second type which appears as an extension of the third period [nthe first
lype, the artists do net reproduve the plasticity and elegance typical of the earlier period. The
absence of this impertant feature is the clearest indication of the age of the statues. Despite the
fact that medieval Silpa Sastras provide a whole array of attributes for Vindyaka, the most
frequeat.y depicted attributes of the modem period are stl the axe or the aguse in the upper
nigit Hand and the louis flower in the upper left hand, The lower hands may hald the rosary and
the modaka patia Sometimes the lower nght hand is resting on the knee while the lower lett
hand holds a book or palm-leaf manuscript. M. N. Tiwart believes thal the presence af a book
or pai: leaf manusenpt is a typical altibute for the Vinayakas of the area around Banaras frem
the Jale cighteenta century onwards. The moder representations of the Vindyakas are also
characterised by their size Whereas the majority of the Vindyakas of the first three categories
were rather smail, the maximum about cighty cenumetres in height. many af this fourth
category are more than one mete in height. A possible explanation for this could be that after
the dectine of the Mughal emp:re in the eighteenth ceatury, power resided in the hands of
Hhndu xingdoms which vied with each other for influence over Banaras, contribuung to the
restoration and revival of religious life“? Whereas the Vinayakas of the previous periods did
hot wear many ornaments, the ones belonging to the modern period wear necsdaces, bracelets
and aukle rings. Another distincuve feature are the fan-shaped ears in which veins are visible
Finally, most of the modem statues are not set agains! a background but appear in the round
Apart from the stance and the shape of the figure, different attributes could also be
j thought to cantribute to the process of dating the Viniiyakas. Uniortunate!y this preves not to
de the case as inmost of the attributes depicted on the fifty-six Vinayakas were common to
Vinayaka-Ganega since the earliest representations. Llowever, there seems to be some
cansensus 2bout particular attributes associated with a particular form of Vindyaka-Ganega. ‘The
problem here is that the group of the fifty-six Vindyakas is unique and many of the fifty-six
Vinayaka forms are not found elsewhere. What follows are the most frequently occumng
attributes, the hand in which they are held and the Vinayaka forms with which they eccur. In
some ol the cases the significance of the attribute iy also mentioned. The noose ar pasa is held
in the upper left hand and is considered to control human passion (raga). Ganesa carnes the
nous’ in Ins form as Heranvsa, Ksipraprasada, Srsu, Uddanda, Dvimukha. Trmukha and
Durga. The aikusa or elephant poad can be held in any of the upper hands and and is found,
Aiangsice the noose, wilh these same forms of Ganesa The axe is considered to be one of the
widest etnibutes of the gud and was already established as a Ganesga allribute in the fifth
7 che Ganesa statues erected by the Posvis {such as Bade Ganeda in Kabir Cauia. a statue of coe atetic forty
sentimeres high: Saxst Vinayaka an ¥:évanath gait, which was alse erected by 2 member ot the Marzthi dynasty :s
abyut the same heizhy are a goed :bustranan ef this Today SAksi, the witress Vinayaka. is the Virayaka which:
showé Oc visited afte: competing the Pafcakrus: Yatra A thid cxanpke which os discussed us greater detail in
Caapter Five, is the present mir of Dihundhiraia Reterences to these larger statues ul Ganesa are fen inv the
lave! accounts of J Ewer (1886), Neweli (C916), Cape C. Philgs Ud j and Edwin Greaves (1904)
123

--- Page 125 ---
century, Ganeda in the forms af Kkadanta and Dhundin carry the axe. The tristifa or indent has
been described by the Visnudhannottara as one of Vinayaka's attributes. IU should be carried in
the nghthand. The abdaya mudi is believed todispels al! doudt and fear in a devotee's mind.
Vindyaka is depicted with this mudra ax Saku, Heramba and Simia. The verada or boon-giving
muda is common with Trimukha Vindvaka. The rosary or aksamadla symboiises the one
hundred and eight names of the god and 1s ore of the commen attributes of Ekadanta, Dhundhi,
Durgz, Siddhi, Heramba and Trimukha. There ate no representahons of Vindyaka without the :
famous modakas. The Vindvaka Kalpa of the Baudhavana Grhya Sétra (11:10 1) already
mentions that Vinayaka must be offered sweets (Martin-Dubost 1997: 203). The modaka
symbolises the dnanda that GaneSa bestows to his devotves, The modaka patra 1s among ons of
te earhest attributes to be depicted and is found in fifth-century terracotta statues of the god
(Martin-Dubost 1997-207, plate 22). A last aitubute which is often represented 1s the ckadanta
or the tusk, (t symbolises samsara, the etemal cycle of birth and rebuth. Ekadanta Vindyaka is
represented with the tusk.
In the Kasi Khanda, the tifty-six Vinayakas are mentioned as situated in sever covers
ov circles (dvarana) contammg cight Vinayakas in the eight directions. This structuring raises
the question as to whether the fifty-six Winayakas are to be considered as constituting 2
mandala , and this will be considered in the nex? chapter
For the seventh and last circle of Vinayakas, the Kasi Khanda docs net give any

cirecttoas. Instead the first five Vinayakas, known as Moda Vinayakas, are mentioned as a
greup, alter which the names vf Jiiina Vindyaka, Dvara Vinayaka and Avimukta Vinayaka

; lo.low The possible reasons for the omission of the directions are discussed in the last chapter

of this thesis.

(24

--- Page 126 ---
Fig. 8: The Fifty-six Vinayakas in the Kasi Khanda
Khanda (KKH in the KKH
es es
ae ee
:
hoe deg EE
125 |

--- Page 127 ---
a ee
a
68, Maiigala®!
rr ee
[Muavinyaka |
™ Contrary to the other circles whieh begin with the Veniyata situated it, Ue south-east, the spath crcl stasts
wilh @ saminary of the Vendyaxas trom the cast “Phere is no reasen given for thts sadder: change.
** Manga. Windyaka does oot feature uv the English translane of the Kasi Khasde by Tagane 109% mnetsad |
Abie Vinayesa is mientaned as the eght Vinayaka (page $7, verses $7 TL- TU) Fer a tut! account of the
centevensy regarding Mangala Veviyaki; and Mita Virayata, see supra i
126 |
:

--- Page 128 ---
In the analysis of cach Vindyaka that follows, the Roman muaneral before the name
tefers to the circle on which it stands, followed by an Arabic numeral wich indicates. ils
pes:ton on that circle, The mumber between brackets after the name indicates the position
witan the total groupimy The page number, also between brackets, refers to the page in the
Appendix where the picture or sketch of the Vindyaka can be found. Tae analysis of eaci: one
starts wit) a Wanslation of the name, which is folkowed by the iecation This may consist of a2
address with a house number, in cases where the statue is situated 22 a house, or may de a less
specific reference in cases where the Vindyaka 1s situated in a temple or in the open. The
relevant quotation from the Kas: Khanda tor cach Vindyaka is tien given An iconographical
analysis of each of the Vindyakas is followed by a discussion of its possible datmg

I. 1. Arka Vindyaka (1) (page 47). '‘Vindyaka of the Sun’ (aka means ‘the sun’ or 'a
ray af light’) Situated at the back of the Lolarxa Kanda, ir, front of house B 2/17 (Vyas
1987-90, Sukal 1977:357). Lhe Kasi Kianda states: At the confluence of the Ganga and Assi
al Kas: is the Vinayaka named Arka Vindyaka. If he 1s visited by peopie on Sundays he will
subdue ail distress’ (87:59). The role of Arka Vinayaka is ciearly connected with the worship of
the Sun oa Sundays at Lolarka kuada. It is a common belief that in order to ebtam 2 sen or to
xeli.d of skin diseases a bath should be taken in the Lolizka Kund:a an Sundays (Eek 1993 179;
Hanshankay £996:100-101)** Arka Vinayakxa is also mentioned in the Tristhaliscta, the
Ta thaprakasa and the Meratantra (verse one hundred and three)

The statue which is nearly one and a half metres ‘righ and flanked dy another statue of
Ganege, stands in an enclosed shrine. This simple shrine was constructed in the cighteentl:
century (Harishankar 1996: 101)

The Vinkgyeka does nat wear a crown but areund fis forehead are some lines which
suigat be an indication of a hairband The tak as slightly bend towards te left and the
ckadanta is shown. The stance in which Arka Vindyaxa 1s depicted is neither standing. nor
* Bor the Iseatian of the Vindyakas, the works of Vyisa and Sukul Kudenita have bect: used tus reference
Cress checking has been mace with the olde: Hiner zucde books on which these autaers have based ther wor
The Suck sonttes oy pandt Vyasa cs, according to tie “egal population ef Banares, the best reference werk for tie
Present .veabon ef temples ans shrmes in Banaras 2bc cnany priests refer to dis book
“This asalysis has preaily benefited flor the considerable expertise ata valiable suggestions of Prefesso: M
N Towant, Head of the Degartinent of Art at Baares Hinds Uneverszty Further help was aiso given by Danton
Devanagana Desa: Where cts stated that Mo N) Tiwan sULKests, Without a releicice. ‘lis inéccates a persona
crmowntcanen
On the sixth Gay of the month of BkAdtapad, also cx ed Lolinga gastii, there is a oy, melt around tae kunde

'y ¥

Childless coup.es eck tu the Aunda where they both take a bath oxetier, the wife's san fed lo the suar's dots
When bathing the wemae, offets certain urts which synbolise fetihty {RP BR. Singh 1993-219).

“The Menitania, composed by Ragvuatth Sast: at the begining of te twertictt comury, slates m chapter
Winsteen (ast there were saty-four forn:s nf Vindyaka in Banaras, farmung engat enclosures of eight Vinayaeas
gaca However, the remark 19 19.493 shows that the trad tion of the Hitty-six Vindyakas is followed In some cases
the teading of He Menuantin ditters fram the Trsthalsess, the Tithepakdta and De Kasi? Khanda, ir worl cess
nvweilllbe included. The verstor, used rer Gus Chapter is tic reprint af [996

12?

--- Page 129 ---
dancing, but rather with ene knee bent. Phe god is snown wath four arms but the atuibutes are ‘
hard to discern due to an excess of red vernnhon, The attribute in tus upper right hand could be
euther a pasa or an axe and in the upper left he holds a lotus flower. His lower right hand rests
on his knee and itis possible that he also holds a rosary but the vermilion paint has blurted the
contours. Although there was probably a fourth hand which presumably held the snodaka patra,
itis no fonger visible today.
Arka Vindyaka is une of the Vinayakas which can be dated lo the Wansilional period
He lacks the overall Nexibility of the earher sculptures, fer example in the kuces and trunk. On :
the other hand, he does not correspond with the later medieval form. The absence of a crown is
also suggesuve of an carly rather than a later date. The date suggested is post-twelfth century,
probably thirteenth to fourteenth century. This date also corresponds with the revival period
after the first wave of Muslim raids. Because Lolarka was an important shrine in the time of the
Gahadavialas, the Muslims may have raved this temple as well. The Kasi Khanda, however,
indicates that there was a Vindyaka cailed Arka on the vicinity of the Lolirka shrine. A possible
hypothesis could be that the original Arka Vindyaka was deslroyed during the Muslim raids
and that, during the revival period, afterwards a new statue was consecrated
{. 2. Durga Vinayaka (2) (page 48). This Vindyaka owes his name duce to his
situation pear the Durga temple which is in the south of the city (Vyas 1987:90. Sukul
1977 387). Durga Vindyaka is situated in a separate shrine to the East of the Durga temple,
close to the kunda. The Kasi Khanda states that, 'The Ganadhyaksa named Durga is the
destroyer of all wretchedness. He is in the southern region of the holy area and should be
. assiduously worshipped’ (37:60) Although the Kasi Khanda does not mention Durga
Vinayaka as situated in the vicinity of Durga Devi, one must assurne that there is a connection
. Despite the fact that the Durga temple is as recent as the vighteenth century, there was probably
always a Durga or Devi shrine nearby. The Durga temple forns a part of the Nava Durga yatea
and the miirti worshipped inside the temple is also known as Kismanda Devi (Sukul 1977.87)
The Kriyakalpataru of the Oveltth century, however, dees not mention any of the Devi shrines
The Kas: Khanda, on the other hand, gives a fall account of the exploits of Durga, her worship
and her place in Kasi (Suku! 1977:87). It is nouceable that Durga Vinayaka's function 1s
*" Harishankar (1996:188) agrees with the proposed date He alsa mentions another Vindyaxa which stands
beside Arka Vinayaka and which is, w:thout doubt. alder He dates this Vindvaka the seventh century, tus
Maxing it ons ofthe aidest representations of 2 single Vindyaka. Iis conceivable, thougat unpros able, that sans,
was the anginal Arka Vinayaka.
“ Chapters seventy-one and seventy -lwo deal with the explo:ts of Durga. Her worship 1s recommended o: the
eghth ane the frurteerth lana: day anc especiaily on. ‘Tuesdays. Tuesday also happens to be the special day for
Ganesa wersniy The Kasi Khanda also prescribes a bath in the Duna kunda as the remedy to get nd of the sins at
cue bicths (KKH 72 87). Despite the lack of evidence that the Durga kuad: whch is mentioned by the authors of
the Kasi Khenda was situated in the south of the city, :tis reasonable tu assunce that Rani Bhavan! inerely
vonstracted a stone pond at the place known es Durga Kanda.
128

--- Page 130 ---
sumilar to that of Durga, namely being the destroyer of all wreteledness ™ This Vindyaka 1s
also mentioned in the Tristhalisstu, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verses one hundred
and ten to one hundred and thirty).

The statue is approximately one and 2 half metres in Aeight and aitheugh it was nut
possible to see the whole statue, some extemal features indicate that the present mart is of a
recent date. The wunk 1s hangs down over a potbelly. According to the local pandit Ganesga is
siting i: the laltasana position, Because of the ganment and the flawer garlands covering most
ef the murti, lus arms and attributes are not visible His head is decorated with a silver cresvent
moon

It is common belief amongst some pandits im Banaras that the images of Durga, Asa
and Siddhi Vinayaka are exact copies of one another. Sincg it is not possible to examine al the
attributes of Siddhi and Durga Vinayaka as they are covered by cloth, one could assume that
these lwo have the same attributes as Aga Vindyaka who will be discussed later. However, at
tis stage it can be said that, taking ito consideration the statue of Asi Vindyaka which shows
Vinayaxa with a twisted irunk, Durga and Asd Vinayaxa have litle in common except for the

| height

There are several factors which suggest that the statue 1s fairly recent. First of al! there is
the height of the miirt: and secondly are the features of the tace and trunk which are round and
clear The head lacks the elephantine features of the first and second period and the trunk hangs
sMraght down Whether Durga Vindyaka has any features of the third period 1s difficult to say
but the size of thy statue suggests that Durga belongs to the fourth period. Taking into
consideration that it was Ram Bhavan: who restored the kunda and commissioned the Durga
temple, it might well be that Durga Vindyaka was established around the same period, and
theretore dated to the eighteenth csntury.

I. 3, Bhimacanda Vinayaka (3) (page 49). This Vinayaka acquired its name trom
the goddess ‘Bhimacandt’ which is a corruption of ‘Bhisinacandi’, meamng the fearful Candi
(MW':75).°* Bhimacanda Vindyaka 1s located m1 the complex of the Bhimacand) Devi temple
on the Paficaxrosi Yawa (Sukul 1977:388; Vyas 1987:90). The Kasi Khanda states: In the
soutn-west of the ksetra near Bhimacandi is Bhimacanda Vinavaka. By taking his darsana all
your fears wall be destroyed’ (57:61). The position of the Vinayaka in relation to tie Devi
temple is clearly stated and even the function of the Vinayaka corresponds wrth the function of
Verse enghty-two of chapter severty-lwe teads “Durga, te destoye: of all wretchecness, shouid always be
adored at Kas oa the eighth and fourteenth wunar cay ang especially on Tuesdays’

*" SanEarly tu the Nave Durgas, there are rine forms of Candi, Bhismazand being one of them. The Lang
Parina mentioned by the Kriyaxalpatans (196-127) reads tbat Bhismacands 1s the protector of the narthem region.
tSuku, 1977 84)

129

--- Page 131 ---
This Vinayaka is mentioned by the Tristhahsetu and the Tirthaprakasa Merutantra classifies
hun as ieyasvanda Vingvaka’ (verse one hundred and tinrty-one)

The actual statue, without adding the height ef the rodent mount, is approximately sixty
centenetres lugh. On nis head 1s a crown which és typical of the turd period: a helmet-like
structure on a petal-hke base with a top decoranon 7! The lack of plasticity and the pose of the
Vinaveka, balancing above his mount, is another clear indicaten of this period. The trunk 1s
turned towards Lie felt and ts louching the modtka para which is held in the feft upper hand In
the night upper hend is an axe but the attribute ef the lower right hand is not ciear, The lower
ieftrs aolding a lof#. On the upper right hand is a bracelet and it ts therefore possible that the
Vinayaka was orginally depicted with bracelets and ankle rings, although the other omaments
are aot clearly visible. He does not wear a yapfiopavita Tae crown and the lack of plasticity
class.ty this mrt: to the third period. M,N. Tivari suggests that because of the tup decorahon

on the crown, the statue 1s seventeenth, rather Chan sixteenti, century

1. 4. Dehali Vinadyaka (4) (page $0). 'The Vinayaka cf the Gate’ (dehal means
door or gate).”* Dehall Vinayaka is known as the protectar of the western gate of Kasi. Mis
temple is found on the Paficakros: Yatra in the village of Blhataui near Caukandi (Sukul
1977-388; Vyas 1987-90). The Kast Khanda states: ‘In the west of Kasi is Dchali Vinayaka. He
destroys all the obstacies if you take his darsana’ (5? 62). His name :s aiso mentoned in the
Trsthalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse one hundred and thirty-erghv).

The statue is eighty tu ninety centumetres high and features a Vinayaka standing on a rat.
The chuacteristics of thus Vinayaka are very unusual. He is standing mi the sdmuabhunga
positon (with his teet together) The crewn is plain and resembles a hat more than a crown. It
could be that the crown originally depicted flower petals at the base but they have become
invis;ale because of layers of vermiion He has wide ears, the trunk is turned tawards the left
and touches the modaka patra which ts held in the left upper hand. In his right upper hand he
helds a torus, in the lower one an aksamédla. The upper ‘eft hand carries the modaka patra and
the lower hand is holding a fos The most peculiar feature is a third eye, a silver spot witch
Shppe¢ from its ariginal posinou between the eyes and is here placed on the trunk bone, giving
Denali Vindyaka an almost comical appearance. The surtace of the statue is smooth, the
potelly is skillfallyly carved and the hands ard attnbutes have some roundness to them

The statue ts defimtely modern, nineteenth- or maybe even early Weenuecth-century, thus
making the mért: more recent than the temple, canimissioned by Rani Bhavani in the middle ot
" Drotesser ‘Tiwari exp.aried that the helmetelike crown ie icenoprap yy ts ore uf the typical cheractensues of the
sistecnth te seventeenth centuriss (personal commmmcaton)

“lathe English transtauien of the Kasi Kanda by Tagare (1947), Deball Vinayaka is spelleé Dedal; Vonayasa,
130

--- Page 132 ---
the eighteenth century, in which itis sitzated. Tt can be assumed that the present marti repiaced
an earlier statue although the priest responsible for the temple could not confirm this. The kunda
next to the temple was also built with the Ram's financuil support.”
The Kala Bhawan Museum im Banaras houses a Garesa statue wluich was allepedly
found near Dehali Vindyaka (Kala Bhawan, number 158). The ged is depicted in a dancing '
posinon, with eight arms and with a half lotus medallion above his head He wears a pearl chain
over lus forehead and ankle rings. His attributes are a parasu, an aksamala, the hood ard the tail
ata snake, his tusk and the modaka patra. The slalue is dated tothe eight century, The discovery i
ol such an elaborately carved Vinadyaka-Ganega state near the Dehali Vinayaka shring clearly j
suggests that the god had achieved considerable importance m the regian by the cighth century |
Considering that the area around Dehalt Vinayaka was probably no larger than it is naw, there
canbe ro doubt that the presence of Dehali Vinayaka as ‘the protector of the western gate of the
sacied territory’ was the imunediaie coason for other Vinayvaka-Ganesa statues to be erected in
the vienity.
An interesting feature is the presence of the sixteen Vingyakas pane) or Sodaga
Vindyaka on the outer wa.l of the imple. This shrine is visited after Dehah Vindvaka on the
Pancaxrosi Yatra. Bithnemann writes, “A group of sixtcen forms (of Ganega) appears in the
texts for the consecration of temples and is ovcasivnally depicted ou the temple walls’
(1995-38). Rao, however, beueves thal the worship of sixteen Vinayakas can be daled to the
Smru period Atthough the mimber of Vindyakas in the Vindyaka Scinti cousists of four or six.
wher. they were invoked in a mandala thet number was tweive on sixteen. According lo this
author a list of Ute sixteen iconographical representations of Vindyaka is provided in the
Chuntagama (1992:22.1-222). As the representations of the sixteen Vinayakas on the wall of the
Dehalt Vinayaka sivine are all the same, it cannot be that this 1s such an :conographic chart
The presence of the Sodaga Vindyaka on the wall of the Dehali Vinayaka temple may
hot be coincidental as itis knowa that Dehan Vinayaka is ere of the mest important Vindyekas
of the sacred tenitory, Ee sits at the most Western point of Kasi ard serves as the radial point
fir the city with Madhyamesvara as us centre, His name is also cientioned in the Padma Purana
(see Chapter Tiree), There is no doubt that Dehali Vindyaka had an inyportant position rom
carly times and the fact that he was the first Vindyaka and the first shrine which was visited by
the pilgrims in earlier days suggests ‘hat he may Have been honoured with some sort of a shrine
7 On page filythics of the Ththavivccana Khanda a Vuviyake Kunda is mentored but ils focatian is ret
knewa Ithas beer suggested by Rana PB Singh chat this Kumda might be the pone which is next to the Detah
Vingyaka temple although there 1s uo evidence to support such a theory and considering fo¢ fact that dhe sacred
phices descuibed by Laksmidhaia did net include anywhere outade the sacred tertiiory uf Banaras, tus would be
vakkely. Acorcing to Vishyakirita (1987 1225 tee Vindyaka &undawes nearry the Dhannegvar Kinda, opposite
a Viniyaka status Today this Vindyaka Aunda has disappeared.
131

--- Page 133 ---
or temple. If so, then this shrine was probably destroyed or simply became dilapidated The
present temple with the panel of the Sedasa Vindyakas <adicates that there was a desire to
consecrate the new temple properly.

1. 5. Uddanda Vinayaka (5) tpage $i) “The Vinayaxa Holding a Staff. His smell
shrine is along the Paficakrosi Yaurd near Ramesvar (Suku; 1977.359; Vyas 1987:90), The
Kasi Khanda states. "In the north-west of the kseaa ts the Gajinana named Uddanda Vinayaka.
bie removes the umperunent obstacles of all his devotees’ ($7:63) His name is mentioned by the
Tisthalisety, tae Tirthaprakasa and lie Merutanna (verse one hundzed and forty-three).

The statue is between forty and fifty cenumetres in height and is very damaged ft does
not seem that this Vinayaka ever wore a crown. ‘The slight bulging on the top of the head
indicates that he was represented with a topknot but the statue is so damaged that this cannot be
established with certamty. The trunk tums tewards the left and seems to be touching the
modaka pata. The Vinayaka is represented with two eyes. Like Blimacanda Vindyaka he is
alsv represented in a balaneing position but he dees not seem to have staod on a rat. The upper
wo hands are very vaguely defined and one can only conectire about what the Vinayaxa may
have actually held in them. The upper left hand may have carried a bow! with sweetmeats but
the contours are very vague, The lower mght hand is placed on the delly and possidly held a
vosary. [he lower left hand is damaged and hardly visible. The potbe:ly is cupped o!T and
almost tlat. Because of the rough surface of the whole image it cannot be verified whether this
Vindyaka was represented with a yajfopavita or ornaments.

It:s possible however, despite us eroded form, to date this Vindyaka. Although the
absence of the crown could suggest that this Vindvasa betongs to the first period, the awkward
balancing position and the stiffness of the limbs clearly date it between the fifteenth and the
sixteenth century

I. 6. Pégapani Vindyaka (6) (page £2). "The Noose-hoiding Viniyaka’. The temple
of this Vindyaka 1s situated in Sadar Bazaar, in the nesta of the cily. 1 also forms part of the
Pafticaxrosi Yalra. The Kasi Khanda states: 'In tae north of Kai is Pasapam: Vinayaka reigning,
From paying devotion to him all the obstacles of the Ka4ivasis wall be destroyed’ ($7:64), His
funchon as the one who binds the obstacles is dersved from his attribute, the noose (pasa).?*
Pasepan Vindyaka is not only the mest northem Vindyaka of the PaBcakrosi Yatra, but also
fulfils this function on the smaller Nagar Pradaksina Yate which is considered to be the city
“The noose is are of the most frequently depicted attr:bstes cf the god ard is usually cared in the uppec ‘ett
wee wees the control over the passiens of rdgas and it stops and binds the evil actions (Martin-Dubost

132

--- Page 134 ---
cucumambulatory pilgrimage (R. PB Singh 1993:44-45)." Pagapamt is mentioned in the
Tristhalisetu and the Tirthaprakadsa and, im both works, his name is given both under the listing
of the Vindyakas and under the descripnon of die Nagar Pradaksind Yatra. The Merutantra
mentions his name in verse one hundred and fifty-three
The statue is half'a metre im height. The Vinayaka wears a headband and is depicted in
lhe falrtsana position. He as four hands, the two represented at the back of the statue are very
artificial and ca not seen to be part of the image, a characteristic which denates his later ongin.
In the upper right hand he holds a nouse and i the upper left hand he carries a lotus flower
Tae lower nghthand teans on a stick or a club and the Jower lef hand is holding the modaka
patra, The trunk, winch has an artificial form, is turned towards the left and touches the
sweetmeats, licld in the lefthand. He Aas two eves and his cars are smail and crescent shaped
Two cnstgnificant ines under his ngnt hand suggest that he once wore bracelets, but the rest of
the image 1s too damaged to state whether he also wore ank-e rings or not. Pasapam Vinayaka
has both the characteristics of the first (the lack of a crown) and of the second period (no
plasueity and the arms and trunk are static) which indicate that he belongs to the second period
between the thirteenth and the fifteenth century
Outside the temple of Pagapam Vindyaka, to the left against the wall, a Ganesa figure
stands in the open, This Ganesa or Vindyaka is depicted in aibhanga position and the muton of
: the limbs snow that this particular nafirti can be dated to the ninth or tenth century. Agacn there
ts a dilenuma as lo whether this could have beva the onginal Pasapani Vindéyaka or whether ‘his
Vinayaka statue was found in the vicinity and later brought to this lemple complex. The pardit
of the temple was unable to clarify this question.
| I. 7. Kharva Vindyaka (7) (page $3). ‘The Beautiful Vindyaka’. This is the
meanmy given by the Ka¢? KAanda although the dichanary mvan:ng of ‘Kharva'ts ‘the matdated’
or ‘the enppie’ (MW 348). Kharva is situated ina small tempie on Adi Keshav Marg in the
Rajgnat yela (Sukul 1977:355, Vyas 1987:90) The Kasi Khanda (verse sixty-live) states: ‘The
beaunfii Kharva Vindyaka is at the conflucace of the Ganga and the Varana. He will subdue
and reduce even large obstacles of good devotees by showing him devotion’. Kharva’s name
alse appears im the Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutanua (verse one hundred and
seventy)
che Naat Prdaksma Yatdi detinits the sacred lemtory cf the city of Varanasi and 1s deserdec i several
Puraice sources Matsva Purina (183. 61-62; 18440-4013, Padina Pradna, Kesna Purana (101) amd Agate Purana
156) The total lengts of the yatne is about twenty-five kilometres: Tus ydtra is considered as a symbols fore cf
the arger Paicakros: Yatra and coun's seventy-two shrines, of which ten ate Vindyaxa shones (R. PB. Singk
993 44, Eck 19935835) Despite diferent references lo Cis sitio vanous Parinas, there is some confusion
asout the exact terstory encompassed by the ydtei In the Virdnasi Vaithav Cus 1s discussed an great detay. en
pages furty-mine © Ally-iwu
133

--- Page 135 ---
The statue of Kharva Vinayaka is about one mete in height He is seated but, because
of the damaged base of the statue, it is dificult to see whether he ss sitting in the /alitasana o:
not. His head is bare, he does not even wear a head band and with the bulging temples and
trenkbone the head is very elephant-like He has wide cars and two eyes From the lett hand
side af thy statue it can be deduced that there were tour lands orginally, allhough it is net
possidle to describe what attributes were once held. Around Ins waist he wears a
ndgayaysopavila, Other ornaments are abseat. [Lis trunk, protruding al the hase, turns towards
the left and 1s rough-cut but there 1s an unmistakeabie flow of movement.

In datng Kharva Vindyaka a similar statue found in Kanaw should aiso be considered
This figure is dated to the seventh centin. The Kanau Ganega is ina much better state than
Kharva Vindyaka and therefore its atuributes, the axe, the aksamala, the lotus flower and the
inodaka bowl, are more distguishable (Yadav 1997:34, plate 10}. Wilh reference to the
Kausauj figure itis possible that Kharva Vinayaka belongs to the first penod. The bare head. the

7 gracetul seated position and the elephantine face indicate iis carly date, but :ts present damaged
| condition makes 1 difficult to classify it precisely. Therefore to posit the eigath century as the
vathest limit and the tenth century as the upper limul seems reasonable.

I. 8. Siddhi Vinfiyaka (8) (page $4). “The Vindyaka of Success’. ‘flus Vinavaka,
protector of the eastern direction, is found near Mamkarmika kunda. Before reaching the kunda '
there are steps on the left, halfway up which ts the shrine of Siddhi Vindyaka (Sukus 1977-356; |
Vyas 1987.90). The relevant verse in the Kas: Khanda states: 'To the east of the sacred area,
Siddh: Vindyaka 1s always ready to protect the holy place. le is on the west of the Yama firth
ard is the prompt bestower of powers to a sadhaka (aspnanty (37:60). Manikamika ghat was
not yet known as the burning ghat when the Kasi Khanda was composed but the reference to
the Yama trtha, which later became known as tie Mamkanka area, indicates thatthe Vindyaka
is sal im its original location. The term ‘Siddai Vinayake’ is very widespread and Siddhi
Viniyaka shrines are found everywhere in India. Today the shrine of Siddhi Vinayaka should
be visned belure commencing a yatra of the sacred territory and at its completion His name is
also mentioned in the Tristhalisetu, the Tirthuprakasa and the Merutanua (verse one hundred
and eighty-four)

‘The statue ts about one metre high and 1s always covered in cloth, leaving oniy the face
visible for te public. A silver crown ts placed on Siddin Vinayaka's head ‘Three large eves are
ailached to the mgr: and, together with the crown, must de some kind of recent donation to
embellish the figure Right above his third eye is a candra bindu in shaumng silver The trunk,
which ts very thick, is tamed towards the left. Despite the fact that itis not possible to examine
this Vindyaka for all of its iconographic features, a few visible characteristics indicate a more
recent dale, Apart from being a large statue which would scarcely have survived the upheaval

34

--- Page 136 ---
of the medieval periods in the Manikarmika area, there is also the large and inflexible trunk,
twisted by ninety degreus. Thus, the statue can be classi%ed in the modern period and could be
even as recent as the nineteenth century The similarities between this Vindyaka and Bade
Ganesa in the Kabir Caura area may suggest that Ure present Siddh: Vindyaka ardrt: was also
established by the Marathis or the Pesvas, as was Bade Garesa, but ut has not been possible to
continn this It was suppested ecarier that Durga, Siddlu and Aga Vinayaka could be exact
copies of each other. The few visible characteristics, however, indicate otherwise: Durgs
Vonidyaka's trunk hangs over his pothelly, whereas Siddin Vindyaka's trunk twists to the left

IL. 1. Lambodara Vindyaka (9) (page $5). ‘The Vindyaka with the Potbelly’. He is
situated at the dottem of Lali ghag in a small shrine along the Ganges. This Vindyaka is only
accessibie when the water level 1s low enough, between December and June, The Kasi Khenda
slates: ‘On the western bank of te heavenly nver, to the north of Arka Vinayaka 1s |ambodara

Ganddhvaksa who washes off obstacles which have the form of dirt’ (57 68), ‘This Vinayaka 1s
also mentioned in the Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa ard the Merutantra (verse one hundred
and mnely-one)

Tae present locaton of tus Vindyaka corresponds with the descnption in the Kasi
Kbanda, The Lambodara statue is currently situated ina small shrine which was Suilt very
recentty, possibly len years azo. Besides the mdrt are olher figures: an image of the magas and
another of an ciephant standing. The elephant figure strongly resembles the elephant depicted in
the Patica-Vindyaka panels of the eighth to tenth century. The collection of figures in this
waterside shrine suggest that all these images used io be in the neighbourhood together. The
well preserved state of the other figures suggests that they were originally somewhat higher up
the ghat, where the ude of the Ganga could not erode them, As recently as 1988 there were
major waterwarks on this ghar (Harishankar 1996:49) and it would come as no surprise if the
figures were moved to their present location at that ime.

The statue is about eighty centimetres im heigat and iooks very much hke a danving
Vinayaka. The legs are bent and by the right foot, carved i the stone, is the vague shape of a
rat, On his head he wears a simple crawn which may have originally been a crown with a dase
of flower petals. Today, however, the lower border of the crawn does not have any monf. On
Uhe head byo inedsm wile eyes are visible and belween the eyes ts a candra bindu ‘The trunk
curls towards the left and is touching sweetieats He has four hands, the right upper holds ar
axe, (he lower right rests on the knee, Tae attribute in the upper left hand is net very clear and
void be esther a jolus flower ora pasa The lower lef hard carryies the modika patra The
Bork tae lotus flower and the noose are the attnbutes usually depicted ay Cie left upper hand

135

--- Page 137 ---
contours of tae belly are very clear and the Vinayaka does not scum to be wearing a
yaiopavila Ornaments around the ankles and wrists are vaguely diseemubie

‘The statue itse!t, in the tbhanga pose, expresses Mexibility and movernent and the pose
of the Vindyaka is identical to a teath-century Ganesa with conserts from Bharatpur (S$, L
Nagar 1992-plate 6).°7 The contours of the chest and the potrelly are extremely well carved.
Wher. compared with other dancing Vinayaka figures described by Yadav?" ané Martin
Dubost, itis possibie that Lembodara belongs to the first period. However, :t1s the presence of
the crown, shaped in the form of a hat because ef years of erosion and layers of vermilion,
which distinguishes Lambodara Vindyaka from statues ef the first period In addition st 1s alse
noticeable that the two back arms do not reaily form part of the hody These fatter wo
characteristics classify Lambodara 2s a transitional Vutayaka, prebably of the thirteenth or
fourteenth century

I]. 2. Kiltadanta Vinayaka (10) (page 50) The Vinayake with a Hamed Tooth’.
The word Adta means ‘the bene ofa forchead or a hon’ (MW.299), This Vindyaka is situated un
the Aghura complex on Kami kuada in Ravindrapun, Aouse no. B 3.338. The Kttudanta
Vinayaka sus in the open, painted in bright colours (Sukul 1977:357, Vyas !987:90). The Kase
Khanda states: To the west of him (of Lambodara) and to the north of Durga Vinadyaka 1s
KG&tadanta Vindyaka Ie 1s the annhilator of difficulues and calamities. He always protects tas
hoty place’ (47:70). The Vinadyaka's present location matches that of the Kasi Khanda {
Kittadants Vinayaka :s located near the Kami Aunda, described by Prinsep as ‘Kinga’ Kunda (R |
P [3 Singh 1994,222). Kitadanta is mentioned by the Jristhalisetu, the Tivthaprakasa and the
Merutantra (verse (wo hundred and twenty-one).

!

The Vinayaka is about sixty cenumetres high and seated On lus head he wears a crown
with a carved flower-petal base. The trunk is tums towards the right and holds a modaka which
touches ius right tusk, This Vindyaka is represented with io tusks, with the ieft one smaller
than the night. His ears are fan shaped. He has four hands, the right upper hand holds an axe,
the lower night holds a round obyeet. This could be a modaka but it could also be a pomegranate
or another fruit, In his left upper hand he holds a lotus flower and sn the fourth hand he carries
a palm leat’ manuscript?” Because ef the paint, the many emaments Vinayaka is wearng,
necxlaces, bracelets and anklets and a special ann band decorating the upper arm, are noticeable
The picats of a dhoti are also visibie.
This tenth century Ganeda statue depicts the god with a lopkiiot and a Lauband.
“to tie work of Yedav (1997) these are many examples ef dancing Viniyakas, for instance plates 95, 96 ard
1235 to 169 Tn wos of these cases Ganesa is weanng an clakorated crown or mekitfa.
“OE MON Tiwart has stated that the attribuce of a book ut one of the hands ef Gareds is a typical attabute cf che
opatecats aad cuneteent) ceotaces. VP. Singin hes included same plates ef Ganesa statues of the ncneteenth
Cestiny. seme af them delding a book or pain leaf manuscript {19507

136

--- Page 138 ---
This nity is a good example of nmeteenth century Vinayakas.”' The manuscript and
she oinaments en the arms constitute the evidence of a recent date Remarkable is that: this
mneteenth century statue is almost an exact copy of a Ganesa statue found in the Patna museum
(Yadav 1997:40, plate 22, Pama museum no. 10617) Yadav states that doth the lower hands of
this Patna statue are mutilated, however, a glance at te piate shows that this Bihar image held a
tusk in the lower right hand. Taking this image into consideration, it could be suggested that the
artist carving the Kttadanta Vinayaka took his inspiration from the Bihar piece which also is
dated to the nineteenth century

I. 3. Salakatankata Vindyaka (11) (page 57) This 1s the name of one of the four
Vindyakas in the Manava Grhya Sétra and the Yapiavaikya Smit. Vhe location of this eleventh
Vinayaka is on the Marwad: kunda im Muadth, outside Banaras (Sukul 1977 358, Vyds
1987-90). The Kasi Kiianda does not reveal mach about the cunchon or role of this Vinayaka:
‘Shyhtly to the norta-east of Bhimacandi Ganega is Salakatankata, the protector of this holy
spot. This Ganadhyaksa is worthy of bemg adored’ (57:71). His name is also mentioned in the
Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse two hundred and twenty-four)

Although the lower part of the statue is covered in cloth, at is clear Uhat Salakatankata is
represented in a seated position. There does not secin lo be much differentiation between his
head and the crown he 1s wearing and it almost looks as if he has a long ridged forehead, This
lype of crown is aiso worn by other Vindvakas of the same period {sixteenth to seventeentia
century). Two mpple-like promberances tadicate his cyes and mars the beginning ef tis trunk H
The trunk is tumed towards the leit in a partcular way: instead of going downwards it goes |
upwards where it touches the medaka bow! held in the upper left hand. The upper night hand \
holds an attribute what is possibly a stylistic representation of a lotus flower. The ears a’so i
show the same stylistic features. In general the statue Aas the same smooth and round features.
as Dehalb Vinayaka

The crown indicates that the statue is not carlicr than the sixteenth century but the other
features, namely the stylistic flower, the ears and nipple-like protuberances suggest that the
stalue is mucin later than the sixteenth century, Accordingly, it is therefore assigned to the
eighteenth or munetcenth century with the artist attempting to reproduce features of an earlier
pertod.* The enly problem with this dating is that the Vindyaka is somewhat idiosyncratic and
he bes unpadished PhD thests from Banaris Hindu Caversty, VP Siagh amcades some clustrations of
Sundyakas trom the mneteerth century which resembie all the feataes of Kitadanta Virdyaka
A) Taking mta consulerazor Gre modem stucture ef the comple, a smacious ceastuctien with many coiurins
typrcat of (ke post-Moghus princely dyvasties, could even ‘ze suggested that the statue, lather than beng meved
thoi somewhere else. was estadl:shed when the temp.e was constricted

137

--- Page 139 ---
this would argacs against it bemg a modern repreductien, as these are usualy mors
slereotypicai

Il. 4. Kiigmanda Vindyaka (12) (page 58). The name of this Vinayaka also
appears in the Manava Grhya Sutra and in the Yajiavalkya Sorts, It is also one of the names
for Durga (MW-:300). The temple of this Vindyaka hes in the ouddle ef the mustard fieids in
the Phuiwariya village, to the west outside Banaras (Sukul 1977:358;, Vyas 1987-90). Near the
lemple an old panel depicting the Saptamatrkds (dated seventh or eighth century) was found, as
was « damaged siatue of Durga in ‘he form of Mahisasurmardim. The Kasi Khanda states: “Last
of Dehali Vinayaka is the Ganadhyaksa named Kismanda Vinayaka. He is always to be
worshipped by the devotees for the suppression of great mishaps and calamities’ (37:72), He is
mentioned in the Trsthalisctu, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse wo hundred and
turty).

The statue of this Vindyaka is definitely old and belongs to the earliest period. The stone
is eroded and the features have lost their details The Vingyeka is bare-headed A slight
slevation on lis head may indicate that there was once a topkuet but tis is only comecture. All
facial expression has disappeared, as have the ears, which nave merged with the stone slab
agaist which the Vinayaka is carved. The dunk hangs down, tumung slightly to the left. The
Vinayaka 1s seated and bas only two ams. In the left hand, resting on his knee, he holds a bowl
with sweetmeats but it is not very clear whether the mght hand also carryies something as the
slane is loo eroded. It does not seem the Vinayaka was wearing a ya/fopavita or any other
ornaments.

‘The presence of the Durga statue and the Saptamiatrkas panel combined with the clear
antiquity of tus Vindyaka suggests that Kiisimanda shouid be dated to the eighth century or
perhaps even the seventh. Perhaps the onentation of ths Vindyaka placed on the westerly
access between Dehaii Vindyaka and the centre should be noted since it suggests that the
location was determined by directionality and not by its proximity to a kunda

Il. 5. Munda Vinayaka (13) (page $9}. “The Vindyaka of the Head’ The stame of
Munda Vinayaka is situated in the wa!l of Cand: Devi's tempic 21 Sadar Bazaar, in the norh of
the city closeby Pasapani Wmayaka (Sukul !977:359; Vyas 1987-90), The Kas: Khanda states
‘South-east of the Ganapati named Uddanda ts the extremely renowned Munda Vinayaka. He is
to be adored by devotees. His body is stationed in Patala. The head is situated in Kasi. Hence
the Lord in Kaéi is known as Munda Vinayaka’ (57:72-73) The text explains tie name of the
Vinayaka The current statue of Munda Vinavaka thus corresponds with the iconographical
deseriplior given by the Kasi Khanda This Vinayaka is also mentioned in the Tristhalisetu, the
Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse two hundred and thirty-five}

138

--- Page 140 ---
The statue reveals only the head of the Vindyaka which is about twenty cenumetres in
height The trunk Aangs straight downwards and only the end curls towards the nght. He is
shown with big cars and the wunk bone protrudes slightly so that overall the head iouks very
reausuc, While the crown Manda Vindyaka is wearing is famly typical of the third period
because the shape suggests that here were originaly Uluwer petals an its base. Nevertheless the
shape of the head 1s so clegant and fluid that this Vinayaxa is probably another exampic of the
second tansitonal period

Il. 6. Vikatadvija Vindyaka (14) (page 60). ‘The Vindyaka with the Huge Tusk’
Vikatadvija is tacated in the Dhuncandi Devi temple in the Dbipeandi mehalla (Sukul
1997 359, Vyas 1987:90). The Kasi Khaada states: ‘South of Pagapan: Vinayaka is Vikatadvija
Vinayaka, from whose piija one wil achieve the Lordship of the Ganas' (57:75). The function
described by the Kas? Khanda refers to one of the older roles of Vinayaka as the ‘lord of the
Ganas'. The Vinayaka 1s mentioned ia the Tristhalsctu, the Tirthaprakasga ard the Merutantra.
The latter, however, names him: Vikatadanta Vindyaka (verse ovo hundved and thirty-nine),

| The statue itselfis about thirty centimetres high and as damaged. Only the head asd the
body are smeared with sindar Although the [cet have disappeared, from the shape of the knees
aisclear that this Vindyaka is seated in the Jalitasana position. He is bare-headed and has bip
ears which Aave merged with the background panel. His trank curves towards the left and has a
lugh ceyree of plasticity. Considering the Low of the trunk sts ikely that it touched the
modaka patra but the sweetmeats are ne langer visible. Because one hand m the upper leit
corner is sull visible, it can be assumed that tins Vinayaka was represented with four hands.
Untortunately the hands are too damaged to distinguish any attributes.

Yadav has published two photographs of filth century Vindyakas which show some
resemblance to V:xatadvija Vinayaka.”’ The bare head, the natura! flow of the gunk and the
lwy resembling arts found in tie work of Yadav provide enough evidence to argue that these
slatucs belong to the Hirst penod. It is however most unlikely that Vikatadvija Vindyaka is of)
such early date. Taking ite considerauion the historical evelution of Banaras, the tenth century
should be taken as the upper Limit for dus statue. The well-curved tun and the presence of
four arms classify it to ths periad
™ vadav (1997:32, vlates @ and 7) Both the states arc trem Ura: Pradesh and ate currently housed ou: the
Mathura Museus: ino 15-1180 and no 18-832) These O80 examples given ky Yadav emphasise orce uiore the
unpercance of Virdyaka-Canesa in and arouid Mathura which, the fifh century, was anmpostant centre for the
Ja. community (see Chapter Two;

139

--- Page 141 ---
Il. 7, Rajaputra Vingyaka (15) (page 61). ‘The Crown Prince Vinayaka'. This 1s
the third of the Vindyukas whose name is given in the Manava Grhya Sétra and the
Yaniavatkya Sirti. This Vinayaka is found in the Rajghat gila, in a shrine near the road leading
to the Adi Kesava temple, house ao. A 37/28 (Sukul 1977-358; Vyas 1987-90). The Kasi
Khanda states: ‘The Vinayaxa named Rajaputra is in the south-west of the Lord named Kharva.
On bemg worshipped, he will remstate a king who has lost his kingdom’ (57:76) There could
be no better place for Rajaputra Vindyaka than on the Rayghat plateau, which for centuries was
the centte of pawer of the rulers of Kasi. [tis interesting that in the Manava Grhya Sitra
princes, when they are possessed by Vinavakas, co not obtain savergnty. [tf should also oe
noted that the three Vinayakas mentioned im the Manava Grhya Siitra and the Yajiavalhya
Smit: are all situated on the second circle of the Vindvaka group. Rajaputra's name is included
inthe Tristhafisetu, the Dirthaprakas and the Merutantra (verse two bundred and lifty-one).

Unfortunately the shring was not open and it was not even possible tu take a picture
tihough the doer or get any more information about the general iconography of the mite
Except for the forehead, which is not very revealing, and the eyes, everything else is covered by
a garment. The statue is about sixty centimetres im height. Outside the sinall temple there is
another Vinayaka statue which was also covered with a garment. This Vinayaka appears to be
of considerab‘e age. It has been suggested that this statue is the original Rajaputra Vinayak

Il. 8. Pranava Vindyaka (16) (page 62). ‘Aum Vindyaka’. (The word pranava
represems the mystea! syLable aun) (MW: 660). He ts located on the southern wail in the
Hianyagarbhesvara temple on Trlocana ghat.. Above the statue 1s a plaque with his name and
she inscription 'Kasi Khanda (Sukui 1977-356, Vyas 1987-90), The Kasi Khanda states “The
Ganadhipa nained Pranava is ou the western dank of the Ganga and to the south of Rajaputra
On being bowed to he will lead [a devotee] to heaven’ ($7:77), The funcuen given to this
Vinayaka in the Kasi Khanda is related lo his name in the sense that the aruculauon af the
myshe syllable gum icads lo liberation, The position of Pranava in the Kasi Khanda
corresponds more or less with its current location at the edge uf the Ganga. Sukul states that the
original location for this Vinayaka was Gola ghat, which 1s one ghat upstream from Trilocana
ghat. This claim is net supported by any argument except for a statement that Gola ghar was
destroyed by the Muslims.” Pranava is listed in the Tristhalisetu and the Tirthaprakasa but in
the Merutantra he 1s Known as Pravaran Vinayaka (verse two hundred and seventy-one)
 Sukal further points out thet Prarava is currently m the Himayagarbheévara temple because the Vieayaka’s
orginal position cn Gola ghat was also nea: the Hiranyagarbhedvara artha and temple (Sukui 1977-386). At
pisseat Gioia wht does not have inuch religious scwertcance the ghae was mentiencd for the Gist une by James
Pinscp m1 1832 CE. ft ew cn cmportance at the beginning of Che twenticth contary CHarsdanker 1996 83)
Tivocana ght, at Use other band. was aready glented in the Kast KAanda aad ives always slanned an -mportant
pasion anon the deas in the cuy. the ght was completely destioyed during: the reign of Aannpssb and
wbaloin 140 CE with the financial support cf the Peswas and Navdyan Diksit (Hanshaskar 1996:82) (21s thus.

140

--- Page 142 ---
The statue ts no larger than thirty contnetres and has an odd appearance. The contours
are faded due to the venmlion paint. Pranava Vinavaka is depicted in Jalitdsana, On his head he i
wears a crown which 1s typical of the third period. He has two artificial eyes stuck on his ice.
Tae srunk hangs down over lis belly which is flattened by years of eresion and is turned
slightly towards the right. He has four hands of which the upper mght hand halds ar axe. The
upper le? hand holds something that looks like a lotus flower. The lower hands are so damaged
Uses the identification of the attributes is unpossible. It seems lnat the tower leit hand is resting
on whe left knee. The whole image is very flat and there are ne traces of a yaniopavita oi
ornaments The peculiar shape of ths Vindyaka could make classification difficult, but, if the
crown is taken as a criterion, it is possible to suggest the sixteenth or seventeenth century for
this image. Tire way the limbs are represented, without plasticity, plausibly dates it to the third
penod.

II. 1. Vakratunda Vindyaka (17) (page 63). "The Vindyaka with the Twisted
Trank'. This Vinayaxa, woich is also known under the name of Sarasvatl Vindyaka, is seated
nex? toa Lakstmi image the outside the Causatti Yom temple on the wail of the Rana Mahala
(Suxul 1977-457, Vyds 1987 91). The Kasi Khanda states: 'On the nerthern bank of the Ganga,
north of Lambodara, is Vakratunda, the remover of mass sins' (S/:80), Vakratunda also
fealures in the Tristhafiseti, the Tirthaprakasa and in the Merutanta (verse (wo hundred and
SUVENTY=S1X).

The Vinayaka is sixty centimetres high and is depicled in the falitasana position. On iis
head is a lopknot. The face is very clephant-lke with snght bulgings at the heigth of the temp:cs
and trunkbene. His ears are small and almost rectanguler. [le does not show a yayiopavita
crossing his stomach, neither any other ornaments. His tran is curved towards the left and
louches the modaka patra which 1s held in the left lower hand Vakvatunda Vinayaka has ‘our
hands. In the upper myht ke helds a pasa, and in the upper left he carsies a lotus, The Jewel
ught hand rests on his “nee and the lower ‘eft hand holds the nrodaka patra.

Al first sight it appears that this Vinayaka belongs to the first peried, as it has a topknos
and is reasonably well carved, but closer inspection reveals that the trunk shows @ certain
stiffess as it sccm to by dent in an unnatural way Also, the two back arms are depicted in the
typical styic of the medieval period, that is, alinost detached from the rest of the body Apart
from these iconograplical characteristics the age of the stalue zs reveatcd by its surroundings
Next to Vakratunda Vindyaxa's mhe is one with a Laksim figure: the bve ches form one part
and are clearly taken from another temple ar shire and placed here at the cntance of the
Possib.e that what ts row known as Gate gikt was erymally part of Trocana ghét and that Pranava Vinayaka
alulted its pasition slide southwards

14)

--- Page 143 ---
Causatu Yogini temple. The depiction of Ganesa and Laksmi together can not be dated carher
than the seventeenth century, and therefore this peried is taxcn as its lower lirut and it is
asstgned to the thid period The Causate Devi temple itself was constructed in 1807 CH
(Harishankar 1996:54-5$)

Ill. 2. Bkadanta Vindyaka (18) (page 64). “The Vindyaka with the Single Tusk’
His statue is found in the Bengali Tola in the Puspadantesvara temple, no. D 32/102 (Sukul
1977.35&, Vyas 1957-91) The Kasi KAanda states: ‘North of Kiittadanta Vindyaka 1s Ekadania
Vinayaka, who protects the forest of bliss fron) war and riots' (57:81). The description of this
Vinavaka in the Kasi Khanda is vague, its location remains general and so is his function as a
protector of Kas: The Vinayaxa is mentioned in the Tristhaliseta, Tirthaprakasa and he 1s called
Dantura by the Merutantra (verse lwo hundred aud eighty-five)

The image is very smal, about twenty centimetres high, and 1s represented in the
falttisana position. His head is bare but elephant-like, with bulging temples and a_ slight
protruding irunsbene. The trunk is turned towards the left and touches the modakas held in the
lower left hand. His ears are large and set against the back of lus head. This Vinaveka is
depicted with four hands holding a pasa or a parasy in the upper night hand and a Jetus in the
upper feft hand. The lower left hand holds the sweetmeal bow]. Frasion bas obscured the lower
nyht hand although its position suggests that it rested on lus knee and held an aksamala or
expressing some mudra. The surface of this statue is quite rough and itis thus difficutt to see
whether (ie Vindyaka once wore a yayfopavita or any other omaments

The averall iconographic features, the bare head and the plasneity, indicate that this
atatue belongs to the first penod Providing an exact date for Fkadanta Vindyaka is more
complicated as the man is blurred by layers of sindir It should also be noted that this Nigunne
shows similaritics in form and attributes to We Ganega figures found in the Matnura Museum
(numbers 15-1180 and 18-822) ™ However, these Mathura statues are of very early date and
therefore, considering the evolution of the city south of the Rajghat plateau, it 1s passibie that
Ekadanta could be as carly as the seventh or eighth century. His present location in the
Puspadantesvara temple. a small temple in the Bengali Pela, is unusual since the slatie itself 1s
below street ievel, thus suggesting that this Vinayaka was installed there before the temple was
constructed. [lis probable that the image of Ekadanta has been in the area for a long ume and
was once worshipped in the open

II. 3. Trimukha Vinayaka (19) (page 65) "The Vinayaka with the Three Faces'
The statue is found in the Tripurantesvara temple on the Sigis whi. D $995 (Sukul 1977:358,
ason Yadaw (1907-32, plates 6 2nd 7). See also Vikatadvya Viadyaka above.

142

--- Page 144 ---
Vvds 198791). The Kas: Khanda gives seme mleresting informanon about this Vindyaka's
iconography: “The monkey-lion-clephant-faced Vighnesa named Trimukha is situated to the

north-east of Salakatankata. He is the remover of the fear of the people of Kasi! (87:82). It is |
interesting to note that the Kasi Khanda describes this Vinayaka as having three different faces \
whereas the present Vinayake is represented with three elephant taces, One might conciude

therefore that the lextof the Kasi Khanda was probabiy not used 2s a source in the construction

ofthis Vinayaka This Vindyaka is mentioned im the Tristhalisctu and in the Tirthaprakasa |r.

the Merutantra he is calied Trivadanta (verse Ovo hundred and ninety-two)

The sculpture is around sixty centimetres in height and its most striking feature is that it i
tas three trunks, one in the middie which hangs down over a potbelly and curls towards the !
night with the other two curlmg up at ether ode of the middle one. Just above these two i
sidctiunks are two protruding nodes which svinbolise the tusks. His forchead is elevated and it
looks as if tae crown and the farchead have become one. [t:s still pessible to see the indentions
of the crown an the top. The image 1s seated an a lotus with his two lower hands resting on inns
krees. The lower nght hand caries a bow! and the other one holds a book. In the two upper
ams ke carrics an axe on the right side and a totus on the left. His ears are tnanguiar and he has
wo eyes and a big third eye above the middle trunk. The ndgeyayiopavita, although not very 1
cleat but stl! vaguely present, is hung over the belly The only other ornaments, the bracelets,

. are also vague but can stil] be discerned

The shape of the head with the crown as an extension ef iw the book and the lack of
notion in the limbs date tus Vindyaka to the moder period. In the temple complex Mere is a
plaque wath an inscription which says that the temple was constructed on the seventh of March
S74. It seems likely the smage also dates from that period.?*

Ill. 4. Paficamukha or Paficisya Vinadyaka (20) (paye 66) The ‘Five-faced
Vinavaka or the ‘Vinayaka with the Five Trunks’, Banaras has several Paicamukba Vinayakas
The one belonging to the fifty-six Vinayaka group :s located ina wall on the outside of the
Pigacamocana ‘temple, C 21/40 (Sukui 1977 388 Vyas, 1987-91) The Kas: Khanda states:
hast of smanda Vinayaka is Paiicdsya Vinayaka, who has five heads and also protecta tne
ey of Kasi (57:83). Pafivasya Vinayaka is menuened in the Tristhalisets and in’ the
Tirthaprakdsa and in the Merutantra (verse two hundred and mnety-mne).

“PK Aganwa.e has described asather Tumukha Vindyaks situates sear Paficasya Venayaka na riche av the
Pigacamocana temple. He vorfuses tais Trmekha Viazyaka with the Trukha Vinavaka of Sigca and concluces.
Uaat his is tag one mmentioaed tn the Kasi Kinda Both. Trmuxha Virayakes ae very simular but there 1s nn daukt
that Use ene fn Sivra ts the Trmukla referred to in te Kranda Agarwaia (1977 (a) 184) nas giver. the thicteenth to
lourteenta century as che carhest cate of the P:Sicamocana [rimucha Vindyesxa ard is supported in this theory by
Marta:-Dubost (1997-127) Hewever, the :conmopraphical teatares da net cortespond wath: the Virayakes of te
transional periud.

143

--- Page 145 ---
The image 1s about seventy centimetres in height. The name ‘five: faced’ should here be
amterpreted as ‘having five trunks’. The middle trunk hangs straight down, with only the tip of
the trenk curling, a hettle towards the left. The ovo trunks on cither side point respectively in the
left and the right direction. The two outermost trunks are simply small curled-up versions of the
first two. Just as with Trimukha Vindyaka, the crown seems to be an extension of the forchead
It is conce:vable that the five trunks cantiaue to the top of the head The vars are sharply ,
featured and fan shaped. Pahcemukna Vinayaka is represented in the faltsana He las four |
arms, the rear arms ure sel very arlilicially against Wie body. In the upper right hand he os :
helding an axe and in the upper left hand he holds a lotus flower. The lower right hand is
resting on the knee and is hotding 2 rosary. In the fourth band he hoids a book. This Vinayaka
wears ankle uings and bracelets. On the stone base on whch he 1s seated is (he image of a rat
Because of his peculiar shape, this Vinayaka is featured us art gooks Pau. Martin- |
Dubost (1997.1 77, plate 9X) has also confused Trimukha Vindyaka with Pailcdsya Vindyaka
Underneath his photograph of Paficdsya Vinayaka, the name of Trimuxha Viniyaka is given
and he suggests that ‘its old representations are very few! Marun-Dubust dales tlus statue ty the
Jeurteenth century but he docs not provide any reasons fer this. According to the caption
beneath the photograph ut is clear that he based lus dang enbrely on PK, Agarwala's article,
Agaiwale (2977(a):155) attributes the figure to the sixteenth to seventeenth century but this ;
seems too garly The book or palm leaf manuscript and the lack of plasticity indicate that it
should not be daled earlier than the seventeenth century Its more likely thatthe statue is of the
same date as tie Pisacamocana temple which was constructed in the cighteenth century. The
crown, the lack of plasticity in the limbs and trunks ard the presence of the manuscript, togetiel
with the snowledge that the PiSacamovana temple was constructed in the eighteenth century
incicate that this Vinayaka also should be ass:gned to that period
Il. 5. Heramba Vinayaka (21) (page 67). The name Hevansba is one of the
gpitiets of Vinayaka and is related to the Tantric Vinayaka, This Vindyaka was once located in
a temple on the Valiniki gi (C2141) (Sukul 1977:359, Vyas 1987:91) but the temple
foundations collapsed during the monseon of 1996. Since then the whole ten:ple hits
disappeared, Daring a visit to the site in December 1997 the Heramba statue was nowhere to de
seen, Pandit Vyas, ma personal commurication, recalled that Heramba Vinayaka did ‘oox hke
every othe: Ganesa statue. However lasign:feant th’s information may seem, itis proof that the
Heramba Vindyaka of the fifty-ox Vindyaka group does not conferm to tie 1orographical
characteristics of Heramba as) described ay the | Riipamandana — ($:16-:7), the
Devatamiirtiprakaran (8:21) and the Sifparaina®™? which refer to Heramba as havinp five heads
and riding on a lion. Heramba Vinaya‘a is an important Tantric form of Vinayaka and h:s
Both the Rupeniandana ond Ce Devatamuntiprakaian ave cated to the fidteenth: centusy, fe Sripsiatiea os a
South tadias work dated to the siatecati cemury {Towan aud Gi yO appentiay,
1 ya

--- Page 146 ---
|

iconographic features are also described in some Tantric texts such as the Vidyarnava Tanta”
sn which Heramba 1s one of the fourteen forms of Ganesa, in the Tantrasdradhrta™ and in the
Tantasaia™ The Kasi Khanda reads ‘South-east of Munda Vinayaka is the Lord named
Ierainba whose worship benefits mothers’ ($7:84). The reference in the Kasi Khanda suggest
that Heramba did not have any Tantne connection. Sukul believes that the onginal Heramba
figure was staGioned more to the south of the city but he does not provide any support for this
beet (Sukul 1977 359). Heramba is mentioncd by the Trsthalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and the
Merutantia (verse three hundred and six).

In tignt of the nussing Heramba Vinayaka it is interesting tu ote that both Martin-
Dubost and Yadav include a photo of another: Heramba Vinayaka statue in Banaras The imdrt:
concemed is situated in Visvanath gaff and is dated by Martin-Dubost (1997-18!) as sixteenth
to seventeenth century. Yadav (1997: 37) also includes it in her work but she does not refer to
il as Heramba but as another Paftcamukha Vinayaka. The main reason why Martin-Dubest
refers to Uus image as Heramba is the fact that there is a hon at the right foot of the statue. In
Chapter Five of this thesis further details will be provided about this five faced Vinavaka figure
as itis situated in a shrine above Dhundhiraja Vindyaka and there is a controversy as to
whether this five-headed Vinayaka is Dhundh

Ill. 6. Vighnarfja VinSyaka (22) (page 68). The King of Obstacles’. Located on
the Citrakéit well, J. 12°32 (Sukul 1977:359; Vyas 1987-91). The Kasi Khanda states: 'For the
success of the wise one should worship the Ganapati named Vighnaraja who destroys all
obstacles. He is stationed to the south of Vikatadanta (57°85). Vighnariya 1s also mentioned by
the Tristhalisetu, the Tithaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse three hundred and thirty) |

This image is about cighty centimetres in hetpiit and seated in falitasana We is scaled on
a lotus seat, with the nght leg dangling over a seat His cars are smal! compered with the size of
hus head. On bis head he wears a helmet-shaped crown with a cear flower petal base. A third
eye, a gicaming modern version, 1s set in the tront of the crown. The trunk is turned towards
the left and gors upwards, as if te touch the object (probaly a imodaka) held in the lett upper
hand. His ears are rounded and rather small compared with the rest of his body. In the nght
upper hand he cames an axe The lower hands are resting on the knees and carry a rosary in the
Tramemana (1989:25-27, 33-353. Again Homumba Vindyaka as descnbed as nding on a ion, be has five heads
and ten arms in which be cartes a poad, a tosery, an axe, a modakaand tne welevwisling mudd on the right ade
and in bis left hands be cas a ident, a utace, a skull, a tusk and the protect-ve drudnt. The date of the Vidydmava
Tanta is estimated around 1726 CE.
yO Srear 1972-1973:202-204, The text is duted 10 the firet half of the euthteenth century.
or a detailed desenption, see Pal (.981-°95). ‘Che Tantasics knows two saght vanatcas ef Herbs
Nundyeka winck are deserted by the autha: The man charactenstic of Hesamba Vinayaka is that bis vehick: s.
wees ralaat a son The bon velucte as aise fund am the iconography of Ganesan Kastner, Afghams:han and

1468

--- Page 147 ---
right hand ard a book in the left, On the budy are traces af what coud be a vayfiopavita, but it
also could be a fine necklace Around his wrists are bracelets. The statue hay two small tusks
On the whole the statue is rather flat and the potbeliy does nat protrude. Apart from 2
yvapiopavita his omaments consist of some bracelets and some ankie bands,

The overall impression of this statue is that itis a mocern marty there is absolutely no
trace of auy grace yr Nexibility and the presence af the book and the lotus seat on which he is
svated dale this figure the mocerm period, Apart from die statue itself) the entire background
depicting an arch and a bell and the flowerleaf pattern at the base, is modern and car: ti!l today
be found in newly-constructed temples in Banaras

Ill. 7. Varada Vinayaka (23) (page 69). ‘The Vindyaka who grants boons or
fulfils wishes’. This Vindyaka, whose statue reveals only half of the body, is simated in a
roadside shrine on the road to Prahlad ghd, A 23-19 (Sukul 1977.458; Vyas 1987-91). The
Kast Khanda states: ‘A little to the north-west of Rajaputra Vinayaka one should do the pad of
Varad Vinayaka who gives hoons when praised with steady devouon' (57:86) The function
of Uys Vindyaka corresponds with his name and Varada’s present location vorresponds to the
location inthe Kas: Khanda. His name occurs in the Tristhafisetu and the Tithaprakasa but is
omitted trom Ihe Merutantra.

The figure is about forty centimetres 1 height and us dilapidated state suggests that it
may have Seen removed from debris and putin a new shnne. A quick glance at the statue
suggests that this arirty shares many sinularities with the svayambhd forms of the deity, such as
the ones representing the Asta Vinayakas. In fact Varada Vinadyaka shows a great resemblance
to the Siddhi Vindyaka of Siddhatck in Maharashtrs.”” Despite the fact that he is only half-

‘ represented itis hkely that he was originally depicted seated. He is bave-headed and has an
extremely bit forehead on which a modem third eye is placed. The trunk is very broad and 1s
turned towards the left. The ears are set against the back of tie head although this may also be
the result of the erosion which has occurred over the years. It appears that the statue originally
had only ovo hands and us. along with the bare head, is indicative of the first periad, to which
this statue ts here assigned,

Ill. 8. Modakapriya Vindyaka (24) (page 70). ‘The modaka-loving Vinayaka’
Situated in the Adimahadeva temple, A 3-92, at the back of Trilocana ghat. (Sukul 1977:356,
Vyds 1987-91)” ‘The relevant verse of the Kasi Khanda is: “The Ganega Modakapriya is
** Loatil tus date the Asta Vinayakas lave been only discussed as to thers socto-religious importance th
Moeharashtra No scholar has trade an attempt to date the eight svayembbu statues and thus any reference to then
has ne iconogrplical value
“"Susul cams that this Vicayaka was moved trom the Rayghat ara to its resent location (197.256), but be
docs not grovide any evidence lo support tis theory

146

--- Page 148 ---
stavianed to the south of Pranavavighnesa an the auspicious bank of the celestial river in the
Pisang:la dria” He is worthy af being adored’ ($7:87). His name is included im the
Tristhalisear, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse three hundred and sixty)

The statue is forty centimetres in height. [nts present state it scems as 1 the legs have
deen amputated from the umage. Modakapriya does nat wear a crown, dut the slight elevation
on the head indicates that he may have once had a topknot The temples and trunk bone
protrude shghtly. The trunk is sumed towards the lefi and the way itis carved suggests that it
ongimally couched a modaka pata. Because of the presence of the upper nght hand, holding an
untdentitiable attribute, it appears that Modakapriya Vinayaka was originally represented with
Your hands. The lower nght hand seems to have rested on the knee. At the left side there is no
tace left of any band or attribute. Because of its delapidated state no yayfiopavita or other
omament is visible Judging by what is visible, this statue belongs to the first: penod. The
elephantine bare head, the trunk which curls in a natural way anc the presence of the four hands.
suggest that itsiould be dated to around the tenth century

IV. 1. Abhaya Vinayaka (25). (page 71). The Protecting Vinayaka’. ‘The abhaya
is a muda symbolising ‘protection’. The statue of Abhaya Vinayaka is found im the

SOladantesvera temple on Prayaga vhag 1 18111. Abhaya is the first ef the two Vinayaka

| slaties found against the nghkt watl of the temple as one enters (Sukul 1977:357, Vyas
1987-91). The Kasi Khanda states: ‘On the dank of the heavenly river, to the north of
Vakratunda Vindyaka is Abhayaprada Vinayaka, the reassurer of those who are afraid’ (57:89).
Here the name of the Vinayaka reflects his function, and its present position which is on
Praydiga ghat aiso corresponds with the text’ However, the Siladantesvara temple in which the
image 1s setis not very old, perhaps nineteenth century (Hanshankar 1996:200) and it is clear
that Abhaya Vinayaka was placed in the temple at a later dats, thus suggesting dhal his onpina:
location was somewhere nearby. He 1s mentioned in the Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and tne
Merutantra (verse three hundzed and sixty-nine)

The image has a height of about sixty centimetres and sits in the daliGisana position. He
has a topknot on his head. The temples and the trunkbone protrude stightly. The trunk is tumed
lowards the left Because of its age, the image is quite damaged and the attributes in the four
bands are beyond recognition. However, from the position of the left lower hand it dues not
seen that the Vindyaka held 4 pet wilh sweetmeats The ears are iarge and, at bout sides of the
inaink, he scems ty have two smal: tusks. Two eyes are discernible. The feet and the potbelly are
flat and on the belly no yayiopavita can be discemed, neither are any ornaments vis:ole. Tae
stylistic features, namely the bare elephant head and the trunk which 1s twisted in a natural way
The Pisangila gtk corresponds with the area arnurd Trilecana gia’ (personal conununicanon with pandt
Vyasa)

iW

--- Page 149 ---
indicate its antiquity. Because of the four hands itis dated between the tenth and the twelfth
century.

IV. 2. Simhatunda Vindyaka (26) (page 72). ‘The Vinayaka with the Lion's
Snout. His aadirt is found m the Brahmesvara temple situated in Khalispura D 33.66. The
saluc itsel? as lucated below street level and is about forty cenumetres in height (Sukul
1977:357, Vyas 1987:91). The Kas? Khanda states: "To the north of Ekadanta is the Vinayaka
named Srmhatunda who destroys the elephants in the form of obstacles of the inhabitants of
Varanasi’ (£7 90). Despric his name meaning ‘hon's snout’ there 1s no iconographic feature
which matches this although it could be argued that the name is symbolic tor his function as the
one dealing with a mass (elephants) of calamities. His name is mentioned in the (rsthalisetu,
the Tirthaprakasa and the Menutantra (verse three hundred and seventy-seven)

The shape of Sumbhatunda's head ts very strange, as if he eriginally wore a crown which
is almost completely eroded. Alternatively, he may neve wom a head band The forehead
bulges slightly. He has two eyes which seem to be modern additns and the trunk turns
towards the lefi, touching the modaka patra. The base of the trurk is very bread and un-
elephant ike, Simhatunda is seated in the /alitésana position and is represented with four hands.
The upper ngnt hand holds a noose and the upper left hulds a lotus. The lower left hand carries

a bow! with sweetmvats and the right lower hand rests an his knee. Because of the layers of
vernulion paint it is not civar whether hie ts also helding a rosary in this hand or not. It also 1s
not possible to detect whether he originally wore a yafopavita or any ornments. The lower part
of the statue, the legs and feet, are very Cun and disproportionate

This statue is difficult to date The apparent lack of a crown could indicate that it

, belongs to the thirteenth or fourteenth century white the Qvist of the trunk and the artiticial back
arms indicates two to tiree centuries later. Accordingly, here this Vindyaka is assigned to the
thid penod

IV. 3. Kiinitaksi Vindyaka (27). (page 73). “The Vindyaka with the Closed Eyes'
The word Kania means ‘contracted, closed or shut (MW.299}. The large statue of this
Vinayaka 1s found in housg nu, $2/38 at Laksini kunda (Sukul 19772358; Vyas 1987-91). The
Kasi Khanda states: ‘In the north-castern direction of Trimukha Vinayaxa is) Kiinitaks!
Vinayaka, he is protecting the Mahagmagana from the evil eye of the wicked’ (57.91). The
Khanda does not say much about the position of this Vinayaka His name is listed in the
Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and in the Merutantra where he is named as Kupitiksa (verse
three hundred and ciphty-five)

148

--- Page 150 ---
|

The statue is about one inetre thirly centimetres in haght and is kept behind a fence.
Kunttaksi Vinayaka is seated in the /afitaésana position and wears a crown of the type Kanindis
miukuta Under Ins third eye is a silver candra bindu. He has two tusks aud his tunk 1s curved
towards the lett, the two dips of the trunk clearly visible. The wide open silver-coloured eyes are
In conuadicton to the meamug of his name. Around his belly is a prominent navaya/fopavita
and at his mght foot a litte mouse is visible. He has four hands. The upper right hand carries en
attribute which vesembles a fan. In the left hand ke 4olds a letus and the lower right hand holds
around attribute which could be either a modaka or a pomegranate. In the fourth hand he helds
a book or palm leaf mauscript. He wears ankie rings and ornaments around Ins upper aims as
well.

Kamitiksi is, without doubt, one of the most beautiful Vindyaka statucs among the fi2y-
six. The height and clarity of the carving are in sharp conwast to seme of the other damaged and
formless Vinayakas. These sharp ane clear features indicate drat the statue is not very old; the
varliest pussible date would be the ciphteenth century although the umeteenth or even the
twentieth century seem more likely. The size and detail of the statuc indicate that the artist was.
commissioned to make a statue of an ordinary Ganesa instead of ISGmtiksi Vindyaka.

IV. 4. Ksipraprasadana Vinfyaka (28) (page 74). "The Vinayaka who gives
Quick prasdda’. He 1s situated in the PitareSvara Mahadeva temple in Pilara kupda, © 18/47
(Sukul 1977:388, Vyas 1987.91). The Kasi Khanda states: 'Ksipraprasidana, stationed to the
east af Patcisya, will protect the city. Siddhis shall be quickly attained by the waiship of
Ksipraprasadana’ (57:92) This Vinayaka's ability to grant boans quickly 1s reflected in his
name. Ks:praptasddana Vindyaka 1s also mentioned in the eighteenth century Vidydrnava
Tantra where he 1s one of the fourteen fonns of Ganesa. He is there described as having four
anns, varyiig a spear in the upper right hiwid and a voose in the upper left hand. The lower
nght hand holds a lotus and the lower left a tusk. His traink holds a lemon. (Bubnemann
1989-33-35). In Banaras Ksipraprasddana Vinayaka's iconographical features, newever, do not
correspond with this text, His name is also mentioned in the Trsthaliscta, the Virthaprakasa and
the Merutantra (verse four hundred and twenty)

‘The statue is barely durty centimetres in height. The crown on his head is verucal and,
because of crosion and layers of vermilion, appears to be an extension of the head On his
forghead 1s a small moon-like crescent which protrudes shghtly. He has two small eyes and
tusks: His ears are square and set at the back of the head, carved into the background ston. The
tramk turns towards the left at an angle of minety degrees and touches the sweetmeats held by
the lower let hand. Ths upper right hand :s heiding an attribute which cannot be identified
pryperly it could be a totus or a noase. On the other side the attnbute is the axe. The lower

149

--- Page 151 ---
right hand rests on a xnee bit, as in many cases, itis not clear whether he also holds a rosary m
tus hand. The statue shows no traces of a yajnopavita ov decaralive ornaments

Without a detailed inspection af the unage it could be ezgued that this Vinayaka could
belong to the transitional period bus the vertical crown and the sharp bends in the trunk indicate
otherwise. This Vinayaka is therefore dated to the third period. possibly the sixteenth century. :

i

IV. 5, Cintamani Vinadyaka (29) (page 78) “The Wishing-Jewsl Vinayaka’. Thus a
rains frequently given to Vindyaka. In Banaras alony there are no less than Jour Cintamain
Vinayakas.”* The Cintimam statue of the fifty-six Vinavakas 1s set in a small temple on the
cast side of the Isvaraganga well, K 86/42 (Sukul 1977:359; Vyas 1987:91} ‘The Kasi Khanda
states ‘To the south-east of Heramba, Cintamani Vindyaka 1s stationed. He is like a cumtarnani
(wish-granting Stone) unto the devotees. He will directly present lo uhe devatees whatever is :
desired by them’ (57:93). His name ts also listed in the Trsthaliseti, the Tirthaprakasa and tie
Merutanta (verse four hundred aad thirty-one)

The statue is abaut one metre m height and although most of it ts covered by a clath,
some of its features are indicative of its date. This Varayaka is bare-leaded and the trunk bone
cuts oul, a feature which was fairly common by the eighth end minth centuries. Another such
example of a protruding wunk bone was found on a fifth century bala Ganeda from Badamn
(Nagar 1992:plate 2). Later examples are found in a seventh century Ganesa w:th consorts in
Mathura, an cighth century Ganesa from Biccavol and a tenth century statue from Bharatpur
(Sivaramamurti 1980-28, Nagar 1992:plate 5). Also peculiar is the fact that he is represented mm
6 position which could be descnbed as the inverse falitdsana, the le? leg is folded and pulled up,
whereas the right leg hes in front of him. He has two eyes. Despite the yellow cloth covering
up lus whole body it is possible to see that Cintémam has four arms. The attributes, however,
are unknown

The ‘ack of a crown. and the protruding trunx bone place this state in the period
between the eighth and the tenth century. Considering its reasonable height and its location in
an area where there has been a dominant Masini population for centuries ican be argued that
Cintamant is one of the rare cases which survived the upheavals of history. Tither this aniirty is
sol tig original Vinayaka, or it was hidden during the period of Muslin iconaclasm There 1s
the slight possibility, however, that the statue was brought from somewhere else, bul,
considering its size and, possibly also, its weight, it could not have been toa far away
“All four Contamam Visiyakas are mentioned ay Vyas (19872187)

(50

--- Page 152 ---
IV. 6. Dantahasta Vinayaka (30) (page 76) ‘The Vinayaka Holding his Tusk’
This Vindyaka 1s currently found in the complex of the Bade Ganega temple in Loktrya, K
$8102 (Suxul 1977359, Vyas 1987:91). The Kasi Khanda states: ‘South of Vighnaraja 1s
Dantahasta Ganesa. He puts thousands of obstacles to harass the men who hate Varanasi’
(87-94). ‘The Vinayaka 1s mentioned in the Tristhalisen:, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutsnia
(verse Zour hundred and forty) 1

The statue is about half a metre mgh and the most ebvious feature is that there 1s another .
small statue, with big white eyes, 1s seated on the lap of Vinayaka. Close examination reveais
that it is a mouse or a rat*™ This Vindyaka seems t be bare-headed with enormous cars.
However, closer inspection reveals that this Vindyaka actually unce wore a crown in the style
of the sixteenth or seventeenth century. He has ovo white eyes which are probabiy recent
additions. His trunk is hanging downwards over hs torso It sects as if the mouse is held in
the left hand wich is resting on the lap. The nght arm is brought to the face of the Vindyaka,
thas explaining its name ‘holding his tusk’. There are two more arms at the back of the statne
but because of the vermilion their attributes camel be distinguished, His position is also
difficult to detenning. It seems to be a combination of the faltasana and a cross-legeed pose. A
horizontal line seenis to divide the body inte an upper and tower part, Because of the many
layers of vermilion it !s impossible to distinguish a yayfopavefa and other ornaments,

The presenve of the rodent velucle in the hand of the Vindyaka and the thick layer of
yermilion covering the features cause a problem in dating the statue. However, the trunk and the
typical crawn wiih flower petal mouf classify this status to the third penod,

IV. 7. Picindila Vinaéyaka (31) (page 77). 'The Corpulent Vindyaka' (MW :624)
The mira is located on Prahlada ghag, outside the temple, A 10/80. The statue stands im a shrine
alongside the stars leading to the ghat and is about fifty cenumetres high (Sukul 1977:388;
Vyas 1987.91). The Kasi Khanda states: “The Lord na:ned Picindila is to the south-west of
Vaiada. He is surrounded by yatudhanas and protects the city day and night’ (57:95). He as
mentioned in the Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse four hundred and
forty-nine),

The statue 1s a mixture of styles. Vinayaka is represented standing wath legs slightly
bert in an deformed gibhanga position as itis clear that the artist did not quite manage te
represent a correctfribhanga pose. The temples bulge slightly as does the trunk bone. Elis crown
consists ofa base with flower petals, He has big cats and tie wunk turns towards the left and
touchys tne mudaka patra which is held in the left lower hand This hand seems to be resting on

* The pest of the Rade Ganesa temple detieves that the umage 1s one of Laks.
ISI

--- Page 153 ---
another figure which is also standing. The Kas: Khanda refers to these attendants as
‘yatudhanas. Here it should be noted that representations of Vindyaka-Ganesa together with
attendants was not uncammoan and are found from the sixth century onwards. The Ganesa
figure from Samalaji depicting Vindyaka-Ganega together with a gana is such an example
(Martin-Duvost 1997:266, plate $, Yadav 1997:plate 83). The lett upger hand holds a stylised
lotus flower, On the nght side the Ovo attributes are a noose in the upper hand and a round.
obrees, 2 modaka or a pomegracaty, tn the lower hang, The lower hand rests against the hip On
his lower night arin he wears an omament. The feet have ankle rings and ali the toes are visible
It is not clear however, whether this Vinayaka was oriyinally represented with a yajfopavita. At
tie right foot a small image of a mouse can be seen

Picindila Vinayaka has some characteristics of the earliest representations of Vinayaka
but the statue clearly lacks the flexibiiity of that period. The crown with the flower petal mout,
the rather aruticial looking hands and the stitf representation of the hmbs make it clear that it
should te be dated much later. [tis possible that il was sculptured at the end of the seventeenth
century but nowhere else amongst the fifty-six Vinayakas does one encounter this peculiar
mixture of feaiures. This Vindyaka is therefore assigned to the modem period with the
pessibilily that it was preduced as late as the twentieth century with the artist deliberately
anuing lo give it stylistic features of an earher great age.?" It needs to be said that the artist
mmakung this Vindyaka must have taken some information from the Ka¢: Khanda concerning the
attendants of tIus Vinayaka. [tis therefore reasonable to suggest that this Vinayaka was
conmnissioned to replace an eariier version. Although there is little doubt that the current statue
18 nedern, Mo may have been modelled on an cariiey version which also represented the
yatudhanas or demons. Prcindila leans on some smaller figures which could net properly be
idenufied and they might be these demons. The name is definitely net reflected in the
lconography of the Vindyaka, but the representauon of the club as an altribute may be an
Indication of his protective role. ‘Today the Vindyaka is situated on the bank of the river but,
since this ts not mentioned in the Kasi Khanda which usually gives a civerbank location, 1 1s
probably thal its onginal place was not on the ghdé The Prahlada ghat area was frequently
destroyed by the Muslims.

IV. 8. Uddandamunda Vinayaka (32) (page 75). ‘The Vindyvaka Carrymg a Suck
(uddanda)'. Vhe small statue of this Vindyaka 1s found at the back of the shrine of Varanasi
Devi im the Trlocana temple, 2/80 on the tep of Trilacana git (Sukul 1977356; Vyas
1987-92) ** The Kas: Khanda states: ‘On the Pilip:la fittha to the south of Modakapriya 1s
Gddandamunda Vinayaka. What is it that he does not bestow on devotees when visited”
* Paoncdila Vinayaka ss dated to the ainetceath century by VP. Sinch (1990.plate 1861
“ie cause of the sive of the statue and ts obscure position in the corner cf anatker shiine it was rot possible fo
produce a picture of this statue.

132

--- Page 154 ---
(57 96). The present position of the Vinavaka cerresponds with the information geven by the
Kasi Khanda ‘The Pilipila tirtha is the vicimty of Trilecana ghat. The iconography dacs not
correspond to the Vindyaka's name. His name is mentioned in the Tristhalisetu. the
Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse four hundred and fifty-five)

The statue is no bigger than twenty centimetres and is very damaged. ‘The form of the
head suggests that he wears a crown in the style of the sixteenth to seventeenth century. The
cars have merged with the background panel. [1 is clear that he is represented sitting but if is not
clear whether Was in the fafitasuna or just cross-legged. The trank is turned through ninety
degrees and bends Cowards the right. He has four hands, The lower nght hand is holding the
swWeelmeals and the upper one 1s holding an attribute which could be an axe. On the left side the
auributes are nut identifiable. Because of ils dilapidated state itis also impessible to determine
whether there was originally a yaylopavita

The vague contuurs of the crown suggest that the stzme should probably be dated later
than the seventeenth century. The sharp bends im the Wink Turther cuphasis ths. However,
since it cannat be decided whether this statue 1s seventeenth. or, rather early eighteenth-century,
itis here classified as belonging to the fourth period.

V. 1. SthOladanta Vindyaka (33) (page 79). “Windyaka with the Thick Tusk’ The
very damaged statue of this Vinayaka is found on Min Mandir gaat, ia little temple in number
1D 16°34 (Sukul 1977.357, Vyds 1987:92). In the Kasi Khanda :t 1s written: The ganegana
nained Sthiladanta is stationed on the bank of the heavenly river to the north of Abhayaprada
To the good he besiows enormous success’ (37 98). The geographical information pravided by
the Kasi Khanda is sill valid: the iconographical features, Sowever, do not correspond ta his
name. His function as the bestewer of success is unspecified. He is also mentioned in the
Tristhalisent, the Tithaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse four hundred and sixty-one).

The statue ts about thirty centimetres high and xs the most damaged of all the fifty-six
Vindyakas. Although the finga in. the temple is suil worshipped, the Vinayaxa is not venerated
anymore, possibly because of its dilapidated state. The only feature suggesting this was a
Vinayaka is the puthelly and even this has been cut in half. The trunk 1s chopped off and the
cars have also disappeared. The figure is seated in the Jalitésana position with the right hand
resang on the knee. This hand may have orginally held an aksemalg. The lef hand also rests on
the ‘nee. It is not clear wheiher this Vinayaka statue has Qvo or four hands, but if the shght
bulging above the nght hand was once a hand er an arm, then itis possible that he kad four
hands. Because of the damaged state of the statue, it ts futile to try and delernune whelher ie
also Wears a yaysopavita and other ornaments

1823

--- Page 155 ---
The damaged state of this Vinayaka makes it difficult to date but it certamiy Jacks the
plasticity of the first phase, The contours of the belly and the Innbs suggest what it could
pass:hly belong to the sixteenth or seventeenth century, and it 1s therefore provisionally
assigned la the third period

V. 2. Kalipriya Vinayaka (34) (page 80), The Vindéyaka who is Fond of
Quarrelling’. This Vinayaka 1s located in the Manaprakamesvara temple, situated 11 a small alley
opposite Saksi Vinadyvaka D 10/50 (Sukul 1977:357; Vyas 1987-92). The Kasi Khanda states:
‘North of Simbhatunda is the Vinayaka Kalipriya who creates natural quarrels for those who
harass the pilgrims’ (57:99), He is mentioned by the Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakdsa and the
Merutantra (verse four hundred and seventy-two),

| The state ts about twenty centimetres in height and is scated in the aftasana poston.

| The statue 1s heavity smeared with sindar, making identificativn of the different atinbutes
difficult, He is bare-headed bee the temples and the protruding trunk bone are clear. The
contours of the ears are sharp. The trunk turns tawards the right and seems to be holding a
modaka. A similar feature is also found in the statue of Kitadanta Vindyaka (Appendix, page
$6) The trunk is preimnent, thus creating the impression that i Was made at a fairly early slage
put the position of the trunk contradicts this, This Vinayaka nas four anns, holding an axe and 2
jotus flower tn the upper right and let hand The lower hands both rest on thre knees but the
attnbutes are obscure. The uneven surtace of the stone on the left leg makes it appear as if he
holds a rosary on that side. The rough surface zlsa makes U difficult to discern a yaphopavita or
any other ornaments,

Beture entering the temple, there is anoler Vingyaka statue in a shrine near the
entrance. His features are also to be dated to the sixteenth or seventeenth century The trunk
tunsts towards the right, he wears a distinctive crown with flower petals on the base and has
four hands, halding an axe and a lotus in the upper hands and the two lower hands are placed
on the knees. Some local residents believe that this statue is the ‘real’ Kalipriya Vindyaka
However, as the location of the fifty-six Vindyakas is established according to the work of
Vyasa and Kedarnatha, the state in the temple is considered to be the one that belongs to the
group of fifty-six.

The lack of flexibility in the statue, together with the upwards-going trunk and the
disconnected back arms suggest that this miirti cannot be dated before the sixteenth century and
itis therefore assigned to the third period.

Vv. 3. Caturdanta Vindyaka (35) (page 81). ‘The Vinayaka with the Four Tusks’
This pecuhar stame, unique amangst its kiné, is found im a niche outside the temple of the

154

--- Page 156 ---
Sandlanadharma schoo] on Nayi Sarak, D 49/10 (Sukul 1977 358, Vyas 19%7:92). The Kasi
Khanda slates: ‘The Vindyaka named Calurdanta is on the north-east of Kumtaksa. Masses of)
obstacles shali disappear merely by visiting this Lord’ (§7°!06). His name is mentioned in the
Tristhaliser, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse tour hundred and cighty-three)

The statue is not more than forty centimetres high and represents Vinayaka with four
tusks On the right side two can clearly be disunguisied. There appears to be another in the
auddle and a fourth one on the left side of the face. On his head he wears a crown. From the
contours of the crown itcan be assumed that itis a typica! sixteenth: to severtcenth-century
made, namely a fine base with a flower-petal structure on lop of if, The ears are iriangular and
rather small. Caturdanta Vindyaka 1s depicted cross-legged and his torsy has a well-defined
appearance. Jt is clear trom the way the body is shaped that the Vindyaka never had a potbelly
He has four arms but the attnbutes of the upper aris are not idenutiable: possibly a lotus
ower and an axe, but there ts no proof for this. Both lower arms rest on his nevus, giving the
Lupression that he is meditating. It seems as if he is holding a resary in the right hand but the
surface of the stone is so rough that itis difficult to be certain, The surface also makes at
mmpossible to state whether the Vinayaka inay heave been wearing a yasfopavita ur other
ornaments. On the base the vague contours of a mouse are discernible

| Whereas Agarwala (1977) includes several peculiar forms of Vindyakas, he does not
inention Caturdanta. Martin-Dubost, en the other hand, Gevotes a small paragraph to four-
headed Vinayaxa-Ganesa statues.*” According to him, references to four-faced ar ‘wiht
Ganapatis are found in the Ajitaganna (Patale 1.¥, sloka 7). Vidki Ganapati symolises the four
Vedas, the day of Ganesa's birth and Ins worship on the fourth of bhadrapad. The Ajitigama
deseribes the attributes as being the palin-leat manusezipt. the rosary, the staffand a kamandalu.
The only recogmsable attribute of the Banaras image of Caturdanta Vinayaka is the rosary

A reference to Caturdanta Vinayaka already occurs in the twelfth century in the
Tirthavivecana Khanda of Laksmidhara”™ but it is civar that Laksimidhara cannot have referred
lo [ts particular image of the Vinayaka because the crown and the shape of the head are typical
for the sixteenth to seventeenth centuries. Here this Vindyaka ts assigned to the third period.

7 As scent in the case af the Patcamukina Vindyaka, the tusk of the deny efter alsa represents the head fn this
vase, the four-tusked Viniyaka can equally be regarded as a fuareteaced Vinayaka
the Viata Kbanda of the KKT (pages 84-87) quotes fton: a reference 19 tie, Namstmha Purdna about the
Ganesa Caturthy satis. Hereby Ganega is desezbed as aasing one. two er four heads ard as having four arms,
(Kane 1968 1974, volume Vo 149)

155

--- Page 157 ---
Vv. 4. Dvimukha Vinadyaka (36) (page 82). "The Two-faced Vindyaka’. His statue
Is set in the wall of a temple at the edge of Siirya Kunda, namber 1) 51°90 (Sukul 1977.35%,
Vyds 195?:92), The Kasi Khanda states: East of Ksipraprasadana is Dvitunda who shines with
such lustre both trem the front and from the back’ (87-101) The present Dvimukha Vinayaka
does nut correspond to the above quotation cither in name or in characteristics. Dvnnukha ts
aise mentioned in the Tristhalrseta and the Tirthaprakasa. The Merutantra mentions him under
the uame of Dvilundaksa (verse four hundred and ninety-five)

This doubie-faced Vindyaxa is not more than forty centimetres bigh. Dvimukha
Vinayaka is very damaged and it is necessary to look closely to see that it is indeed a
representation of the elephant-faced god. The two faces are not very clear bul the two lrunks al
both sides suggest a double face. The elevation of the head and the varving of lines indicate that
he 1s wearing a crown. He is seated in the lotus position. Of the four arms only three are clear
the lower left arm is indistinguishable from the body of the statue. In his upper right hand he
holds an axe and the lower one rests on his knees. The upper left hand seems to hold a lous
flower The way the lower right hand falls over the nee suggests that he may have held an
aksamalg, but if this was so then the contours of the rasarv have eroded. The two back arns
sccm to be disconnected from the body This Vindyaka is represented with a protruding belly
on which a yajiopavita cannot be discerned. From the hands and the teet itdues nat look as if
dus Dvimukha Vindyaka ever wore arkle rings or bracelets

Beeause of the disconnected back arms, the style of the clown and the lotus position,
the date suggested for this Vindvaxa is the third period, possibly the sixteenth or seventeenth
century This dating agrees with that advanced by P. K. Agarwala (1977 (a):154) and by M. N
Tisear: (personal communication). Martin-Dubost (1997-177), however, believes that the
statue can be dated to the fourteenth century, but since the static dees not have any transitional
features this proposed date scems very unlixely. The author dues nut provide any proof for tus
statement

V. 5. Jyestha Vindyaka (37) (page $3). "The Eldest Vindyaka'’, (The name jyestha
has several meanings, for example ‘the best’ as well as ‘the eldest’), The statue is situated in one
of the wails of the Jyesthesvara temple in Kagipura, K 62.144, and is coated with bright
cocoured paint (Sukul 1977:389; Vyas 1987:92). The Kasi Khanda states. “The Ganadhyaksa
DK Agarwala besteves that the atuibure held by Ds imukita Venayaka mn the upper feft band tsa mafake er
tadisi ox a oteken tcoth (1977 (a):154).

*” Professer Tiwari lives on the edge of Staya kunda and 1s well aware of the annquity ot seme of the stone
semams around the kunda Siuarly to Laksori kunda, the remems around Surya Aunea are as ald as the mith o:
tenth century A picture of same solar disks cat be found in Bex (1993 '81)

156

--- Page 158 ---
named Jyestha is the eldest of my numerous sons Ile is stahioned to the seuth-east of
Citamant Vindyaka. For the acquisiton of surpassing exceltence he should be well adored on
the fourteenth day m the bright half of Jyestha’ (S7:102-103), Elis nains is mentioned in the
Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse four hundred and ninety-five),

The statue is about torty centimetres high and on his head the Vindyaka is wearing a
very modest crown which has the farm of a cap. He stands in the gybhanga position and leans
ona club. His head is shghtly tamed and his trunk, Ranging over Ins belly, 1s curled tawards
the night He only bas two arms and the teft hand carries a round atuibute, possibly a modaka.
His right hand leans on the club He has two eves and fan-shaped ears. His body 1s siender.
The folds of the cloth draped over his shoulder, failing beside the club, are a noticeable feature.
Foids are also visible on the left thigh and between the legs. The strong colours give this figure
a modera look out the oybhanga position, the two anns ard the leang on the club indicate that
tLis a very old statue which 1s overpainted. In the Dhubela museum there is a similar statue of
the tenth century and at is possible to argue theretare that Jyestha Viniyaka is from the same
period (A. Banerp: 1993.13). The antiauity of Jyestha Vindyaka was aiso confirmed by MN
Tiwan, Mrs Ko Giri and Mrs Devangana Desai (personal commumeation) Jyestha Vinayaka
greatly resembles a Ganesa and Sakti figure from Dhaud (Rajasthan, tenth century). ‘The crown
and the stances are the same, but the Dhaud statue js attended by a Sakti figure on the left side
while Gie lower right hand seems to caress a smaller yaksa figure at the right side (Martm-
Dubost 1997-181, plate $6).

V. 6. Gaja Vindyaka (38) (pave 84). The Flephant Vinayaka’. This Vinayaka is
lucated in the Raja Darwaza area, in the Rharbhitesvara temple number 54°44 (Sukul 1977.359;
Vyas 1987-92). The Kasi Khanda reads: ‘To the south of Dantahasta Vindyaka is Gaia
Vinayaka. By worshipping him devoutly, prosperity in elephants will be attained’ ($7:10-4). Mis
name oceurs in the Tristhaliseta, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse four hundred and
sunety-five),

' The statue 1s Curty-five centimetres high and partly damaged. On his head he wears a
lopknet, The ears merge with the background panei and the eves are very deep, suggesting Urat
the statue has been covered by tayers of vermition paint. The trunk terns towards the left and
probably once louched the swesnneats but the left hand holding lie modaka patra is eroded. In
the upper left hand he hoids an unidentifiable object. On the right side the simation is equally
ebscure The upper right hand's attribute could be anything from an axe to a lotus of a pasa. The
tower hand and arm merge with the body but it could possibly be resting on the knees. Whether
this Virsivaka is in fotus position or in the afitasana is unclear tn genesai it can be said thal the
statue lacks plasticity, Lhe smooth surface of the Vinayaka suggests that he does not wear a
yaniopavita or any omaments.

(57

--- Page 159 ---
Dating this Vindyaka is difficult. The topknat and its damaged condition suggest that he
belongs to the first period, but the turning of his trunk and the tack af plasticity in the limbs
indicate a later origin ere this Vindyaka 1s assigned to the turd period. |

Vv. 7. Kala Vinadyaka (39) (page 85). The Black Vinayaka’. This sixty centimetre H
high statue 1s found under a tree desides the staircase leading to Raina ghat, in front of house K
24/10 (Sukui, 1977-355; Vyds 1987-92) The Kasi: Khanda states ‘ala Vinayaka is to the
south of the Ganapati named Picindila. By resorting to him, men will not be afraid of the dark’
(57-105). The name of the Vinayaka explains its function as the one who overcomes the
darxness of death. Kala Vindyaka’s present position is south of Picindila, although the statue
has defintely been inoved. [t has been argued by Sukul that his origuial posiiion must have
been between Prahlada ghat and Gola ghat. Again, no evidence for this statement is given
Another reference in the Kass Khanda states: ‘Beyond it is the Kalaganga that destroys the sins
of the Kait Age. A sensible man who dathes there becomes rid of s:ns instantly’ (KKH 84:67)
Sukui belicves that the reference to the Kalaganga tirtha alse indicates the position of Kala
Vindyaka, namely that the latter was already located in his present position at the time the
Khanda was written (Suxul 1977:356). The Vindyaka is also mentioned by the ‘trsthalisetu,
the Tirthaprakdsa and the Merutantra (verse four hundred and ninety-*1x).

The figure of Kala Vinayaka ts one ef those belonging to the first pened. His current
pos:ton under the tree is probably nut the orizmal location He stands in the fribhanga position
without a crown but with a lupknol. The head is shaped like that of an elephant. with the
iemples slightly pretruding and the trunk is turned towards the lefl and louches the moduka
patra herd by the {eft hand. His nght arm rests on a club or a thick sick. In comparison with his
torso the iegs are short and dwarfish. He wears a loincloth of which the folds are visible just
below the knees. His cars are big and fan shaped. The whole setting of this Vindyaka, the arch
above his iad and the ove piliars besides hum, give the impression that this mdr has been
taken from a larecr work Here there is some sinularity with Gajakarna Vindvaka (see supra)

The dwarlish appearance, the wo arms and the curves of the body classify this figure
as belonging to the first period, around the ninth or tenth century Plate seventy-nine i the
Yadav's work (1997) shows a similar statue in the Wibhanga pose which ts dated to the :unth
century

V. 8. Nigesa Vindyaka (40) (page X6) ‘Lotd of the Snakes’ Located in the
Nagesvara temple on Bhonsla ghat (Suku! 1977:356; Vyas 1987-92). The Kast Khanda slates:
‘The devotee is huneoured in the Nigaloka by visiting the Ganapa named Nagega stationed in the
southern direction from the Vinayaka Uddandamunda’ ($7:106). Currently the Nagesa temple is

188

--- Page 160 ---
situated on Bhonsla ghat but originally this temp!e. and probably alse the Vinayaka, were in the
Nagega drtha, which 1s now Mehta ghae"" (Sukul 1977:356) The temple in which Nagesa
Vinayaka is situated is a very small structure which does not scem to pe very old. He 1s
mentioned in the Tristhafisetu, the Mrthaprakasa and the Meratanira (verse tour hundred and
Inety-$ix)

The forty centimetre hugh statue has all the characterisucs of a recent statue. The crown
or his head is stylistically late with the base represenung flower petals. Just under the crown 1s
a pearl Aead band. The temples protrude slightly as does the trunk bene. His trunk is turned
towards the right and touches the modakas in the right lower hand. In the ight appe: hand he
carnes an axe. The two other attributes at the ied side are a iotus flower and a rosary in the
rower hand which rests on the knee. Across his belly is a nagayajhopavita: He has two cyes
and fan-shaped ears. Apart from the fine pearl head band he does uot scem ty have any other

ornainents.

The black polished stone, the civar contours of the attributes, the crown and the shghtly
stutened position leave no doubt that this statue belongs to the eighteenth: or nineteenth century.

VI.“ 1. Manikarna Vinadyaka (41) (page &7) The Vinayaka owes its name to the
location where itis situated, 2m the vicinity of Manicanmka ghat The Vindyaka is in a shrine
next ty the slarease leading to the place where woed is stored for tae burming ghats (Sukul
1977:336; Vyas 1987:92). The Kasi Khanda states: The Vinayaka named Manikarna is the
destioyer of obstacles in the gast’ ($7:108). Whereas in the descriptions of the previous
Vinavakas there was some indication of thei relative location, this no longer applies te the
Vinayakas of the sixth and seventh circles. The position of Mamkarna in the cast of the city
corresponds with the text, hawever. The Vinayaka is mentioned by the fristhalisen: the
Tirthaprakdsa but is omitted by the Merutantra.

The statue is just under one metre lugh, and wears a detachable silver crown. His head
turns awkwardly towards the right. The base of the wunk is very broad and beside the trunk are
two smal] tusks. [he ears are rectangular aid his eves are large and set against the slopes ef his
cheeks Because the eyes are white it can be assumed that they were a recent addition to the
statue The trunk is twisted towards the right and holds a modaka. He has four arms In the
" Unti, 1960 Melia ghat was part of Rama ghat but wits the construction of the Mehta hosp:tal on the ghut the
name changed, The ghat does not have any great reuigio.ts enpertance today (Hanshanket 1996 70)

The descnption of the Vinayakas ef Fe sixth circle is different from that of the others. Whereas to: ze other
cisles tag Aasi K handa always starts with, the Vinayaka on the south easter) direction, the sixth cire.e stars with
lie Vindywka itt the eastern diestion (Mantkaina Virayakay

159

--- Page 161 ---
upper right hand he holds an axe and in the upper left he cares a lotus flower. The lower right
hand rests on his knee and the lower left grasps a palin Jeaf manuscript. The two back arms
seem to be disvomiected from the rest of the body. He is seated in the Jaditdsana position and
wears ankle rings on his feet. Because of the rough surface iC cannot be discemed whether this
Vinayaka was depicted with a yajhopavita and aay other ornaments.

This Vinaéyaka cannot be dated caries than the exgiateenth century. This 1s not only
supported by the presence of the manusenpt, but also the disconnected back anns

VI. 2. AS& Vindyaka (42) (page 8k). ‘The Vindyaka of Hope’. The status of Asa
Vinayaca, about one metre ligh, 1s situated at the back of the Hanuman temple on Mir ghat, '
number £) 3/59 (Sukul 1977:357; Vyas 1987:92). The Kasi Khanda states’ 'ASa Vinayaka 1s
stationed in the south-east and is fulfilling the hopes and desires of the devotees’ (57:108). The i
name of the Vinayake corresponds with his function as “the granter of wishes’ His shrine as :
frequently visited by the many pilgrims. His name is mentioned in the Tristhaliset: and the
Titthaprakasa but, like Manikama Vinayaka, he is omitted from the text of the Menutantra.

Asa Vinayaka is a very popular Vinayaka in the religious life of Banaras, He is depicted
an the fafrtasana position. His bead :s pointed which may midicale that under the lavers of sindéir
there is a small crawn or a topkuut. On special occasions a detachable silver crown is put on his
head. His ears ate stall compared to his head. The dunk turns tawards the right and does not
couch anything. Ou his forehead 1s a candrabindu made of silver. The god has four hands but
the attributes have become obscured under the layers of paint. The ght upper hand is holding

; something which could be an axe or stylised lotus flower The lett side is very unclear but it

seems that the lower left band rests on the knee, maybe even holding a resary. The whole statue
is rotund: the trunk ts round as are the legs. The smooth surface leaves no doubt that the
Vindyaka is not wearing a yayfiopavita or any ormaments, although every day the god is bathed
and smeared wth vernulion, after which he ts adored with a real yayfopavita and a dhow. On
special occasions he aiso wears a detachadly silver crown. Earlier, when discussing Durga and
S:ddhi Vinayakas, was suggested that they were copies of Asa Vindyaka. Having completed
the descriptions of these three Vindyakas itis clear that there are very few similarides between
the three except that all three are statugs of over a metre in height.

The size of the statue, as well as the tori of the trunk and the general roundness of his
linbs, indicates that it belongs to the moder period, that is the nmeteenth or even the twentieth
century

VI. 3 Srsti Vina@yaka (43) (page 89). The Vinayaka of Creation’. This: sinali
Vinayaka statueis sel ura wall near house number D 83 in Kalika galt (Sukul (977.357; Vyas

160

--- Page 162 ---
1987:92). The skrine is always locked but in December 1997 a marble plaque was placed under
the shrine wath an ode lo Hanuman, thus giving (he impression that the red face peering out
froma behind the clot is the god Hanuman. The Kasi Khanda states ‘Srstiganesa in the south is
she indieator of creation and annthilation’ (57:109). This snort cetercnce in the text does not
offer any clarification with regard to his name nor with regard te dis exact locauon. His name 3s
mentioned in the Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse four hundred and
ninety-seven).

A white garment covers all but the face of Srst: Vindyaka. ‘Lhe features underneata are
very vague and eroded, A large third cye is glued to the forzhead but it dees not appear that the
god Is Wearing a crown. The trunk tums towards the left. The ears are disproportionately large
The vague contours suggest that there was an ann on the right side, hanging at the side of the
belly, but other arms or hands have disappeared in the layers ot veriulion, therefore making it
difficult to guess whether there were four or two arms. Equally itis mnpossible to say whether
or not he was originaily depicted with a yajfopavita or other emaments. From what is visiale of
the lower part of the statue it would appear this Vindyaka 1s silting cross-lepged. The blurred
feanzres inake if very difficult to establish a date for this statue and hence itis here classified as

] undatable

VI. 4. Yakga Vindyaka (44) (page 90). Banaras has several Yaksa Vinayakas™
put the one belonging to the fifty-six Vindyaka group ts hidden m a house in the Kotwalpura
area in house number K 37:29 on Rudra Praydg (Suku} 1977-348, Vyas 1987:92). The Kasi
Khanda states: 'Yaksa Vinayaka is in the south-west and is the destroyer ef all obstacles. He 1s
ths greatest of them all' ($7:109). The role attributed to this Vindyaka :s the pencral function of
Ganesa. His name is mentioned by the Tristhaliseta, (he Tirthaprakasa and the Merutantia
(verse four hundred and nincty-seven).

The slatue is about eighty centimetres in heiht and has teatures of oth the first and the
second period, thus indicating that :t was probably carved at a period when the skills of earher
“The Yaksa Vinayaka delonging to the fifty-six Vingyakas is avt very well-known in today’s Banaras as ils
shrine is not ops te the pubsic. Tae Vindyaka which “as becca Cainous under tre name of Yaksa Vinayaka is
vae af the Paticamukha Vindyaxas which is situated near Dhundh:caja (see afte).
© Sule) wiites that the Vinayaka was worstupped for some Unie bu: Lica there seem to have been & provlem ant
ssersiry ceased (Sukal 1977 28h) The Kotwalptta area fas always beer a very volatie crea m terms ct
cestnictions and reconstauctons. Ut was searby thatthe fast Vigvaitha mardi vas destroyed and later rebuilt
Becarse of this histo: cal situation :: is difficult to beheve that the statue ws the enyinal one alGiough its possib.c
that it survived because 1 was well ludden Sull, ts present date suggests Crat this one might be 2 replacement of
the th. teenth or fousteenth century far the one which was Crere befor.

lal

--- Page 163 ---
tines still prevailed The Vindyaka :s bare-headed and the lorehead and the trunk bone have the
natural style of the carly statues The trunk tummy towards the left and touckes the sweetmyats
held in the lower left hand. The ears are fan shaped and the veins are visible. He is seated in tie
Jafitasana position with lus tower nght hand resting on his knee. Whal he holds in Ge upper
hands is not very clear but on the left side it seems almost as if the attribute was cut off to make
the state fit inte the space, The surface of the miint is very smooth and there is no trace of a
yamopavita or any other ornament. In comparison will: the upper part of the body, especially
the face, the legs are slender and oddly shaped. 1

This statue, in combining features of the first (the bare head and the naturally curled
unk) and the second period (the two back hands no longer with the flexibility of the first
period and the legs without any plasticity at all), 1s a good cxample of the transitonal style of
(ae fourteenth century

VI. 5. Gajakarna Vinayaka (44) (page ¥1). “The Vindyaka with the Elephant
Lars’. Taus Vindyaka is situated in the Kotwalpura area, in the [sanesvara temple number C.K :
37-43, behind the Bhanspatak cinema (Sukul 1977-358, Vyas 1987-93), The Kas: Khanda I
states. ‘Gajakama in the west ts the cause of we'fare to all’ (57:110). He is mentioned by the
Tristhalisetu, the Lirthaprakasa and the Merutantra (verse four hundred and ninety-seven)}

The figure is small, about twenty-five centimetres high, and is bare-headed. With the
sughuy protruding temples and trunk bone, the head resembles that of an elephant: Besides the
frank there ate two small tusks. The trunk hangs downwe:ds over tae belly and is shghtly
surved towards the right. It resembles Kala Vinayaka in the sense that it also stands in the
fibhanga position, the right hand leaning on a club and the lett hand holding a flower in the
Tonn of a solar disk. Between the legs the folds of the dhom can be seen. On the right upper arm
there 1s a band: this could either be an ornament worn on the epper arin, or it could be the fold
of a scarf as itis on Jyestha Vindyaka (see smfray

Stylisucaily this Vinayaxa clear'y delongs te the first period. Gajakarna Vinayaka is a
classic caample of cary Vinayaka statues standing, in the erbhaniga position, only two arns
and a very elephantine head. ‘The image of Gaiakarna is carved on a small miniature temple or
sivala which is very similar to those found around Laksmi and Strya kunda (see Chapter
Three). This emphasises the antiquity of the Vindyaka :drii and adds to the probability that this
Vinayaka was originally situated elsewhere in the neighbourhood

VI. 6. Citraghanta Vindyaka (46) (page 92) "The Bel! Vindyaka’. The locauon of
Cus Vinayaka :s problematic. Both Vyas (1987-93) and Sukul (1977:359) give two possible
sites for the present Citraghauta, Sukul does not believe that either of fhe two sites és correct.

162

--- Page 164 ---
The two places where Citraghanta Vinayaka can be found are: first, in the Ram Kua area, near
Uke temple of Ciwaghanti Devi, number 23/34 and second in CAandani Cauk,** house number
CK. 23/25. In the Kasi Khanda is wnitten. ‘The Ganapati named Citraghanta protects the cny 19
the north-west’ (57.110) The positions of both of the two possible Cutraghanta Vinayaka ars in
the uorth-west of the city. Citraghanta is mentaned in lie Tristhalisetu, the Tirthaprakasa and
the Merttantra (verse four hundred and ninvty-seven).

The first locator is a roadside shrine A plaque indicates the presence of Citraghanta
Vindyaka but the statue is litle more than a mound wills two white eyes, Next to it stands a
similar image, again shapeless and with two eyes. The door of this shrine is always locked.
‘This and the fact that the statue is nothing more than a heap of red sindér are the reasons why
no picture is reproduced in the Appendix.

The second possible location is ina shrine on the road just before the actual Cauk. The
statue is about forty centunetres in height and vis with some difficulty that 1 can be seen that
dus isa Vinayaka The head is high and round and it is net clear whether he ever wore a crown,
The trunk is projected and a gap Jurther down the trunk suggests that it might have curled
towards the nght** On either side of the trunk are the eyes which: are set deeply im the head.
The vague shape of the rest of the statue suggests that the figure probably had four anns but
due to the layers of vermilion a‘l the attributes are blurred and unidentifiable, as is the stance
Apart trom a few silver papers which decorate the mdrti, there are no Lraces of any ornaments.
A real yapiopavita seems to be ted around the neck of this Vindyaka, possibly suggesting that

! one is not carved on the statue.

| ‘The position of the trunk could suggests a late date for this statue so here itis assigned
la the moderna penod, Some peuple beheve that this Vinayaka is the acntally Sthilaiangha
Vinivaka (sve supra)

VI. 7. Sthilajagha Vinayaka (47) (page 93). ‘The meaning of the name is
ubscure. The identity and location of this Vinadyaka are problematc. No less than four
Vinavakas are suggested as the ‘teal’ Sthalajangha Vindyaka. On visiting the four different sites
it is vasy to conclude that nene of these are the authentic amage. The area in which ths
Vinayaka 1s supposed to have been located was, and is still, densely populated by Muslims (sce
Chapter Ong). It 1s interesting also that the nineteenth-century guide books to the different
"This Location is also accepted by the Kasisthidevasmama vali page VV
"8s sLghtly similar gay representing tsc and truck is Zeund :n the statue of Kaltpriya Venayaka {Append:x,

Daye 80)
163

--- Page 165 ---
yatas of the city do not agree on this Vinayake either. “7 The Kasi Khanda states: ‘In the nortis
SthGlajangna subdues the sins of those who control the minds’ (S7:111) Has name ts
micnhoned by the Tristhalisetu and the Tirthaprakasa but it is ormtted in the Merutantra
Some peaple believe that the location of this Vinayaxa 1s in ihe Mangala Gauri temple, a
position which is definitely wrang because there only is one figure of a Vindyaka in that temple
and thal is believed to be Mangala Vindyaka (sce supra) Another theory is that Sthilajangha
Vinayaka is located near Cauk and is the same figure as the aforementioned Ciwaghanta
Vinayaka Others have suggested that his satirtiis tound in the Pasupausvara temple but there
are (wo Vinayaka mdrtis there and no one has suggested which of the two is Slafangna
However, 11 a personal communication Vyds suggested that the larger of the Wwo 1s
Stalajangha. A fourth suggestion made by Sukul is that Stilaangha is to be found im a wali of
the Asddhisvara temple in Raya Darwaza (1977:359). The Vinavaka there 1s very modern.
Because Mangala Vinayaka wil be described next and Citraghanta Vindyaka has just
deen Cescribed, the following iconogiaphical description wall oe luted to the statues in the
Pasupalisvara (the sindfra-simgared one) and the Raja Darvaza temple If the statue of
Sthélajanghe Vindyaka 1s to be found in the Pasupatiévara temp'e then there is a choice hetween
Wo indrtts. The larger of the (va, about one metre high, shows a hare-headed Vindyaka carved
with a big halo around his head. The head 1s old with the trunk bone siightly protruding and the
trenk curled towards the left. On the p of the tusk he carvies a medaka. This movement of the
uunk is cisewhere found in Kitadanta Vinayaka and Kahpnya Vinayaka. The base of the unk
ty also very broad He is seated in the /alitisana and his legs are very thin compared with the
resi of the body: it almost looks as if the weight ef tie upper body has squeezed his legs. On
the right side there 1s a big tusk visible The cars are large and clearly ourlmed He has four
aims, Wearing ormaments on ail of them. The upper right hand seems to be formed into a fist.
The upper left hand is shghtly damaged but could be holding a noose or a lotus flower. Both
the lower hands rest on the knees. No yajfopavita can be seen over the vast belly.
‘The strangely shaped limbs and the somewhat attificial back arms date this statue no
carher tian the eighteenth century, The size of the slatue confirms this penod.
" Widnas? Adeese (paye 89) iocates Sthilalanyha Vindyaka en Bala ghar, in the Mangala Gaun temple, ar
argument wich os agreed upon by the author of Panezktoss Ydteu (page $4) The Kadsvatra (page 2) argues that
daly Vindyake 1s on Paficaganga. closeby Mangala Gaur: His name is also Mitra Vindyaka. Mangala Vinayasa 1s
paced, net: the Manga'a Gaun temple but in the Aumaviresvara temple, according ta the same source.
Kisisthade asmamavali and: Kasiprakdsa do not mention any dificaltes concern the location of Sthilajangha
Viniyaka,
"ST: Fnul:sh tanslauon of the Kasi Khunda by Tagare onuts this Vingyaka aad considers Mina Vindyaka as
the exghth Vinayak on the sixt1 eircte
1
16% |

--- Page 166 ---
To the left of this Vinayaka there is another smaller one, some forty centimetres high,
which seems to be older. The head is high and the shape suggests a crown The eyes are
modern and placed at the beginuing of the truns, one cys functioning as the third eye. His ears
are sinall and rectangular. ‘The trunk turns towards the nght and touches the sweetmeats held by
the ght hand on the knee In dis upper mght hand he holds an axe. The upper ‘cf hand holds
an unidentifiable attribute and the lower hand rests on the knee, halding a rosary. The figure is
cep:cted in the falitasana

The headgear end the position of the trunk, as well as the lack of plasticity, date this
statue to the sixteenth or seventeenth century and therefore it is here assigned to the third
period

The statue found in Raya Darwaza is very modern and well carved. [tis made from a
black shiny stone and dypicis the Vindyaxa sitting between two consorts waving a fly witisk,
Tis crown Is elaborate with a base of preciuus stones and fiower petals above. On lis forehead
a candi bindu can be observed above which a jewel holds a pearl hair band. The trunk is
turned towards the right and holds a modaka The wuak hes inthe right hand which rests on the
knee. In the upper right hand he carries a lotus flower. The lower left hand rests on the knee
wid dolds a paun leaf manuscript. The upper arm carries the axe. The Vinayaka sits in the
filitaésana with the folds ef his dho& anauged between his iezs. Around his neck he wears
several pear] necklaces and around his feet and wrists he also has ornamems. His two consorts
are standmg and both wear a dhow tied between their legs. The Sakti on lus right side alsy holds
acup in her free hand while the other one holds a wine yar. The Vinayaka is seated on a Jotus
seat and at his nght foot is a small mouse

VI. 8. Mangala Vindyaka (48) (page 94) “The Auspicious Vindyaka’. The statue
of Mangala Vinayaka is found in the Mangala Gauri temple on Bal ghar (Sukul 1977:355;
Vyas 1987:92) The Kasi Khanda veads: ‘In the north-castern corner is Mangala Vinayaka who
muuntais and protects the cily' (57:12)."* Manpala Vinayaka is mentioned in the Tristhalisent
and the Tirthaprakasa but is omitted in the Merutantra

The figure itself stands behind a Devi statue and cannot be seen when entering the
temple Because of the position of the statue it was impossiale to take a photograph so only 2
sketch is provided in the Appendix. His position aidden behind a Dewi shrine does not seem to
be of any significance. The Mangala Gauri temple ts the oldest tempie on Bal ghdf and unul the
construction of the Bal ghdftempte in the beginaing af the Wwenteth century the whole ghdt was
called Mangala Gaur ghat. The text of the Girvanapadamaijari (sixteenth century) and
Prinscp's accounts demonstrate that the Mangala Gaur ghat was well known inthe iate
medieval period (Harishankar 1996:72). It is difficuit to say whether the statue whick is

165

--- Page 167 ---
considered to be Mangala Vinayaxa was always considered so and i is unclear whether
Mangala Vinayaka is in the Mangala Gauri temple or in the Aimaviresvara temple (Sukul
1977°385-356). However, the Vindyaka in the Aunavireswara temple is currently known under
the name of Mitra Vinayaka,

The statue is about forty centimetres in height and depicted in the Jaltasana position, On
lus head he wears a topknot. The wo white eyes are modem additions The vars are no longer
vis:ble and have possibly merged with the background stone. His trunk hangs down over his
polbelly and :s shphily curled towards the lett. Originaily le bad four hands but the left upper
azn has disappeared. The right upper ong Aoids an axe. Both the lower hands scem to rest on
the knees The figure lacks any form of flexibility or plasticuy. No yayfopavita or ornaments
can be discerned

Reeause of the complete lack of flexibility ics likely that thes statue is of the sixteenth or
seventeenth cemury, and hence it is assigned to the turd pend.

VI. Mitra Vinaéyaka (page 95) “The Friend Vinavaka'. The position of Mita
Vinayaxa :s problemauce. In the Kas: Khanda he is menuoned after the aghth Vindyaka on the
sixth circle. bringing the total of Vinayakas to fifty-seven. In some modern works describing
the fifty-six Vindyakas and the vate? of them he is sometimes mentioned Lastead of
Sthilajangna Vinayaka (as im Vyas 1987.93). Because the Kasi Khanda mentions hun atter
Mamkarna Vindyaka he /s inciuded here ” His present location is im the Atmaviresvara temple
near Manikamika Devi on Seindia ghat, C.K. 7158 (Sukul 1977:386, Vyas 1987:93). The
Kasi Khanda reads: ‘That auspicious Vindyaka named Mitra Vinayaka protects the city of Isa in
the north-east. Le 1s to be worshipped in the north of the Yama firth’ ($7:112). The position of
Mitra Vinayaka among the fifty-six Vindyakas 1s unique: not only docs he bring the number of
Vinayakas on the sixth circle to nine instead of eight but by being added to the group of the
fifly-six Vindyakas the total number goes up to fifty-seven Vinayakas, thus breaking the pattern
of seven times eight) The situation concerning Mitra Vinayaka seems always to have been
confusing, with same guide books including his name while he is omutted by others. THis
present locauon on Scindia ghat corresponds with the text of the Kasi Khanda fo: the Yama
tirtha is south of Scindia ghat, near Manikarmkd. Miva Vindyaka is net mentioned in: the
Tristhaliseta nor in the Tirthaprakasa, a fact which could indicate that in the sixteenth and
 Corcerning Mitra VirZyaka, a7 mteresting pout is mace in the Kasiyatrdprakaga (page 66) which says ‘In the
Xasi Khanda th:s Vinayaka is memioned dut some peeple call nine MangalaVinayaxa’ (translated from the Hindi).
‘Io the Tannasiza tive forms of Ganeda are mentioned, one of them best Haridtd Garesa who together with
Uschista Ganesa is considered as two cf the six Garupab cults which developed froe: the tenth century onwards.
The same Amoda is ane o7 the names listed fo7 Handra Others are Pramecda, Sumukki. Pamiekha ars
Gananayaka (Pal 198" 528)

166

--- Page 168 ---
seventeenth centuries, the confusion between Mitra and Mangala had already occurred. The
Merutantra, owever, does mention this Vinayaka (verse four hundred and ninety-seven)

The statue is about one metre in height and the surface 1s very rough as if the creators
wanted to creale the effect that he was made out of rubble He is bare-headed with a rather
bulging forehead and a trunk which seems to have been added afterwards His cars are well
proporhoned compared with the rest of the statue. He is seated in the dalicisana position. His
trunk turns towards the right and touches the modakas in the right hand. In his upper right hand
he nolds a pasa. The upper lett hand has 2 jotus fewer and the lower left hand rests on the knee |
and holds an aksamala. The two back arms seem to be detached from the body. He has two :
eyes and wears ankle rings. Because of the very uneven surface of the body no yayiopavita is

| visible The whale Vindyaka statue sits on a structure on which a small rat is depicted

Despite the rough surface wiich would give this statue an ofder appearance, this statue
cannot be dated before the eighteenth century and is passibly even from the nineteenth century
The indicators for this are the two back arms which are detached from the body, and also the
size of the statue

Comung now to the seventh and innermost circle of Vinayakas, the first five Vindyakas
are known as the Moda Vinayakas ar ‘the Vinéyakas of Delight’. Their individual names are not
mentioned by the Kasi Khanda, thus giving the impression thal they were worshipped as one
entity and that their individual names were known only to devotees. The Kasi Khanda states
“The five Vighnedgas are Moda and the others’ (57,113).

VIL. 1. Moda Vinadyaka (49) (page 96). The Virdyaka of Delight’. His statue is
situated ina temple in the Nepali AAapra, house wamber C.K 31-12 (Sukul 1977:357; Vyas
19X7:93). The pandit there did not alow the taking ef any phatographs of this thirty centimetre
ingh figure whieh 1s set ina wail

Moda Vindyaka has a large bare forehead in which is a crescent moon shaped carving
‘The cars have disappeared: they were prooably placed ai the back of the head and have merged
with the background. Two thin cuts represent the eves. The trans turns towards the left at an
angle of ninety degrees [t iy possible that the trunk touched a modaka bowl as it hanps in the
aw The Vinayaka may have had four arms but only two are now visible and they are too
camaged to show any attributes. The position of his legs make it clear that he is depicted iv te
lalitasana The miirti docs not show any traces of omaments or of a yajfopavita

Because the group of five Vindyakas is known us the Moda Vinayakas it can be
assumed that Moda Vinayaka was the first aud foremost of these five Vindayakas.

167

--- Page 169 ---
VIL. 2. Pramoda Vindyaka (50) (page 97), The Vindyaka of Cuter Delight. His
location 1s very close to that of Moda Vinayaka in the same Nepali AAapra, number C.K. 31/16.
His statue is at the rear of a milk and sweets shop (Sukul 1977:357; Vyas 1987:93)

‘The stame 1s carved on an oval stone slab and has unusual features and is fifty
centimetres high. The most remarkable feature 1s that there is no truns. Where there used to be a
trunk, nothing is left but a protruding nose bone If there were cars, they have merged with the
background stone, OF the limbs only the legs are still visible, and they are depicted in the
falitasana position. It appears as if there were four arms, although th:s cannot be said with great
certainty, and the possibly attnbutes cannot be described al all, On the forehead three sectarian
inarks are painted, The while eyes are recent additions. The damaged statue does not show any
trace of 8 yajmopavita or ornaments,

The absence of the trunk and attributes make it difficult to date. It could be that there
never was a trunk and that this statue onginaliy depicted a gana ar another sort of demon. ‘The
owners of the shop teld me that when it was bu, the Vindyaka statue was not touched. His
unusual location at the back of the shop certainly indicates this to be true. If dis ts trac, then the
Vindyaka orginally stood very close to the Visvanau: temple which was destroyed by
Avrangzeb in the seventeenth century The chaes of that period and the subsequent activity of
the construction of the mosque on the Visvanath temple site would make 1 almost impossible
for any statue to have been situated there at that ume. It 1s possible, therefore, to argue that the
mitra presently known as Pramoda Vindyaka came to its present location after the Mughal
per:od or was hidden somewhere nearby during the Mughal years. The odd shape and the
absere of a trunk could be evidence that the Vindyaka was originally another figure which was
consequently avcepted as a Vinayaka in the post-Mughal period

VIL 3. Durmukha Vindyaka (51) (page 98). “Ihe Ugiv-Faced Vinayaka'. This
Vinayaka ts located in house number C.K.35/7 (Sukul 1977:358, Vyas 1987-93).

Thy statue is one metre tngh On his bead this Vindyaka wears a conical crawn whieh 1s
Wprcal for south Indian images of the god. ‘Phe Ganesa of Tiruttan: dated ca, 895 CE and the
Tinmarayur Ganeéa of the Cola dynasty (tenth century) are yood examples of this headgear
(Yadav 1997:piate 70, Martin-Dubost 1997:126, plate 8) The ears are very smail and hardly
visibie, The tank, which is very broad at the base, turns towards the right and touches the
sweetmeat bowl, placed on the right knee. The fingers of the right upper hand ¢lasp a round
object, which could be a pomegranate or a modaka. The attribute in the upper left hand is very
une-gar and the lower lett hand is placed on the knee and hofds a rosary Across hus belly a
napayajfopavita is visible. His position ts the fafitasana but with the left kuce raised, and his

168

--- Page 170 ---
legs are unrealistic and thin in comparison with the rest of the tarso. Around the ankies and the |
wrists no ornaments are discernable.

The peculiar seated position, the suffhess of the limbs and the fact that the statue is
rather large indicates a more recent date, perhaps the eighteenth century, The crown 1s
uncommon for the north of India and 1s typical of Cola statues of the ninth ey tenth century It
can therefore be suggested that the stame was sculptured by a south Indian artist who came to
Banaras after the decline of the Mughal period. The somewhat odd form could hypothetically
be explained by the fact that the artst did not have any good example from the south to hand.

VII. 4. Sumukha Vinayaka (52) (page 99). "The Beautiful-taced Viniyaka’. This
Vinayaka 1s located in house number C.K. 35.7 almast opposite Durmukha Vinayaka (Sukul
19TH3SR, Vyds 1987:93).

The statue is about one metre high and has a fhendly appearance. The expanded
forehead probably indicates a crown. The temples and the trunk dulge somewhat, The trunk
| turns towards the left and touches sweetmeats. Alongside the trunk two small tusks are visibie.

The ears are large and rectangular. It looks as if he nas only (wo arms, because at the right side

there 1s no indication of an upper arm. The right hand rests on the knee or holds a round otyect,

a modaka or a pomegranate He 1s represented in the Jalitésana. The vayfopavita is not visible
. and because of the rough surface there are no indictions of any jewellery either

The presence of only two arms could suggest an easly date but the lack of flexibility and
the turns af the trunk in angles of ninety degrees place this statue in the durteenth or fourteenth
century, hence it is assigned to the second period.

VII. 5. Ganan&tha Vinayaka (53) (page 100). ‘The Leader of the Ganas'. The
shrine of Uus Winayaka ts in Diundhiraja gall, C.K. 371 (Sukul 1977:388; Vyas 1987 93)

This figure is about thirty centimetres high and is always covered with a garmeat, thus
making itimpossible to describe mm full. On his forehead he has a third eye and through the
opemng of the cloth it can be seen that his trunk turns sharply towards the left. Perhaps the
wunk touches the modaka patra held in the left hand. The pandit provided the information that
the Vindyaka is represented in the /a/itasana pusition. As | was not permitted ta view under the
c.oth, there 1s no information about the number of arms and the possible attributes held in them

From what can be seen, this smal! sculpture is rather ate and lat the lower hit for dns
statue is slo earlier than the seventeenth century

169

--- Page 171 ---
Having analysed the five Moda Vinayakas according te their iconographic
characteristics, It is necessary to analyse their position ui the history of Banaras. Earlier, in
Chapter Three, it was suggested that thoy may have originated out of the Pafica-Vindyaka
concept which was depicted on panels and winch was mentioned by Laksmidhara in the twelfth
century. Their reference in the Kasi Khanda as the five "Moda Vindyakas' shows that they were
considered as an entity. The Kasi Khanda, however, does nol give any details about the:r
geographical position in the city or their position relauve to other Vindyakas. The fact that they
ave mentioned on the inner circle which is the closest to Visvanatha could indicate that thei
Posthon in terms of direction was cilher not unportant or not very clear. Maybe at the time of
the composition of the Kasi Khanda they were sul depicted as one proup instead of as separate
Vindyasas focated in different places

If the fifty-six Vinidyakas are considered as situated in seven circles then the present
location of the five Moda Vinayakas breaks this circular pattern because four of them, Meda,
Pramoda, Sumukha and Durmukha, are situated ina le (sce Fig. 4: MV, PV, SV end DV)
The alignment 1s north-east of Vidvanatha The politcal disturbances of the medieval period
and the repeated demolition of the Visvanatha temple are the main reasons as to why there is no
simiarity of style or period between the Meda Vindyakas All of them can and should be
considered as being placed at their present locations after the collapse of the Mughal empire and
probably aone of them belonged to the orginal group of Vinayaxas.

| The Tristhafisety omits the name of Gananatha Vindvaka and replaces it with the name
Amoda Vindyaka, thus stating ‘Moda, Pramoda, Amoda, Sumukha and Durmukha’ as the five
Moda Vindyakas. The name Amada also occurs in lists of the Tantne forms of Ganesa (Pal
1981128, 142-143).°° The Tirthaprakasa does list the five Moda Vindyakas as they are
mentioned in the Kas: Khanda and so does the Merutantra, wluch ists them in the same order
(verse four hundred and aimety nine}

VU. 6. Jfiana Vindyaka (54) (page 101) ‘The Vinayaka of Wisdom’. The huge
statie 16 Situated at the southern edge of the mandapa under which 1s the JAana Vapi well
(Sukul $977,359; Vyas 1987:93),

The stawe 1s one mewe and twenty centimetres igh and has ihree eves painted on its
forehead Two eyes have eye-lashes painted on them. The forehead bulges slightly and on the
whole this is a very good representation of an elephant head. There is a little tusk an the right
side though none one the left. The trunk turns towards the lefl and touches the sweet bow: in
the lef hand on the knee. The upper left hand holds a flower in the form of a sun. The upper
right hand carries the axe and the lower right rests on the knee, clasping a rosary He wears

170

--- Page 172 ---
ankle rings He sitin the Jalitasana and wears a yajhopavitt across his belly. He also has large
ears On the base of the structure is an image of two rats facing each ether.

The sharpness of the features and the size of the statue Icave no doubt that it is very
recent, probably established im the twentisth century.

Again the Kasi Khanda does not provide any yeograptucal evidence about tas
Vinayaka, but the fact that his name is Jana Vinayaka and situated near the Jhana Vapi well
should indicate that there was no need for an claborate description of his name since this
Vinayaka was probably always identified with the well. The glery of the Jiana Vapi well is
described in the Kasi Khanda.

VII. 7. Dvara Vindyaka (55) (page 102}. "The Vindyaka of the Gate’, For this
Viniyaka two possible locations are piven oy Suk. (197.359), According to him the comect
site is the marti in Ue Paihca Pandava temple near Visvanatha. Untortunately the Vinayaka
init cn this temple is a very damaged statue of which oniy the body 1s intact. The other
possible site, also quoted by Vyas (1987:93), is the Dvara Vinayaka shrine near the Java
Vinayaka temple on the way to Manikarmka ghat’" The Kas: Khanda text states: “Phe seventh
ones Dvdra Vinayaka in front of the great door’ (57:114). Some scholars such as Sukul and
Rana P. B. Singh have argued that the text of the Kasi Khanda is quite clear about the location
of tus Vindyaka, namely before the great door, thus indicating that it was posted before the
temple door of the Visvanatha temple. However, nowhere in the text is there an explicit
reference to the fact that the ‘great dear’ was indeed the ‘temple door’, The ‘great doer’ could
equally have referred to a city gate and in particular to the gate which guarded the antaragtha

; area, One of the reasons why some scholars, such as Vyas, believe that Dvdra Vindyaka 1s
located near the Java Vindyaka temple is because it 1s there that the pilgrims who do the

; Pancaxrogi Yatra offer barley and pracece ta what is considered the most sacred part of the
city.

The first mentioned statue is a small figure of about thirty centimetres and is found in
the Pafica Pandava temple. C K. 28°10, on the way from Cauk te the Visvanatha temple (Sukul
1977 359). The Jambadara suggests that this was onginally a statue of Vindyaka-Ganesa ‘The
has aigucd by SuksI that Dvara Vinayaka's anginal site should Se at (ae door of the Vigvanatha temple
Howeser, over the centunes the site of the Vigsandtha temple itself has chaaged several mes, theretose being su
ge of the present site of Dvdia Vinavaka

* Aathough this Dhundhird ais now known as the voly real ene, Suku! pointed out that iy years before the
conplanon af bis peck (1977) the Pahcamukha Virriyaka statue which stands in the temple af Rani Whavaiai
shove fe present shrine af Dhundhi was known as Ad) Dhunciu. The pasdit of the Pahearmikha Yimayaka
established by Rini Bhavam knew about the story of the Pefva prince of ineresant estabishing a new Dkuadhi
muna, du ae was unable to give any more infonaatior, concerning the idenuty of the Pegva Te did not even know
whether twas a noblerian of atader on prganage. When | asked avout this othe Marathi community cr
Benaras they also farted to give a suitab!e answer

wal

--- Page 173 ---
figure is headless and itis possible to see that he was represented in a seated position and with
tour arms, Unfortunately not enough remams to be able to identify the attributes

The second possibility is another small statue of approximately forty cemtimetres deiglit
situated in a shrine near the Java Vindyaka temple. The bulge on top of bis head suggests that
originally he had a topknot. The trunk bone 1s protrudes slightly and the trunk itself turns
towards the Iefl and touches the modaka patra held in the left hand. The upper left hand holds
en unidentifiable altribute. The upper nght hand cames the axe and the lower hand rests on the
knee and possibly holds au aksamala. He ts ckadanta and has two small eyes. He is seated in
the Jaltasana. As the image is very small and the surface verv rough it is mmpossible to say
whether there was a yaiflopavita depicted or not and whether tis Vindyaka wears ankle rings
and bracelets.

The rouga surface of the statue makes cating problematic but, considering the relative
plasucity of the body and limbs, the thirteenth or fourteenth century is a possible date for the
unage and hence it is assigned to the second period,

VIL. 8. Avimukta Vindyaka (56) (page 103) Today there 1s an Avimukta
Vinayaka to the teft of the entrance in the Visvandtha temple (Sukul 1977:355) but according to
Vyas this is a fairly modem statue and the authentic Avimukta Vinayaka is to be found
amongst the debris al the back of the Jhina Yap) mosque (Vyas 1987:93). Despite the
accessibility of the modem Avimukta Vindyaka 1 the Visvanath temple, the one at the back of
she Jiiena Vapi mosque is still honoured whenever devotees have the chance to go through the
security bariers Unfortunately a large fence prevents the taking of photographs. The Kasi
Khanda states: 'Avimukta Vindyaka, the eighth one, removes all the distress of those with
hinble minds in my holy spot Avimukta’ (57 114). There is no correspondence between the
hang of this Vinayaka and his function as a remover of distress, The fact that das Vindyaka is
calcd Avimnukta indicates that the nomeaclature of Uns Vinayaka predates the decline of
Avimukra in the thirteenth century. Clearly neither of the tvo contenders for Avimuxta
Vinayaka can claun the status of being the original statue.

The Vinayaka :s carved on a panel and is completely croded. The head and the trunk are
stl visible and he is bare-headed, has large cars w:th kis trunk tumed towards the right. At the
base the trunk 1s very broad, Because of the damaged state af the statue nu mere mformaton
concerning the attributes, a yafopavita or ornaments, could be obtained.

The position and shape of the trunk suggest Uvat this statue dates from the sixteenth or
seventecnth century. ‘This date weuld then correspond with the construction of the new
Migvanatha temple around 1588 CF. and its demolition less than a century later

172 |

--- Page 174 ---
The descnption and dating of cach of the fifty-six Vinayakas together with Mitra
Vinayaka is now complete, Although there are ather Vinayakas in Banaras. there is only one
further Vinayaka who will be treated here because of his crucial connection to the Vinayaka
mandala. This is Dhundhiraya, the most important Vindyaka in the sacred area. When Ganesa
way sent ty Kasi he assumed the fonn of Dhundhiraja and divided himself unto fifty-six
Vinayaka forms, thus Dhundhi ts the fens ef ortgro of all the other Vindyakas. Controversy
surrounds the present statue of Dhundhiraja which wil! be discussed in Chapter Five.
It is generally accepted that the statue standing at the doanway of the alley leading to the
Visvanatha temple is Dhundhi. The sculpture is about one metre in height. His head is i
abnoumally large and the cars, hardly visible under the ever-present flower garlands, are set inte !
the background panel On his forchead he has a crescent silver moon and a third eye. His trunk
curls towards the left side and the end curls upwards. He has four hands, all of which are silver
plated. The two lower hands rest on his xnees and he wears bracelets around his wrists, The
back arms do not seem to be an integral part of the rest of the bedy, thus indicaling Us recent !
date. Its alsa not very clear what the attributes are. The attribute i the nght hand resembles a |
flower. Despite the multitude of flower garlands there is na doubt that Dhundhi is net |
represented with a yajsopavita. Dhundhi is seated in the dalasana position and his feet are also
covered with silver.
Itis known that this statue of Dhundhiraya was established by a Pesva prince os
merchant in the eighteenth century’? and the iconographic style of Uns figure corresponds with
| the slyle of that period.
173

--- Page 175 ---
The Classification of the Vindyakas according to their Periods.
Seventh-Twelfth Thirteenth- Sixteenth- Eighteenth-
Centurics Sixteenth Kighteenth Twentieth
Centuries Centuries Centuries
Kharva Arka Bhimacanda Durga
Kismanda Pasgapani Uddanda Siddhi
Vikatadvija Lambodara Pranava Dehali
Ekadanta Munda Vakratinda Kiitadanta
Varada Yakysa Gara Salakatankata
Modakapriya Sumukha Durmukha Tnmukha
Abhaya Dvara Simnatunda Paficasya
| Cutaman Ksipraprasadana Vighnaraja
Jyestha Dantahasta Kanitaksi
Kala Sthitadanta Picindila
Gajakama Kalipnya Uddandamunda
Catudanta Nagesa
Dvimukha Manikarna
Mangala Aga
Avimukta Sthiilajangha
Gananatha
Jiana
Ciraghanta, Srst:, Rajaputra, Heramba, Moda and Pramada are undalable and the present
Dhundhiraja mértt can be dated to the vightecnth centu y.
174

--- Page 176 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
The Fifty-Six Viniyakas as a Mandala

Huherto, the filty-six Vinayakas have occasionally been referred to es a grouping The question :
how 1s whether or not this grouping constitutes the symbolic unity imphed by the tenn :
mandala. This chapter first examines briefly the noven of the mandala, then turns to the
concepiualisation of Banatas as a cosmologised mandala, considering the various deities that
populate the city. Finally the question of whether or not the fiPy-six Vinayakas may be
considered a mandaia is examined.

Fiiade (1961, 1969) and ‘Pucci (1961) are two scholars who have writen extensively
about the mandala and the theories behind it in is vanious manfestzuons Here it will be
sufficient to summarise their general findings. The earliest reference to the werd mandala is
found in the Vedas where it means ‘circle’ (Fliade 1969:219). The Reveda (4:28:2) uses the
word to Gesenbe a ‘solar disc’ and later Samhitis and Brahmanas use the term when dealing
with the construction of temples ar allars (Ro Rao 1988:18)."* The notion of a mandala as
‘curcle’ was soon extended and today the mandala is an important symbol in religion, art, yoga
and psychology. Both Hindus and Buddhists have used the symbolism of the mandala as a
means of represenung cosnic order in temples and art or to express different levels of
consciousness in yoga." The multiple usage of the term mandala requires that, when studying
the mandala, a distinction 1s made between the mandala as a circular diagram and the symbolic
meaning attnbuted to it, Lhe mandala evolved rom the notion of a curcie lo become a complex
cesign, comprising one ar mere concentne circles or square divisions within a circular
dardec * However simple or complicated the design, the mandakt acquired a greater
significance as it became a symbol of the cosmos and its applications became regarded as
"The tcun mnandaiestakd is applied wher bricks are patina circular shage In Sie fre altars for the Soma
auctifice. Ihe saindala concept was adapted to forms other than the circle The arse of the sitar consisted of sever
and a halt squares and the area of the cirece kad te corzespand to the area of that squaie (Ro Rao 1988-18) Eliade
1991 54) explains that the araadala funsuoned 2s a representation of tie centic in atchitectare and wonograpliy
“Ta ars work on mandalas, Tucer (196!) mainly tecuses on the use of the sy mol of the mandala in voua ard
csotericisn:
*SEhade (7969-219) descnbes a mundals as. 2 complex desig compesing # cueular border ard one or more
concentuc cies enclos.ag a square division in four wianyles. In the centre of each tangle and in tie cents ul the
avandala sell are other circles comtaiaing mages of the divimtcs and ther enbiems,
‘15 mythical geography, Sowever, sacred space 1s the essetitia’ real space (hace 1961 40) A good deFniion
at sacred space I> suggested by Brereton (1986:526) “The sacted space inciudes spaces that can be entered,
physically, as the outer peagrapay of a holy land, imaginatively. 2s the inne: dedy va Tastee yoga, of visually, os
the space of mundald:

175

--- Page 177 ---
representauons of the cosmos, whether of the macrocosm or of the mer microvosmic world or
of both together.

The mandala is an image of the world (Eliade 1962:51-34; 1969.220). The world of the
imandala, however, is not everyday profane reality, rather it is sacred space.** ‘The sacred
character of this space is not imtatly defined by the outer boundary of a mandala but by 2
hicrophany, or ritual, which then uthses the concept of the mandala lo delineate and represent
the sacred barder. The hierophanic character of a sacred space resulls ina space which is
neither profane, homogenous or geometric, because incrophany is rarely so tidily structured
(Ehade 1961:39) [tis the difficulty of visualising lis secred space which leads to the
symbdolisation of this space by the means of the mandala. Vhe direct impheauon of the
symbolisation of sacred space 1s the existence of a non-sacred space. When visualised on the
niandala this suggests that the area outside the mandala is profane or even dangerous, The
anindala not only delineates the consecrated space, iCalse protects it fram an invasion of the evil
which could threaten the sacral purity of the space within the mandate |

‘The second cmicial characteristic of the mandala symbol ts the notion of ‘the cene’. 11s
the centre that creates and defines the world included within the circle "" In many cultures
representations of the casinos often rotate around an axis or a centre whica symbolises the most
sacred port within that cosmology The use of a centre has taken many forms: on a small scale
bul stipas and temples, or the garbha grha within them, are considered as the ‘centre of the
work, whereas in Jarger contexts every holy place car be regarded as ‘the centre’ The
mullipiicaton of holy places and temples purporting to be the axis mundi results in a loss in the
religious efficacy of these centres, which creates the need tor a symbol such as the mandala to
mamlain and clarify the true meaning of the sacred centre. Tns permus a definition of the

| mandala as a geometric prajecuion of a world whick is reduced to an essential pattern consisting
of Wo important elements: the first beng the outer boundary which not only encloses the

j sacred but also wards off evil, thus differentiaung the sacred from the profane, and the second
being the centre or axis mundi.

Lhade (1969: 222) connects the intricate pattern of the mandala, linxed to its cemplex
syinbohe meanmng. to the notion of the labyrinth, seeing a commonality in two main
characteristics: the entry into the mandala and thus into the sacred space, and the protection
provided against harmful forces from the outside so that one may reach the sacred centre ef the
be C986 62) yuotes Ehade (1989.22) ‘Tithe world is to be lived in, st must be founded and no warld car |
seme to bivthoin the chacs of the homogenenty and relativity of profane space. The c:scovery or projestion ofa
Exec. pomt the centre 1s equivalent to the creation of te world’

The imandala un the landscape of Nepal has deer: widely discussed in the wark ef Mary Slusser (1987). Raber:
Levy's in-depth study of Bhaktapuc’s sacred territory (1992) alsa provides a account of the spplication of the
avmibavsin of the mandats in Hinds cites in Nepal.

17a |

--- Page 178 ---
cosmos visualised. These two characteristics of the mandala take on different forms according,

to the application of the symbo! of the mandala. In art and architecture, the entry mtual is

reflected m the construction ef different levels within a temple or stupa: the highest elevation is

thus a representation of the sanctum sanctorum. On pilgrimages. the entry process is miuated as
circumaribulation around the sacred space. At the end of the pradaksing the pilgrim reaches the

hely saactun; which :s oper. towards heaven or Nberation, The whole ritual of entering the

sacred space of the mandala is closely connected with the march towards the centre of the

imandala In order Ww gain a better understanding of the movement towards the centre of the

sacred space itis necessary to bear in ming that the symbolism of the mandala mamtests itself

on the horizontal as well as on the vertical cevel, On the honzontal plane one enters the mandala

or sacred space and moves towards the centre. In doing so one acquires merit and blessings,

Uius raising one’s spiritual condiion prior to meeting with the central theopkany which is

indicative of the vertical plane. This notion of both a verlical and a horizontal plane can be seen |
in most of the mam pilgeunages, In the Paficakrog: Yatra, for instance, the pilgrim :
circumambulates one hundred and eight shrines and thereby moves through the horizontal layer

of the Kast mandala, and, at the same time, through the corrpleuon of the pilgranage, attains a

tugher spritual state and comes closer to salvation,

Tentrism has greatly influenced the complexity of the mandala and its applications,
especialiy 11 Buddhisin. Tt 1s rot necessary here to deal with mandala in Vantrism since tis has
deen cvalt with at length elsewhere. What is of concem here 1s how the Hindus applied the
symbousm of the concept m their art and architecture and to their sacred cities. In some
structures a strong circular element is clearly present: for instance, some Yogini temples are
built according ‘9 a circular ground plan. However, the greater part of Hindu art and
architecture lacks Uns cicular pattem, thus leading to some debate as to whether or not the
mandala symbolism was tollawed. This, however, is to confuse diagranunaltic form with
symbolic content. A complete absence of circular design is noticed in sacred landscapes yet
they are Cescribed in Puranas and Mékdtmyas as mandalas. Most of the sacred cities of
Hinduism ai perceived as mandalas in the Puranas and the Mahatinyas, thus confirning the
mandala as schemalie and symbolic. Whole regions aze considered to be mandalas: a good
example is the 'Nepal mandala’ which actually comprises only the Kathmandu valley."*

No-one has done mare than Eck to clarify the way in whic Kasi is conceived as 2
mandala:

"The city with us divine inhabitants may be likened to the symbolic structure of

the mandala. Ina rehgious or ritual sense, a manda is a sacred circle that

represents the enure iuverse, its powers, ils intenelalions, and its grounding

centre, A mandala may be pated on canvas, ike the vibrant, wenmmy mandalas

of the Tibetan Buddhist teadiuon. It may be drawn én the dust of the earth, as are

uw

--- Page 179 ---
the ritual circles of the Tantrist wadiuon. A aandala may be constructed in
architecture, as in the symbolic worlds of the Buddhist stépa or the Hindu
temple. And a mandala may be envisioned in the divine plan of a city, as is
Kasht. All such mandalas share a common syinbolic structure. They show tthe
pian of he entire universe, with its galaxies and its gods. The borders of the
universe are guarded by fearsome and protective deities. The ortentation of the
world is emphasised by the presences of the four or the cight directions, who
stake oul its farthest mils. And at the centre of the mandala is a particular god
or a patuculat Buddha who, bke the stil centring-point of the architect's
compass, prounds the ever-tuming, ever-changing inultiple worlds of the
periphery. The city of Kasi, with all us divine mbabitans, is such a mandala
The radius of its sacred circle is a distance of five Kroshas, about ten miles, and
around its borders are a multitude of guardian demes. Within this outermost
aucle are increasingly smaller concentric circles, having Siva as their common
venlre’ (1993:146-147).""
Beck (1993, 1986) shows how the city of Ka$i and its mandala contain all the sacred places of
Incsa and all the gods of Hinduism. She shows how the Kasi Khanda connects every world in
the universe with Kagi by showing how their ruling Lords obtained their status through
penance or asceticism in Kasi She has skillfully demonstrated how the Kasi Khanda
cosmoiogised Kasi mnyvthologivally, and has also shawn now Kasi should be properly regarded
as a mandala, marked out by increasingly smaller yatras.
If Kasi is a mandafa as [ick argues, then the grouping ef the fitty-six Vindyakas must be
| considered in a similar light since they are grouped in seven concentnic circles and in eight
directions. Before considering whether the Vindyakas formed a subordinate mandafa within the
Kaégt mandala, itis necessary to lock at the situation of some of the other deities within Siva's
entourage, the sixty-four Yoginis, the Qvelve Adityas and the eight Bharavas. These deities,
hike the Vinayakas, appear as groups and they to are not regarded as supreme gods. An
lavestigaion of these ceiues therefore offers a useful context for a better understanding of the
grouping of the Vinayakas.
“P Whes speaking of tacveasiugly smaller cunceatiic circles Reck vefers to the diferent ydiras present in the sacred
tornitary A study of the five principal mandalas has deen given by Rane PB. Singh (1993) The mandata of the
‘tive Kroshes ds a retereswe to the Paricakrogi Yatra wluch cncamanbulates the city and which forms Ure outer
cirels of the Vinayaxa cover. Singa arpusy that there was onginaliy arothe: larger pi.primage, the Caurdsikras:
YAtA, around the city whick see:ns to have faiten wito disuse befere the wweltta century: [his study Singh (1951,
1993 38) nas shown the pazallels bewveen the five press elements’ uf the organism according to Hinde mythology
anal the Eve pilgmayes Caurdsikiosi, Paficakro@, Nagara Pradakeina, Avimikta and Ariangyha Vand i ese are
also mapped st kek C99T.appendix 2).
“ Deena (i986) shows that there 1s a strong connector, between the Yepmis and the Matrkas. Whersas the
lattice carsted in the relyroas life ef India for centunes, she Yoxint cult seems ta tave been established as late as the
ninth century. The form of their worsh:p also shows an assaciation with Tante:sm
178

--- Page 180 ---
The first group of deities sent off by Siva to wick Divodasa were the sixty-four
Yogmis. An exceflent study by Dehepa (1986) las examined these goddesses with regard to
doth their history and their close relanon to Matrkd worship.” It 1s therefore not necessary to
repeat this material here Archacological and textual evidence indicates that the Yoginis were
generally considered in groups of sixty-four. Because eight is an auspicious number,”
sixty-four, the square of eight, is even more powerful and sacred. Fram Vedic tunes te
number sixty-four has had magical connotations In the Tantric tradigon the number sixty-four
was ascribed to the number of Agamas and Tantras, the concept of the eight Bhairavas had
developed into sixty-four Bhairavas and there were sixty-four Devi pithas and sixty-four
siddhis, The existence of sixty-four siddhis iy possibly the reason why there were sixty-four
Yogms, since they are considered able to grant siddhis, The relation between the srdditis and
the Yoginis is the fact that the siddhis represent ‘the acquisition of supematural powers by
magical means’ (MW'1216), and Yogini is detined as ‘a female demon or any being endowed
with magic power, a fairy, witch, sorceress’ (MW: $58).

The link hetween the Yoginis and the magical powers they represent is also suggested
by che architecture of their temples A! known Yogint temples, wilh one cxception,* are

| circular mv form and without a roof (Thomsen 1980:53). The eieuiar form of the temple
represents a mandala. By constructing the Yogini temples in a circle, the ideal environment tor
the Youimi ntual, usually called Mahayapa, was created. Tlus ritual was generally considered to
be 2 magac rite accessible only to the few initiated (Deheyia 1986-56) * The circular pian of the
Yoymn temples tollows the concept of the sixty-four Yogints visualised in a mandala structure
as preserined in the Mattolara Tantra {R. Pandey 1976. chapter 20; Deleyta 1986), The Kasi
AKhanda descrides the explois of tie sixty-four Yuginis ‘n chapter forty-five (see Appendix). A
brief analysis of dus chapter shows that the Yoginis did not arrive in the holy city as a group
but rather separately and sporadically The names of the Yogins are listed from verse thirty
“The names of the sixty-four Yoxins vanes ia the differen: Este uf Cie various textual sources. This supyests
that the groupings of the Yoyinis vanee according to regiva ead time (Desa 1998.97)
“Since ancient tines the number eight has beea of great importance ‘here are exht directions which have eight
peardian destes, ther? are e:zht slapes in raiayoge. and Hiedu architecture aise mentions exght visions:
“Phe only Yagi temple which :s rectungular in shape is the sixty-four Yogun temple af Khayaraho. Fora
det ed descuption of te Youn temple at Khajuralo see eset 1896 avd Trpath: 1974.75
“ry her monoyraph on Younis, Dele:ta provides pleaty of exampies of the etrecia Yoxini shines and temples
thoughout the porte of lida (1986 chapters 4-40). An sarher valuable study of Yopini tenspie architecture was
provided Sy Thomsen: (1940)
The Present temple was constructed m 1807 CE (Harishankar 1996:54) and stands among other Devi shrines
its the Benpeli Tota. The temple ts impartant for the many Bengal: widows of the nerghdourheed who vist the
temple on a regusar basis The temple brzzes with festivities during the annual Navaritta putas which happen in te
muta and iv the spring (Sukal 1977 99-100)

179

--- Page 181 ---
four to forty-one, after which the methods for propitiating tae Yogin:s are explained. Although
tae Kast Khanda reters to the various sixty-four Yoginis, today they all are worshipped m one
temple on Causatti Yogin ghat’> Despite the fact that the temple supposedly houses the sixty-
four Yoxinis, the martis in the shrine are all known by the name of Durga or Kali, Only the
sentra’ statue is calied ‘Causaiti Mai’

Although the present Causatts Yogint cult 1s now centred in one temple, there ts
evidence that the Yogins were worshipped orginally in various shrines. The surviving matenal
rs loo limited, however, to cuncluds that there were sixty-four different Yogim shrines in the
cry which were situated nm the form of a mandala.” Of te sixty-four Yoginis, Vyas has listed
fourteen whose images are found in locations vther than the Causatti Yogini temple.” The
cuestion is whether or not it can be assumed that these fourteen Yogini shrines are the remnants
ofa larger Yogim mandala. The difterent lovations of these fourteen certainly do not constitute
a circle but this would not prevent them being conceived of as a mandala Overall the lack of
geographical matenal in the Kas? Khanda and the fact that there is no mention of the Yogini
shrines being located in particular directions, in circles or in covers suggests that im Banaras the
Yoegmnis were not regarded as a mandala by tae authors of the Khanda. |

In contrast to the paucily of evidence regarding Yogini worship organised as a mandala,
she Iwelve Sitya shrines are clearly located according to a well stuctured plan. These twelve
Surya shrines origmated from the Sun who, having gone to Kasi with the same intention as the
Yoginis, failed to drive away Divodiisa and split himself into twelve forms,” all of which are
° The importance of his Devi axeti ssems to be sign-feant only for de Bengal: commumity im the ares af the
tompic as never the temple nor Causaty Devt is considered to be among the nest impocant wocdesses of the Uty’s
celigious hfe (Fick 1983 188) t

“Utes interestiag te nate that Sukul does not seem to consider tne sixty-four Yog:nis as al represented in the {
cenple 1: the Bengal: Tela for he states that sity of the sixty-four Yoginis are represented in the teotple on Rane
Maksi gfdt. the otker four, Varihi, Mayurl, Kiinaksa and $:kuka, ate lesuted elsewhere 3: the city (Suku!
2977 994
The Santee shrines are, according to Vyas (ORT TS8-161) 1 Gayanana: 2 Hayayrvar 3. Mayute. 4
Viaetinana, § Vikatalorana, 6 Suskadan; 7 Suki a. Kali: 9 Crdawadirxa: $0 Tapam; 1) Sasanidrsti: 12
Ataataha, 13) Kamaksi, 14. Sraluchana.
"A possible reason tor tus may have been that the Banaras region was never popule: ground for the Yoxuni
cut A ntiap ia Deheja's study shows that the main cancentation of Yopini temples was fom the border of
Rarasthan to Madhya Prades and Onsen. The ‘ack cf any eivhitectual evidence coes not exclude the poss:bilzy
dail the cult was widespread over the whole uf north India. “Tae assocaten with Siva and Bhanava was probes
of more svpartance tot eluding then names on the KAsi Autanda then the prevalence af thers cult
“© pot ber one, the falluwing are the tweive Ad tyas Lelaraa, Utaratka, Sdmbadnya. Diapadiditya,
Mavihidditye. Khakhatka, Arundditya, Viddhaduya, Kesavdditya, Venaidditya, Gampaditya and Yamiditya, the
twelfth cag, in the city of KG. They always protect the boly place fiam evn ones with dominant Tamasa quality’
(KKH 46 45-47)

180

--- Page 182 ---
deserihed in detail from chapter forty-six to chapter fifty-one of the Kasi Khanda. It also
prov:des an account of the location of these Sivya shrines.” i
{
The reference to twelve Sun temples in the Kasi Kitads contrasts wath the one |
reference of the Kriyakalpataru. Laksmidhara only incutions she shrine of Lolarka at the Assi
sana. Tarlier in this thesis it was noted that during Galadavala times the shrine of Lolarka was
of considerable impanance, grants to the shriag providing supporting evidence of this. The
Ciscrepancy between the sing’e reference to Lolirka and the Wweive Adityas of the Kasi Khanda
can most probabiy bg ascribed to the status of the first. and the lack of status of the eleven othe:
Sun shrines. Equatly, it may be accounted for by Laksimidhara’s stated practice of only
including those shrines for which there was textual and Puranic authority. The fact that he
mentions [ olarka suggests that he had textual authority for this form of the Sun whereas for the
others he did not. Eck discusses the antiquity and the popularity of the Sun cult (1993:178-
182).*" The descriptions of the various locations of the Siirya shrines within the text of the
Kasi Khanda could be seen as geographically realistic, but the text fails to indicate the
significance of the location of these shrines. For ths, reference needs to be made to the unique
study of the position of the twelve Aditya tempies by Rana PB. Singh and John McKum
Malville, who utilised the most modern techniques in establisaing that tae shrines, arranged in a
sentivircular pattern, were astrononucally ahgned to the movement oF the Sun in cach of the
twelve months of the year (1995:72-78) This is best seen in Fig 9 which 16 a map of their
findings. The location of these temples was deliberate but based on an organising principle
other than that of a mandala. Itis clear that the authors uf tie Kas: Khanda fully recognised the
Importance of Sun worship within Banaras because they gave a disproporionately large section
to the Adityas, both in the number of chapters and in the significant posizoning of those
\ chapters across the halfway point uf the text. The authors’ emphasis here 1s alse related to the
OE otarks ss wid ta tx in the southem dsecton, al the confluence of Ass. [with the Ganga’. Uttarika x sad +o
sen the northem siic, neat a kunda (KKH <7 1) Cuarirka protects Kag: forever. ‘la the western quazter el
Misvesvara, the splendid ido. of the San god bestowing ausp:cicusness was perfectly propiiated by the nodle-
souled Simba’ (KKH 48 £8) ‘Drupadaditya is lecated in the viecnity: cf Dandapéu, towards the ight of
Visvessara (KKE 49°20 21) The Aditya known as Mayiikhaditya is located near the linge of Gablast!svan’
UCKH 49.97.80) "Khakhoikacitya ty sttuuted to the rorta of Trvistepa ja Siva shane” (KKH 50:0) "Arunadityas
tere os perth of the Mahadew image (KKAT 51:21), ‘Viddliditya’s umaje ss south of Vigalakst CAKH 51.29)
and "Kegavachtya ts to 3¢ worshipped in the north of Adikegava, in tie Padokdaka trtia at the conSuence of tc
Garua and Whe Varana CXKU S1.22-75). Vienaladity a is stationed in the beauufu, forsst of Hankegavana’ (KKH
S088} South of Vesvesa cs anotier Aditya named Gangacitya’ (KKIL $1502) ‘East ef Virega and west of
Yamesa is the neelh Aditya. Yarwiditya’ (KKH $12.06) Further ona the Kast Kitandy there ane teferences 42
wo mere Adityas. Surnantwaditya (KKIL 64:6) ard Karniditya (KKH 84.45) The Fest of these 1s said fo have its
plesert temple it, dhe Hanuman temple of Hansmar Phatak, aad Karnaditya is found at the botten: of Sitala yous
and Riaenandi, douse nember K 20147
“Tp Vardnas, the substantial literary evidence of Sin worship 15 suppemented by the evcence of the ats. In the
holed cocecten of at located at the Bharat Kai Bhavas alone. there 1s. an eight) century Surya, a twel®h century
Sic ya. and an eleventa century female Sun image, Cakiegvan, froin Lovarka, Fisewhere, throughout the city and ats.
emrons, Sum symbo:s may be seen Lotfarn Sin, stores, such as the ve at Satya kuna, may be found a
Sarments bere and ‘there. and sametimes the fill image of Siya may be seen, such as the fine tenth ta twelfth
cenluyy Satya. mistakenly consecrated as Virupakga, at Aardaimesvara alang the Paficakrost rau’ (1993 180- [S45
18h

--- Page 183 ---
cosmologising of Kasi which was largety accomplished in the first twenty-five chapters of the
Khazida by means of the myth of Sivasarman.

Taere remains one further group of deities to consider, the Astabhairavas. [In present-
day Banaras these exzht Bhairavas, together with Kala Bhairava, occupy a significant place in
the religious life of the city although the Kasi Khanda dedicates only one chapter to the exploits
of Kala Bhairava (KICH 31). Further in the Khanda, in chapter seventy-two, verses muiety-two
and minety-three, there is a reference to eight Bhairavas which are located in the eight directions
After the desenption of the nine Durgas (KKH 72:90-91), who are also said ta be posted in the
eight direcuons and protecting the haly area, the eight Bhairavas are mentioned: ‘Similarly there
are eight Bhairavas established in the eight quarters, who aways protect Kasi, the abode of the
goddess and the glory of salvation. They are Ruru, Canda, Asitaénga, Kapali, Krodhana,
Uamattabhairava, Samhara and Bhisana in due order’ (KKII 72:92-93), The presence of the
Astabhaizavas in the savred geograpny of Kasi lends further weight to the concept of Kagi as a
mandala The fact that there are eight Bhairavas, set in the eight directions, suggests the notion
of a circle or enclusure of Bharavas. The symbolisation of the mandala as a sacred space 1s

| farther enhanced by the fact that the function Bhairava fulfils in Hindu mytholagy is that of
protector aud guardian.

The cult of Bhairava 1s indisputably of considerable antiquity. In general the Bhairavas
comprise a group of eght.' Whereas the other deities who aze part of the Kasi microcosmos
were sent to Kast by Siva, the Bhairavas were already present in. the city. The story of the
appearance of Kala Bhairava, the city’s most important Bhaiave, 1s told in chapter thirty-one of
the Kasi Khanda. It relates how, when Siva revealed himself in a ditiga of light, he was ridiculed
hy Brahma Out of his anger Siva created Bhairava, the mamfestation of the god's ternble
aspect. Bhairava then took up the struggle against Brahma and cut off one of Brahmi’s five
heads. The head, however, became glusd to Bhairava's hand, as a symbol of the sin of kalling a
Brarmin,” Bhairava had to wander the earth and used the head as a beegmg bowl. He then
entered Kasi and the skull fell (KKH 31:121-122) * The story continues to tell of the various
virtues of the holy piace of Kapalamocana and ef Kale Bhaiava, the name under which
Bha:rava became known in Banaras.
 Romer-Willan's bsts them as Mala, San:hiza, Asuangs, Rau, Kala, Krodba, Tasorasuda or Kapdla and
Candrecuda or Rudra (MW:767). Ecx gives a slight vanauon of the names Kala ard Maha are replaced: by
Unmatia (he wid one) and Bhisana (she fea: fal) (2993. 190)

“4 Te Ins study on the Kapalicas of sicill-bearets, Larengct (1972.13) states thal the practce of wandering: the
eat wal a bepping: skull as a way of atonement fer the kilimg ef a Brehm was known as carly as the
Mayiavatkye Sout

“The trament the hoy place was cateted into. at the sight of Bha:rava of tainkle form, Brahmahaty’ screamed
“Alas, alas’ aod entered into the lowest ef the nether worlds, Even as ail the peop!e stood watching. the sul. of
Brulana fell down fiom Redres hand On seeing it fallen, be danced wats greal joy (KKH 31122-2122 ALEM
vutume 5%)

TB2

--- Page 184 ---
Today [ala Bhairava ts sull considered the most important Bhairava of the city and is
known as the Kotwal (policeman) of Banaras because of ais twofold function of devouring all
the sins af his devotees and guarding the sacred territory against evil forces His temple is iu the
mare of alleys not far from the Generai Post Office and Maidagin Park but the present location
1s not the orginal site of the Kala Bhairava temple. As the Kasi Kanda suggests, the site of
Kala Bhairava ts ‘there where the skull fell', tn other words, near the Kapalamocana tirtha.’” '
Une Kapadlamocana tirtha lies in the north of the city, not far from Omkaresvara, and is known |
to be one of the sites which were razed during the first Muslim raids (KKH $4:46-47)." The :
Kala Bhaiava drtha used to be the centre lor the Kapalika sect and their descendants, the
Gorakhaathis and the Kanphala yoxis. Today householders come to the temple te pray for the
weltare of their families It 1s a popular belief that those residing in the city ought to seck his
blessing once a year On that occasion the priest ties the typical black mala around the wrist or
the neck of the worshipper, symbolising the god's protection

Within the symbolism of the Kas: Khanda the cight Bhairavas are referred to siruply as
named directional protectors. No topographical details ave given but their actual locations today
woud suggest that they furmed 2 sort of Bhairava mandala with Kala Bhairava fulfilling the
role of the centre around whick the olhers aie positioned. An annual celebration of the
Bhairavas takes place on the cighth day of the dark balf of mdargasirsa (November to December)
(Vyas 1987-77-78; Sukul 1977:210)

Looking at these three groups of deities, 1tis clear that the Yoginis seem to be more of a
venceptual group than an actual assembly of shrines in Banaras; the Adityas formed a very
coherent group and their shrines were established to a very specitic pian wlich was, hawever,

| astonomically and not symbolically based. Fhe Bhairavas have a centre and are arranged
durectianally with a protective function but m the Kasi Khanda they are not conceived of as a
mandala. The question at now arises is whether itis legitimate ar net to consider the fifly-six
H WVinayakas as a mandala

Neither the Kas; Khanda, nor the later Nibandhas based upon it, mention the word
mandala’ in their descriptien of the group of the fifty-six Vinayakas. There can be no doubt that
“ Honeunng the koly spot KapZamochaza, Basia stocd tere himself eating up the keep of sins of his
devotees (KKH 3. 138)

“Is Vatanast Vaibiay Sukul states that the Kas: Khanckt Goes prve the modem site cf tie Kain Bhinrey temple as.
well (1977 279) He supports his teeny on the bass of verse fBy-six cf chapte: sisty-seven whick desenbes K5la
Bhiitava as south of the Raliesvara fiaga However, nether the Sansknt-Hindh version, ar tae Eaglish translato7
atthe Kast Khanda usea mths thesis corresponds with such a verse. Oa the basis of this verse Sukul concludes
Ihat By the thirteenth century tre onginal Kite Brawava teasple had been destroyed ans moved to its present area
When the Visvanathe temple was constucted in the sixtecnth cemury. one of the side shrines was devoted to Ka!z
Bhauava, Tie present temple, however, was constructed as laie as the cumetesnch cemaury by Sardar Vinshurxar, &
Conmmander of the Pedvas (Sukul 1974191), The English translation of dhe Kas? Khanda (ATM vol. 59) does
Ieter to avother Bhaieva nitha wach hes behind the Karvaditya githa, winch is lozated on DaSasvaneds ghat

183

--- Page 185 ---
fiese seven concentric circles, the clear outer boundary and the definite centre fulfil many ef the

requirements of a mandala and some scholars have chosen to refer lo the fifty-six Vunayakas as

nandala.”” by Tripatht (1969) there is a map drawn by the author's great-grandfather around

1769 CF shownng the fifty-six Vindyakas as a :mandala.** Rana PB. Singh and John McKim

Malville, who have dune such excellent work on the SGrya shrines, have started investigating

thy filly-six Vindyakas but their work is still at an iniual stage. At this point it is important to

sev visually how the Vindyakas are represented in the Kasi Khanda and how they are situated

on the ground. Fig. 10 shows the fifty-six Vindyakas as they are given in chapter fifty-seven ar

the Kasi Khanda and as they are represented in the map in Trpatn (1969). Fig) LL as a imap af

Banaras plouny the cxisting Vindyaka shrines as they are found today with the exception of

sone on the Paficakrogi Yaura."" Fig. 12 is a map of Rana PB. Singh and John McKim

Malville’s nina: findings which will of course be subject lo consideradle refmement when their

work is completed From these Uiree maps itis quite clear that it requires a very large leap in |
unagination to conceive of the existing shrines as they are conceptualised in the Kas: Khanda !
Even allowmy for ali the exigencies of history, for the movement of temples, shrines and !
Vinayakas, it seems highly unlikely that the situaten on the ground could ever have even

closely appraximaled lo the schematic and svmbohe ordering ef the Vinayakas in the Kasi

Khandi.

This situation 18 precisely one that requires the mandala to bring order to the random
chaos of the empirical world through its syinbolic represcniation as an ordered cusmos. The
suserepancy, therefore, between the actual and ihe symbohe strengthens rather than weakens
therefore the case for regarding the Vinayakas as a mandala

One interesting feature of this discrepancy is the peographical awareness shown by the
Kasi Khanda im its descripuons. Chapter tifty-seven gives a precise desenption of the
Vinayakas on the first circle 1 terms of their geographic position. The directions are mentioned
Tor all bul Arka Vinadyaka, who 1s said to be situated at the sanga of the Ganga and the Assi,
and Kharva Vinayaka, who is seated at the Varana-Ganga sanga. The second circle uses the
Vindyakas of the first circle as the onentation for its eight Vinayakas. It also mentions that
La:nbodara Vinayaka is situated alung the bank of the nver, north of Arka Vinayaka.
Sdiakatankata Vindyaka’s position is described as sughtly north-east af Bhimacandi Vinayaka:
“The most :mportact among these are Rans: PB Singh (1987 {b), 199]; 1998), Tripathy £1969) and Bex (1978,
1986.

w Th snap shows the seven circles of the Vinayasas but only the nares of tie Vindyakas situated on the tinst
Untce virces were writen, possib\y hecause thee was no space to wore all the names i the smmaes civies Me
snap resembles # Paramic world map which nomnelly represents the weld am crema nags tis map differs from
Harvie maps, however, because comarxs tho enght directions. [npathr ceastders this map as at unportant rele.
catographizal portrayal of Kasi

“ Because Bhimacaréa (3). Deha‘i (4) and Udeeada Vindyaka (5) are situated outside Banaras, at the villayes oa
the Paficakiosi Yat, 1 was impossible to include them in tis map

1k4

--- Page 186 ---
The description of the Vinavakas of the third circly follows that of the previous one with the
additional intormation thet Vakratunda is located on the nver bank, north of Lambodara;
Varada’s position is shghtty south-west from Rajaputra and Modakapriva is also on the river
banx. The fourth circle 1s analogous to the two previous ones. xtra geographical details j
incude Lhe posiuon of Abhaya Vinayaka situated on the nver bank and Uddandamunda
stationed in the Pihpila tirtha, south of Modakapriya. The fifth circle is the last one using
previously mentioned Vinayakas as an orientation. The Vinayaka Sthfladanta is said to be on
the bank of the Ganga and Nagesa Vinayaka is posted south of Uddaadamunda, which also
puts him on the iver bank. The sixth circle sums up the Vinayakas and their directional
position but it dacs not give any further imformation as to where they ae placed in position to
the cforementioned ones. The geographical details of the seventh circle are non-existent: Apart
from the reference to the Mada Vinayakas** and to Jina Vinayaxa, Dvara Vinayaka and
Avinukta Vindyaka, there is no indication of the relative location of these Vinayakas. The lack
of detail in the description of this innermost circle can be explamed in lwo ways, The first
possibie explanation is that the inner circle was so small and congested that t was difficult to
locate the Vinayakas in terms of direcnons. The other possibility 1s that the relative position of
these Vinayakas was such that they could never be considered as a circle The present position
of the eight Vindyakas on this innermost circle is that Pramoda, Moda, Durmukha and
Sumekha are virtuaily in a straight dine along the Visvanatha temple (see Fig. 4) If this has
always been the case then the second posse explanation 1s the most persuasive.

i

l Analysing the descriptions given reveals that there was a strong sense of directionality,
doth of the Asetra itself and of the relative positions of the Vindayakas to one another, There was
also an attempt Wo locate the structure of the Vinayakas within Kasi by connecting them to

. known snes, particularly safgas, the bark of the Ganga, or shrines

The number eight can be explained as the sum of the four directions and the four
intermediate directions, and so directionality has clearly determined the number eight for tie
Vinayakas in each circle. The connection of the Vindyakas to the directions has already been
alluded to within this thesis Whereas the Vindyakas ace clearly suitable guardians for the
direcuions within Kasi, there can be uo question of them be:ng considered to be the lokapalas 0:
protectors of the worlds’, or the digpalas or ‘protectors of directions’, This would be to elevate
the Vinayakas to a cosmic role which would aol enly be inaccurate but also unnecessary.
According to the Kasi Khanda, because Kasi 1s a microcosm of the universe, the guardians of
“ [ay cteresting 10. note trat the names of the Moda Visayakas are not mentioned in the Kasi Kinda, a feature
which may suggest that the Moda Vindyakas were well keovt by dhe Une the Kasi Khada was writer, This wel
be discussed later when exsiiiainy eazher religious features of Wendyaka worsinp an the city waich were posstaly
adopled dy che authars of the Kasi K handa,
iss

--- Page 187 ---
the universe are counted among, its residents. Chapters ten lo fourwen of the Kasi Khanda®
provide a deseriplion of the worlds of these direconal gods and explain how they established
them separate digas in the city, The presence of these eight cosine regents reheves the
Vinayakas of the cosinic role of protectors and thus allows them to fulfil their function as the
protectors of the region or the kseta in each of the eight directions.

This then leads to the question of why there are fifty-six Vinayakas. There is no
Wadition, as far as can be ascertained, of the number fifty-six being associated with Vindyakas
in the way that sixty-four is with Yogunis. In fact, in other parts of India there is a group of
Astavinayakas near Poona who are regarded as svayambhi, a group of six Vinayakas in |
Ujjain, and a group of five Vinayakas in Puri Sometl:ing very particular must have been i
recuired of the Vinayakas in Kasi that their numbers were raised to such an extent. That the
number had symbolic rather than actual signiticance 1s clear from the fact that the Kas? KAanda
useif describes another eight and states there are thausands more Vindyakas i Kasi (57:123-
124). Fifty-six is seven times eight. Fight is explicable in terms of the eight direcnons. The
nuniber seven can de interpreted in various ways. Seven is considered to be thy number of Siva
and tie use of seven circles in the Vinayaka yrouping could then be interpreted as bemg the
embodiment of Siva in the oght directions. A more philosophical interpretation for the munber
seven in the Vindyaka grouping 1s that Stva protects his city by means of the Vindyakas in all
tae seven /okas. The Puranic sources dealing with the structure of the universe consider the
cesius as divided into seven layers or lokas, which individually are also divided into different
layers. At the very bottom there is the bhdrloka, followed by the bhuvarloka and the svarloka
Above these is the maharloka which is divided in three parts: bhadrasva, davrta and kctumala
At this stage of the cosmos is the world of salvation: once the mabarloka 1s reached one can
hope for entrance into the highest stage, the brahinaloka ‘Vhe maharioka also functions as the
axis of the middle varyas and, rather than being the horizontal plane between the northern and
southern spheres of jambudvipa,“" it symbolises the vertical axis of the universe. In the middle
of itis the mountain Meru which is regarded as the cannechon benveen the different worlds
From the maharloka one moves upwards through the janaloka, the tapaloka and finally reaches
brahunaioka (Grafenhorst 1993:262-274), This vertical movement through the seven diferent
fokas ts aiso an important aspect in the symboiism of the mandala in which there 1s a horizontal
plane and a vertical one. It is clear that the number seven, as noted before, 18 recurrent m the
“ Chapter ten deals wrk the worlds of India abd Agi, chapter clever, with the warld of Vahar the words af
Nimteand Varuna are desctibed im chapter twelve, chapter thitteen is about the worlds of Gandlavali and Alaki
and chapter fourteen deals with the world cf Sena.

“8 Janbudvioa 1s the repzesentation of the Indian cont:nent in Indian cosmology As discussed earlier, Mount
Meru is said ta ke the cente of this world, fom where tour lotus petals spread out i tee tour directions in onde:
support the four coctinents. Janbudsipa or [rdia is the so:.thern petal (LL Fredene 1987 $§21.
“*in the Grdiunandas Purina the folowing verse 1s found. ‘The meuntain Meru is the support of everything. | is
rary vojanas 1m henght. [ls body pesses through all tke fourteen words 7G V Tagare, translation im AITME

186

--- Page 188 ---
Kast Khanda and is indicative both of the entire universe as itis cosmolugised in Kasi and also
of Siva himself.

‘The three characteristics of a mandala identsfied caraer 1 this chapter are the protective
bouncary which divides sacred from profane space, the centre which in fact defines the world
created by the mandala, and the labyrinthine quality whereby the movement from the outside
ito the centre is protected and facilitated, also representing a movement frem the honzontal
plane to the vertical. Taling the first of these charav‘eristics, that of a mandala as protective, it
will be recalled that the word used in the Kasi Khanda for the concentric circles was avaranit,
which means ‘cover’ The Vindyakas on the outer or first circle mark the cight directions of the
circumambulatory route around the Kaé ksetea, the Paiicakrog! Yatra. This road starts from
Maurxanska ghat and continues for fifty-five miles around the city and the nearby villages
before coming back to the Visvanatha temple. On the way no less taan one hundred and vight .
shines have to by visited, and there are at least forty dharmasdlason the route to accommodate
pilgrims. All the temples, shrines and kuadas are found on the right hand side of the route
dharmasalas and welts are found on the ieft hand side. This strict division coincides with the
AoLon of purity and umpurity in which religious undertakings have to be performed on the
vignt, whine achons relating to everyday life are perfor:ned on the lef When a sacred object or
place has to ne circumambulated, it must always be or the nght hand si¢e. That the outer cirele
az Vinayakas corresponds with the Paficakros: Yatra means that the first circle of Vindyakas
finctions as the delineating boundary between the sacred and the non-sacred, thus purity and
impunity and the sacred and profane are conceptually combined by this correspondence. As the
Kasi Khanda states: ‘The eight Vindyakas of the outer ring ward off and expel ron-devetees'.
This image ef a sacred boundary was a famulir idea to the pilgrims entering Kasi thronga is
western gate, Dehaly Vinayaka, Before the railways brought pilprins im their thousands, the i
devotees used to cume into the Kasi Asetra by way of this Vinavaka, who was delieved to
protect the city.¥ The outer rig of the grouping delacales a sacred space and defends that
space agaist evil mntlucaces from outside. In chapter lify-seven there are a number of
leferences to the protection the Vinayakas offer to the sacred territory. Verse fifty-eight: ‘1 shali
mention the places where Dhundhi stayed for the sake of guarding the holy spot’. Verse sixty-
seven: “These eight Vindyakas are on the outer ring of Kasi. They expel non-devotees and
bestow all the siddius an Che devotees, The Vindyakas of the third circle are ‘protecung the
“Sor morte detail on where this entcurnamoula tary toute leads, see Rana PR Singh (1994) and Bek 11993 350-
387) Apart fom describing the Paitcaktesi zoute, boll: authors also pay attentan ic other vilgemage routes instee
the steave terntory of Kast
“Tre nane Dehali Vindyaka scars te Vindyaka of the th:eshold, Dekal: being the thresholé ef # dear or the
raised platiarun en float of (MW 497).

*© Conversations with Kedarnath Vyas and Rena PB Singh. Singh aise stated that the ofigeral Deity Vinayaka
mit depicted Vinayaka with his hands beside bam as if ke protested the city, However, it should be pated that the
rurent statue of the god 1s from the nineteenth or Wwerticth century, whereas the old statue seems to have
d:sappearcd ander suspicious circumstances. Thies icaves some doubt azout this statements value

18?

--- Page 189 ---
urtha (RKH 57°79) as are the ones on the fifth circle (KKJ1 $7:97). After all the Vinayakas
have been described, it 1s again emphasised that ‘these Ganesvaras should be remembered. They
pretecta man from failing into the ocean of calamines' (KKH 57:1.7), The outer ring of eight
Vinayakas therefore meets tae intial criterion for a mandala, namely that of protecting the sacred
space from the profane space outside
The second characteristic of the symbolism of the mandala is the existence of a centre
The filty-six Vinayakas in their concentric circles nave a definite centre in Dhundhirga whe uw
one sense is the fifty-seventh, but in another he represents all of the Vindyakas, who were
brought into being by his self-division™® Dhurdii's present position is in the middle of the 1
seven ciicies of Vindyakas and he 1s eulogised by Siva himself as the most important Vinayaka I
(KKH £7:12-15). He is called ‘the foremost one among those who cause obstacles’ (67:17). |
The Dhundht stotras were later incorporated in the Tristhalisetu and the Tirthaprakasa, thus
underlining their importance (see Dhundhi stotra in the Appendix). But just as the outer circle
of Vinayakas corresponds with the Paficakrosi Yatra im providing the outer boundary of the
mandala, so Dhundhiraya shares the centra! position wih no less than Visvanatha hunself.
Withua the Kasi mandala Visvanatha 1s considered to be the centre, and therefore it could be
| argued that the fifty-six Vindyakas are im fact centred around Vigvanatha rather than areurd
Dhundhiraja, out this would he to miss the point which is that the fifty-six Vindyakas and the
jiandala of Kasi not only share the same outer berder but also share the same centre. '
The third characteristic of the mandala is its labyrinthine quality. The early guidebooks
lo Banaras, and even some of the contemporary ones, describe a fifty-six Vinayaxa yatra which
begins at Arka Vindyaka and goes around the outer circle to Siddhi Vinfyaka, after whicl: the
secund cirle is entered at Lambodara Vindyaka This process continues until the centre,
Dhundhiraja, who offers access to Visvanatha himself) is finally reached. ‘his yatrd may be
referred to in the Kay: Khanda in verses forty-seven and forty-eight of chapter fifty-seven,
which state "Those who have performed the annual y#trd on the fourth day of the bnght half of
the month of magha. having offered faddus made of white sesame seeds, will be worthy of
being worshipped by the enemies of the Asuras. O Daundhiraja! People who wish to receive
the rewards of the Asetra should perform 2 full yaa on the auspicious fourth of mrigha to
please you The reward for this ydtrd 1s that all their obstacles will be destroyed. Even if these
verses did not refer to the fifty-six Vinayaka yatra, i could well be that they previded the
inspiration for its invention by pandits at a tater date. This yatra certamly meets the criterion of
tie labyrmthine character ofa mandala, but 1Calso brings out the fact that the centre has a double
aniculation on both the honzontal plane, where Dhundhiraja has divided himself and marked
“That Diundavis the recson behind the fifly-sia Vindyakas is also acknowledged by the story in chapter featy-
tao ol the Gasegs Purina in which Dhundia, fightiyg a battle agains: the “King of Demons’, divides Insel inte:
Calyesta statues im crder to wr, the fiche (42°12),
188

--- Page 190 ---
out the entire ksetra, and on the vertical plane, where Visvandtha reaches up to eternity. On a
anere mundane note it has to be said that the fifty-six Vinayaka vate is very rarely performed, if
atall.”

The three ersterta set up for a mandala are all met, therefore, by the fifty-six Vindyakas
Why then does the Kasi Khanda not use the word mandala? The reason is apparent froin the
above discussion. There 1s only ane mandala and that is the Kasi mandala which is represented
imythologically and stucturally in the Kasi Khanda The lifly-six Vindyakas share the same
outer boundary as the Kasi mandala and cflecuvely share the same centre The role of the
Vinayakas is threefold: ta protect the sacred Asetra, to remove the obstacles and hindrances of !
devotees, and to guarantee success af various kinds. they are the protectors, facilialors and i
yuarantors of the efficacy of the Kaéi ksetra. It would therefore have been inappropriate for the
authors of the Khanda to have used the werd mandala tor the fifty-six Vinayakas. There is ne
separate mandala of Vindyaxas, there is only the mandala of Kasi

While this answers the primary question raised by this chapter, there remain a number
of further points to clenfy conceming the composition and situation of the Vinayakas, These
are matters that need to be addressed before seeking in the Conclusion to establish a date for the
conceptualisation of the fifty-six Vinayakas.

The first of these pomts relates to the siuatyn of the Vindyakas. When examining the
location of the Vindyakas itis clear that a large mumber of the shrines are situated near water,
whether a Aunda, a kGpa or the bank of the Ganga. This proxunity to water can be explained in
various ways The following list illustrates the connecuion:

1 Arka Vindyaka Lolarka Kunda.

2 Durga Vinayaka Durga kunda and Durga temple

3 Bhimacand: Vinayaka Ghandarosagara and Devi temple.

4. Dehali Vinayaka Situated near a kunda of which the mane is not

known."

§. Uddanda Vindyaka Near a kéipa constructed 1m the late

seventgenth cennury

6. Pasapani Vindvaka Near a Ktipa.

7. Kharva Vinayaka Near Uie Varana and Ganga sanga.
S* Petsonai communication fron pundit Vyas
“he kandi azat Detail Vinayaka does nat lave a particular name: however, in the Tinthavivecana Khanda
Laksmtdhara dass mention a kinda called Vindyaka Kenda. Netaer Rana P. B Singh nor any of the pandis >
worked with were able to give any further information about tus kundi oc its location in’ Banaras Singh
stggesteethat there is a possibility that te kunda at Dekali Vinayaka may have been the Vindyeka kunda
However, sance no other sires, Kundas or temp.es of the Paneaxrosi: Yatra feature in the Kityahalpataru, ths
seems very Enikely

RO

--- Page 191 ---
8. Siddal Vindyaka Near Manikarmika ehit
9. Lambodara Vinayaka Lali ghae.
10 Kiitadanta Vinayaka Near Krmi Aunda.
11, Salatcatankata Vindyaka Near Marwadi Talah.
12. Kasmanda Vindyaka Near Kiismanda Devi shrine and near a well
13. Munda Vinadyaka Near a kiipa
14. Vikatadvya Viniyaka Near Dhipehands kunda.
15. Rajaputra Vinayaka Near the Varana-Ganga sanga.
16, Pranava Vinayaka On Trilocana ghat
1? Vakratunda Vindyaka On Ranamahal ghat.
Is. Ekadanta Vindvaka
19 ‘Trimukha Vinayaka
20. Paficasva Vinayaka On Pisicamocana kunda.
21 Heraimba Vinayaka
22. Vighnaraza Vinayaka On Citakula kunda.
23. Varada Vinayaka On Prahlad ghat.
24 Modakapriya Vinayaka Neara k@pa, which is known as one of the
three oldest Adpas im the city.
28, Abhaya Vinayaka On Dasasvamedh ghat
26. Sifghatunda Vinayaka
27. Kunitaksa Vinayaka At the back of Laksmii Aunda.
28 Ksipraprasddana Vindyaka On Pity kunda
29 Cintamani Vinayaka On isvargangi kunda.
30 Dantahasta Vinayaka Near Lohtiya kunda.™"'
31. Picindila Vinayaka On Prahlada ghat.
32. Uddandamunda Vinayaka
33 Sthiladanta Vindyaka On Man Mandir ghat.
™4. Kalipnya Vinayaka
38 Caturdanta Vindyaka On Dhruvesvara kiipa.
36, Dvimukha Vinayaka On Stirya kunda
37. Jyestha Vindyaka On Jyestesvara kapa which 1s now filled up.
38 Gaja Vinayaka
39. Kala Vinayaka On Ram ghat. |
40. Nagesa Vinayaka On Bhonsla ghat
41. Aga Vindyaka On Mir ghat, near the Dharna kiipa.
“Mtns Kunde :s now filed up, and a fence is the only incheatien of ls presence.
190

--- Page 192 ---
42. Systi Vinayaka Near the Suxra kiipa.
43. Yaksa Vinayaka In Brahmapun, near the Brahma kiipa
44. Gajakarna Vinayaka
45. Civaghanta Vindyaka The statue in Rani Kita is close to a tank which is
now filled up. The second possibility, situated on
the read te Cauk thana, is not near a kiipa |
46. Sthilajaigha Vindyaka For this Vinayaka there are several options. Apazt
fram the one in which it is claimed that ke is
sttuated 1n Rani Kila, there 1s ne link with a water
source.
47. Mangala Vinayaka On Bala ghat
48. Manikama Vinayaka On the ghat.
Mitra Vinayaka On Scindia ghat
49-53. Moda Vinayakas They are supposedly linked with the Jina Vapi
well
34 Tiana Vinayaca Beside the Jana Vapi well.
S$. Dvara Vindyaka
56. Avimukta Vindyaka Also linked with the JRdne Vapi well.
| The question which needs to be addressed 1s whether these Vindyalas were chosen te
‘be part of the group of fifty-six because they were situated near a kunda, a kiipa or the Ganga,
or wagther the proximity to water is purely coincidental. [t must not forgetten that unt) the |
. nineteenth century the Anandavana was full of inland lakes, wells and even sma‘! tributanes to
the Ganga, so that it would have been difficult for a shrine not to have been situated near water.
On the other hand, Chapter Two discusses the association of elephants and yaksas with water.
Both of these twa were formauve clements in the creation of the elephant-headed Vindyaka-
' GaneSa. In her study of Ganapati (1997), Thapan demonstrates a connection between Vindyaka
and the nagas, who also are closely linked to water. It is possible to consider the Vinayakas’
locaton near ty water as resonant of their earlier history. It is, of course, a commonplace that
water is potent in Hindu cuiture and necessary for the successful functioning of a temple, as it
1s required for ritual ablutions Whether, thevefare, there was a specitic reason to locate
Vinayakas close to water because of their lustorical associations, or whether they are thus
located following the normal Hindu instinct, or whether the connection is entrely coincidental,
cannot be answered, In atempting the full documentation of the Vinayakas it would, however,
de avgligent to ignore this feature.
would dice to express ony thanks to Professor Rana PS Sangh fu: poisting out some of the water suutces
which are no longest plesert in Banaras |
191
|

--- Page 193 ---
One of the most peculiar features of uke fifly-six Vinayaka grouping is the fact drat in
the Kasi Khanda fifty-seven instead of fifty-six Vindyakas are mentioned within the group,
thus disrupting the ideal model of eight mes seven. ‘Ta the north-castern direction Mangala
Vinayaka is protecting the city. Mitra Vindyaka 1s to be worslupped in the north of the Yama
rtha' C(KKEL $7:112-112)2" This verse states that on the sixth cirele of Vindyakas there 1s an
additional Vindyeka, thus bringing the number of Vinayakas on the sixth ring {o mine and the
total of Vindyakas mentioned within the group af Vinéyakas to fifty-seven. Whereas Mitra
Viniyaka is inentioned everywhere in later Sanskrit versions of the Kasi Khanda, other works
dgahiay with pilgrimages and the religious lite of the city have continued to use the number
fiPv-six, thus omitung Mitra or another Vindvaka, An earlier account uf the fifty-six Vindyakas
nas already shown that there is confusion about the Vindyakas called Citraghanta, Sthilajangha,
Mangaia and Mitra. The two post-Kaéi Khanda Nibanchas, the Tristhalisetu (198-200) and the
‘Yirthaprakaga (209-2!0)}, do not mention Mita Vindyaka as part of the ydtra, neither is he ?
mentioned m the various Hindi bouklets describing the different pilgnmages of Kasi. The |
Kasiyatraprakaga of 1906 stales that ‘Mitra Vindyaka is referred to in the Kasi Khanda but !
sue people call him Mangala Vinayaka'. The fact that Mitra Vindyaka is included in the hst of j
the fifly-six Vindvakas, allowing the regular pattern of seven times eight to be disrupted,
cadicates that Mitra Vinayaka must have acquired a certam importance by the tune of the
composition of the Kasi Khanda. Anaiysis shows that Laksimidhara did not mention aay \
Vinayaka with that name among the five Vinayakas, but much earligr, in the Mitaksara version i
of the Yajfavalkya Smt, one of the Vindyakas was called Mitra. A possible explanation for '
the fact that Mitra Vinadyaka was added to the group of fifty-six Vinayakas is that he had |
acquired a certain status on the base of the reference to him in the Smrii’/ Another passtbic
explanation is that in the period when the Kasi Khanda was composed there was already same
sort of confusion between Mangala and Mitra Vinayaka The city had already been destroyed
once and it is not unlikely that the chaos this destruction brought created confusion as to which
Vinayvaca was which. The fact that Mitra was included suggests that the authors felt oaliged to
include him, perhaps because they were uncer pressure trom some local pandit er secause they
were uncertain about the whole situation.

Having mentioned the fifty-six Vindyakas, the Kagi Khanda states that there are
‘Thousands, nay maumerable forms, of the Ganega Dhundhi there, devoutly worshipped by
many devotees’. This throws more light on the Vinayaka cult of the medieval period. By
referring to many thousands more, the authors of the Kasi Khanda make it clear that the filly-
“She English transtation by GV Taare of the Kadt Khanca omits Mangala Vinayaka and states. That
auspicious Vindyaka named Mitra Vindyaka protects the city at Isa in the north-east He cs to Le worshipped it the
nornief the Yansa tirtha’ (KKH or A[TM volume $9 57).
“to could be argucd that if Mitta had an important status un the relygious lif al the eity ne sould have beer
mernened by Laksmidhar, but, as has been pouned out eather, Laxsnidnara did emit cathe: 2 jot of the teligious.
Places which became importart in later umes [tis tretefore a’sa poss:blz thar Mhtra rose to his cungat states after
He twelfth century.

192

--- Page 194 ---
six Vindyakas are definitely not the only ones which were worshipped at the Gime, but it also |
seis the ifty-six Vinayakas apart as a group which was considered more unportant than the

other Vinayakas. Six more Vindyakas are named: Bhagiratha, Ganadhydksa, Hariscandra,

Vinayaka, Kaparda and Bindu (KET $7:124), Ta analogy with Mitra Vindyaka it can be

assumed that these Vindyakas plaved some role in the sacred geography of the city but they

were nat considered important cuough, or there was no room left for them, to be included in the

fifty-six. The question remains unanswered as to what exactly determined the status of cach af

the Vinayaka shrines, The presence in chapter fifty-seven of Mita Vinayaka and the six

Vinavakas mentioned above dogs raise questions as to way only fifty-six Vindyakas were

chosen to form the mandala. Other sacred numbers such as sixty-four or one hundred and eight

could have been chosen, since there were apparently numerous Vindyakas worshipped in Kasi.

Here itneeds to be mentioned that the Menutantra, a twerueth-century Tantric text, counts sixty-

four Vindyaxas instead of fifty-six.’ However, in this text it is stated that the Kas: Khanda |
oncy reters to fifty-six Vindyakas and Uaat number is regarded as being the right number.

At the end of the description of the fitly-six Vinayaka avandala, tive Vindyakas are
mentioned as the Moda Vinavakas.“* ‘The five Vindyakas are Moda and the others; the sixth
one is Jaana Vinavaka, tie seventh one 1s Dvara Vighnesa present in front of the great door
Avinukta Vinayaka, the eighth one, removes ali the distress of those with humble minds in my
holy spot Avimukta’ (KKH $7:113-114). The first reference to the ratnes of these five
Vinayakas 1s found in the Tristhalisetu in which their names are Pramada, Moda, Sumukha,
Durmukha and Gananatha (TS:198-100). The later Jirthaprakasa mentions the same names,
which suggests that from the sixteenth century onwards these five names were accepted as the
names for the Moda Vinayakas. From the reference in the Kasi Khanda and in the Guracarita
itis evident that the Moda Vinayakas were considered to be a group of five Vinayakas It is
difficult to know whether in the dirteenth century the Moda Vinavakas were also considered to
have individual identilivs, cach with their awn nace, The suniiarity between Paiica-Vindyaka
worship and the Moda Virayakas, also being five, is stnxing. Itis here assumed that the Moda

1 Vinayakas originated from the concept of Patica-Vindyaka werskip, although no explanation
can be giver for the difference in names. The devapattas and sifpapattas on which the Pariva-
Vinayaka concept is represented give evidence of the importance of tive Vinayaka worship in
Banaras. The representation af the Patica-Vindyakas an panels corresponds with their
significance in the Kasi Khanda where they are said to be sitiated on the inner circle, closest ta
the main shrine of the city. Although the Vinayakas mentioned i the Krtvakalpatant have
Thon ave some shyht dferences between the Merautantrs sani the Kasi Khanda concermng the names of the
Vintyakes Lkedenta is Dantura, Trimukha is Tiivadana, Varad 1s onutted; Kisutaksa me Kipraksa; Cddaoca
Munda is cle Heramiza, Deitunda ts Dytundaksa, Mapxarcw. is omitted, as ate ASH and Sthélaogha Mita
Vimayaka ts there but because Asa and SthOayangha are omitted there only ar sic Vinkyvakas en te sixty
enclesure (Mferutanta, 1908)

*S Kor the location of the Moda Vinay akas, seo Fig. 4 MV is Moda Vinayeka, PV is Prainoda Vunsasa. DV ss
Durmukag Vinayaka, SV 1s Sumusxha Vinayaka and G¥ is Gananatha Viniyaxa
193

--- Page 195 ---
differen: names, the evolution of the Moda Vinayakas from these five Vindyakas is suggestive
‘The Pafica-Vindyaka concept is clsewhere i the city attested by the Paficdmrta Vinayakas in
Didh Vinayaka Mohalla. These five Vindyakas are Dfdh, Dali, Grea, Madhu and Safkara
Vinayaka, A sixteenth-century text, the Girvanapada Manjari by Varadara:a, mentions the
atohalla which suggests that these five Vindyakas were then voasidered as an established group
within the religious hfe of the city. Dadh Vinayaxa is still a very prominent Vinayaka in this
heighbourhood Although in the sixteenth century these Vinayakas ebviously had acquired a
certain status, there 1s no mention to any of them in the Kasi Khanda, thus suggesting that their
rise to promunence occurred during the Muslim period.
Finally, wis necessary to consider the problem altendant upon Dhundin Vindyaka.*” '
The carliest reference to Dhundhirdja is found in the Krtyakalpatare in winch Dhundhi is hailed i
as the lirst and foremost among the Pafica-Vinavakas. Since there is lite more known than the
fact that there was a Pafiva-Winayeka worship in which Dhuadhi had an important status, 14 is
difficult to estimate when a Vindyaka named Dhundhi became prevalent in Banaras and why
Dhundlu acquired his prestige. Within the present context of the twenty-one moesi unportant
7 GaneSa shrines in India, Daunchi 1s unmistakably connected erly with Kasi (B. R. Sharma
| 1978 (a):21-23). Considering that the Linga Purana was the source for the Krivakalpataru’s
deseriphon of sae Paiica-Vindyakas, it can be argued that Dhundhi must have acquired ‘is {
clevated status during an earlier period, possibly around the eighth or ninth century. The t
Dhundti sfotra in the Kasi Khanda and the importance which 1s attached to the deity clearly |
ind:vate the elevation of his status, which took place ai ar earher stage. Contrary to the
Tirthavivecana Khanda, the Kasi Khanda dows give the location of Dhundhirgya, which 1s in the
vicimty of Vigvandtha. Fypotheses concerning his iocation at the Gime of the ¢weltth-century
Nibandha can be constructed. It could be argued that Dhundhi, because of his later association
with Visvanatha, onginally occupied a shrine near Avimukta, who during the Gahadavala
periud was the main deity of the city, and that after the decline in power of Avimukta his status
oweame associated with the new presiding god, Visvanatha. Another possibiiity as that
Dhunehi, despite his anportance, was not connected with the Avimnukla cult and was located
somewhere else in the city, and that the association with Visvanatha occurred as late as the
period of the composition of the Kasi Khanda. In that case il can be argued that the Kas?
Khanda, as a culugy of Viévanatha, brought any other exisung god under the umbreila of
Visvesvara Because his status seems to have been established by the uvelfth century, it 1s
unlixely that the deity ineved to another area a century later. Suxul's arguinent tat the orginal
site of Dhundht could have been the present location of Rajaputra Vindyaka can thus be
ignored. Dhundhi possibly formed part of the Pafica-Vinayeka worship as carly as the ninth or
tenth centunes, which resulted in a reference in the Lifga Purdna which formed the source for
“the iacation of Dhundlt is ind:eated on Fig 4 by the fetter D.
194

--- Page 196 ---
Cis Tirthavivecana Khanda of the Krtyakalpataru. However, this reference docs not suggest the
Importance of the god other than in the Pafica-Vinayaka worslup. It 1s likely, therefore, that the
organisation of the fifty-six Vindyakas took place afer the compos:ton af the Liiga Purana,
thus explaining why 1t was omitted both by the Purana and by Laksmidhara

Whereas there is ne geourephical formation about Dhundhi's lpcation provided by the
tweifth-century Artyakulpatary, the Kasi Khanda reters to his shrine as being new the Jiana
Vap well 'A devotee takes his holy bath ia Manikarnika alang with the cloth wern and walks
ahead [hot muuding} tie feet geting sotled. He offers iibation to the celestial sages, human
beings and the manes. He then comes to Jianoda titha and worships you' (KKE 57 35).
Furtner, there 1s another geographical clug: ‘First, you are Dhundhiraja slightly te my nghi. You
seek out and bestow all the desired objects and wealth on the devotees’ (KKH 57:43). These
verses indicates Uhat at the time of the con:position of the Kbanda, the shrine of Dhundhi was
seat Hiana Vapr and the Visvanatha temple. Today the shrine of Dhundhi is still ia the vicimty
of Visvanatha but the present statue is of a late date and is the subject of a whole controversy,
which not only gives evidence of the difticuities of locaung the original site but also suggests |
that the worship of Dhundhi, like that of the fitty-six Vinayakas, was conunuous. The small |

| shuine to Diundin is situated on the left hand side as ane enters the Visvanatha gah leading to
ie teinple. The roughly-hewn features of the statue may suggest an early date but the statue is
dated to the eighteenth century. Most of the pilgrims who visit the shrine today do nut realise
that this Ohundhi mart: used to be the centre of a controversy i which several Vindyaka noiirtis
vied with one another for the title of Dhuadhiraja, In tus book Sukul notes that untl fifty years
apo the present Dhundhiraja was not considered to be the real ene, as the Adi Dhundhiraya of
shat ume was the Paticamukha Vindyaka in the Rani Bhavani temple (Sukul 1977:348), ‘Hus
story was confirmed by the pandit of this Patcamukha Vinayaka."* ‘The place of dus
Paficamukha Vindyaka is above the present shrine im the temple ef Nilakanthesvara, whose
construction was also commissioned by Rani Bhavani.

The iradition 1s thet the present Dhundhiraja was established by a Pesva king or
merchant who, when visiting the temples and shrines late in the evening, found the Dhundhi
shrine in the Nilakanthesvara temple closed. Disappointed by the fact that he could not worship
Dhundlu, he decided that pilgrims should always have the opportunity to visit Dhurdhi and
“Interview with pact Sharaa, January 29, 1997,

“The statue of this Padearukha Vinayaha ts cescnbed by Yadas (1907-37 and plate 18) ‘leis a tive-feced, fur-
aencd seated usage. The pesutal organ is prom:nently indicated He has worn a kisarido suekuta, The atcibutes nv
hands area dania in the lowet right, pading ut the upper ghia nda pain the upper lett and 2 modeka patra in
the lower [eR band His normal amddle tank +s hanging siraugit with cts tp tamed towards the lef The seo aight
aided tunks are tumed towards the right and the owo left sided tienks ate luted towards Hie left The third eve is
visible’ Yadav attrrsutes thas Vonayaxa to tig late med.eval pena Maron-Dubost also includes this Vinayaxa
lus Secs and beneves itacnatly isa Hesainba Vindyasa’ because of the lon figure en the night foot He dates it to
the sixtecuth or severteeath century (1997 180, plats 108}.

195

--- Page 197 ---
therefore gave the order to establish a new Dhundhi aints."’ Despite the fact that the |
construction or consccration of the new marti is not officially recorded, “' the stary proves to
be truz. The eighteenth century was a period in which the Marathas were very active in the city
aud both the Pesvas and Rani Bhavani patromsed a number of the temples and shrines.
Considering that the Paficamukha Vinayaka of the Rani Bhavam terple was believed to be Adi
Dhundhi, new questions are raised as ta the identity ef Dhundhy Why was a Paicamukha
Vinayaka called Dhundm, or why did Dhundhi suddenly become represented with five heads
unthe eighteenth century? There do not scem to be clear answers to these questions, and vanous
theories have been advanced. |
Before embarking on an analysis of the tusloricai facts tis insportant to cile a sloka
taken trom the Ganesa Purdna The forty-third chapter eulogises Dhundhiraja who had baled
the king of thy demons. All the gods of heaven worshipped Dhandhi: ‘In this way he was
worshipped and he was wrapped with seven covers While being present in Varanasi, ali fifty-
sx Vinayakas protect him. There at the gate of Siva, a Ganesa with five faces stayed’ (Ganesa |
Purana, Krida Khanda, 43:9-10)."* This verse of the Ganesa Purana indicates the presence of a |
five-faced GaneSa at the time of the composition of the Ganesa Purana but it does not state
whether or not that Paficamukha Windyaka was Dhundhi. This seems very unlikely because a
verse of the Ganesa Purana suggests that the Paficamukha Vindyaka 1s one of the many
Vinayakas which reside in Kasi: ‘The others with various names stay pervading Varanasi. Al!
GaneSas came to stay there after Siva had stayed! (Kridd Khanda 42:11)
It is difficult to imagine that anybody could establish a new mit: of a deity ef the
mmportanes of Dhundlwraja when another statue was already consecrated as such. Therefore one
must consider that Paficamukha Vinayaka :s indeed of an varlier date than the present
Dhandlusaya. The reference to Dhundliraja i the Kasi Khands indicates that: Dhundhi's
position in the cily was near the Jana Vapi well and at the right hand of Siva, which suggests
thei at the ime of the composinen there was a Dhundhi shrine or that it had been there before
be:ng destroyed by the Muslims. There ts litle doubt that this shrine had disappeared by the
sixteenth century and that it was reconstructed under the supervision of Todar Mal and
. Narayana Bhatta. However, a century later the Visvanatha temple and its adjacent shrines were
all razed by Aurangzeb's amies, leaving everything in ruins again. When in the middle of the
eighteenth century Rani Bhavani came to Banaras, the Visvandtha temple had not yet been
ivconstructed. There are no ducuments giving reasons for her choosing to build a
“Tae story bebied the new Diuundhi was told to me by the pardit and his wife, aithoug’ they do not save any
tea whether the Muratha was a Pessa sadieman ora merchant: jt 1s aiso ranated i, Sukui's book (1977 348 349)
“The Public Record Office mt Varanasi docs not ave 2 record of the constraction of he new Dhundin shrine
vot has the Rani Whavaai Trust in: the Bengali tots Besause of the meny proverty disputes im recent: years, mans
otticall secords have gone missing. Fieldwork revealed that a lot of Bralunes furrlics Filsets clan: to be the beirs
of teraples ate shes
? Panslated into Englisa by D. Tsipathi
196

--- Page 198 ---
Nilakantieévara temple, but the secretary of the Rani Bhavani trust suggested that it was
because her deceased husband was named Nilakantha.*? ‘The question remains as to why she
chose lo estabhsh a Pancamukha Vinayaka. There ere two possible hypotheses When Rin!
Bhavani came ta the city, the Marathas had already acquired a major ivfluence 11 religious life:
there were a great number of Marathi pandits, and the Peévas patronised the reconstruction of
the holy city. Earner a has been suggested that the Ganesa Purana was partly written in
Banaras (see Chaper Three). The verse referring to the five-headed Vinayaka does indeed
suggest a thovough knowledge of the city and iis sacred spots: it therefore could be that, if the
establishment of the miirt: preceded the composition of the Purana, the Paficamukha Vindyaka
of Rau Bhavani led to die acceptance of this Vindyaka in the Ganesa Pardna
A second hypothesis 1s that Rani Bhavan had been influenced by the Ganesa Purdna
when establishing her Vinayaka statue LH this is so, there is another prohlem ta take into
account, The Upa-Purdna makes it clear that the reference to the Patcamukha Vindyaka was j
referring to an exisung feature within the religious life of the city, thus indicating that, if Rani
Bhavan had not yet established her five-faced Vindyaxa, there was another similar Vindyaka
; situated at the gate of Siva Surprising’y enough there is such 2 miirti, fifty metres away from
tie tempis built by Ram Bhavani and the present Dhundhi shrine. ‘This other Paficarnukha
Vinayaka has been known since the early seventies as Yaksa Vinayaka (Sukul 1977.348-349)
and is not to be confused with the Yaksa Vindyaka on the sixth citele of the fifty-six Vinayaka
mandala. Sukal declared that tus Vindyaka was sometimes also called Dhundhiraja (bid). The
! statue represents Ganesa with a head in the middle and two heads at cach side, the trunks of the
| Sour side heads curling inte tig air. The Vinayaka 1s depicted in a dancing pose P. K. Agarwal
(1977-54-18, see also Yadav 1997:37, plate 16) has dated this figure to the sixteenth or
| seveleenth century. His present position is ma small temple, on the top of some steps, on the
left side before enter:ng the actual Vigvandtha Jane and Diandbiraya. ‘The presence of this
Pancamukhe Vinayaka and iis date make 1 possib’e that it was this Vindyaka which was the
model for the verse in the Ganesa Purdna. However, if this is accepted as an explanation for the
reference in the Purana, then why did Rani Bhavani establish another five-faced Vinayaka?
Was she advised to do se or was it an act uf rivalry Setween the Bengals and tie
Maharashtrans? Or maybe the Pafcamukha Vindyaka which is currendy known as Yaksa
Viniyaka was established on its present location after Rani Bhavani's nnage?
“" The scuretary of the Rani Bhavani Trust, ntored Mr. P21, told me Gat she constructed a Nilakantiesvaca temple
because ber deceased husvand was so called.
“From I73§ CE onwards the PeSvas started the constuction of seve! gadis, and Ceukhamba ard Thatheei
bazar were developed frora woodlané. At the beginning of the c:zhteenth contiry Maratha Brahmins made up one
thid of the Brahrme popalazen (RP. Bo Singh 1993.82. JP Mashia 1986°171-178) Bayly (1983 282)
eapluns the inthix of Maratha immigrants im the ee-gious le of Barares us the result of the vss to power of the
Chiwesan Braimiis in Maratha peliies afer 1780 CE and the fact that <ad1 was considered to be the ultenate
centy af the Braknanieal cuit
197

--- Page 199 ---
A third possible hypothesis which might be considered is that the five-faced Yaksa |
Vinayaka was located in the victuity of the Visvanatha temp‘e and reconstructed in the late
sixteenth century before it was again destroyed. During the destruction of the temple the statue,
whici is about one metre in height, might have been saved, as oflen was ihe case, and kept ;
somewhere untl it was safe lo re-establish it. When Rani Bhavani gave the order to establish |
her tive-faced Vindyaka the Vigvanatha temple had not yet been re-erected, so it could be that
Rani Bhavam, following the reference in the Ganesa Purdna, decided ta build a Paticamukha |
Vinavaka in the vicinity where the Visvesvara temple had been. When, ‘ater, the orginal i
Paficamukha Vindyaka resurfaced, it was placed in another shrine a bit further down the lane :
Ike change of name of the latter Vinayaka indicates that there has been a egal battle concerning
the authenticity of Uns Vindyaka, although T have not come across anybody who could
remember it. Most people in the neighbourhood call both the five-faced Vinayakas
‘Paficamnukha’

The motivation for the construction of another Paicamukha Vindyaka is shrouded in
invstery but the whole controversy around the two five-faced Vindyakas and Dhundhiraja does
give us more insight into the original Dhundhiraia. Tne Ganesa Purdna's reterence to the five-
faced Vinayaka suggest that the Paftcamukha Vindyaka is not Dhundluraja but another
Vinayaka which probably was not considered to be among the fiity-six Vindyakas. The fact
that sitting at the gate of Siva there are two five-faced Ganegas who both used ta be known as
Adi Dhundkiraja suggests that there has been a confusion. The verse of the Kasi Khanda leaves
neo doubt that the place of Dhundh: was to the right of Visvanatha, near the JA3na Vapi weil
Aithough it cou'd be argued that the expression ‘siting a the right hand’ imeans that onc is
considered to be 4 close associate, it would be negligent to ignore Uns detail as information
avout the anginal site of Dhundhi. Locking at the present situation it can be seun that
Obunchiraya is sitting at the left hand side of Visvandtha. Even uf the sixteenth-century site of
the temple is taken into account Dhundtu, and thus alse the two Paficamukha Vinayakas, are at
the lelt Left and right depend on the posilion of the viewer, but considering the directions with
north as a point of reference, Dhundhi is on the left hand side (see Fig. 4).

Considering the earlier sites for the Visvanatha mandir, during the Gahadavala period
the temple was supposedly situated on the site of the Razziya mosque, at the other side of the
raad ta Cauk (Sukul 1977:178; Motichand 1985-190; BE. C. volume XV:298, Eck 1993:132-
133) From the Tirthavivecana Khanda itis clear that Ohundhi was the first and the foremost
Vindyaka who had to be worshipped at that time, although the Khanda dees not refer to any
details regarding the site of this Dhundli and therefore it cannot be assumed thal Dhundhi was
situated in the vicinity of the Vigvanatha temp!e located an the site of the Razaiya mosque It
Dkundlivaja had his shrine there then that position would have corresponded with the right
hand s:de of Vigvanatha. There are no details as to whether in the twelfth century Dhundh was

198

--- Page 200 ---
already located near Vigvanatha, and therefore it can only be assumed that the original Dhundhi
shrine was destroyed during the Muslim raids. The reference to the place of Dhundhi in the
Kasi Khanda does indicate shatin the periud of the composiuon of the Kas: Khanda the shrine :
of Dhuadhi was to the right of Visvanatha, and if the temple was close by the Razziya mosque |
then the current position of the Paicamukha Vindyaka whose present name is Yaksa Vinayaka
corresponds to that
However, this has not explained why the Paficammukha Vindyakas both became known
under the name Diundhiraja. One possibility 1s dealin the thirteenth century the Dhundhi shrine
was situated in the vicinity of the present Paitcamuxha Vindyaxa which is dated to the sixteenth |
br seventeenta century. After the period of religious revival of the ‘thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries thy Muslims raided the city several umes, destroying everytinng which was sacred to I
the Hindus We may assume that if there was a Dhundhi shrine then 1 was also demolished at !
that time During the reconstruction of the Visvanatha tempie on the site where the Aurangzeb
mosque now stands, 10 was decided to re-establish Dhundht's shrine. [f his pos:uen had been
ithe sane as his present location then they might have preferred to reconstruct the shrine in its
original p.ace, regardless of the fact that he is supposed to be at Vigvanatha's right hand. During
tus period of revival the outlook of the mir might not have been an tmportant matter, thus
allowing a five-faced Ganesa tu he consecrated as Dhundhi When the whole neighbourhood
was destroyed by Aurangzeb the five-faced state might have been rescucd. When Rani
Bhavan constructed her Nilaxanthesvara temple with anotier five-faced Vindyaka, the older
five-faced Vindyaka might not have come to the surtace yet. Probably the Bengali queen
followed some pandis advice in reconstructing a five-faced Ganega, as there had previously
been one at the gate of the Visvanatha temple wiich had claimed the name of Dhundhi. In
' conclusion it could be suggested that the confusion between the five-faced Vinayaka and
Dhunchirdia originated in the chaos that followed the aftermath of the Muslim invasions. But
| how can one explain that a Maratha prince of merchants was allowed to found another Dhunchi
shrine underneath? Smee there are no records of this, it has to be assumed that by the time chs
. Maratha visited the city in the middle of the eighteenth century, the situation had changed in the
sense that the Marathas controlled both the religious and the politcal Ife. When the Maratha
proposed building another Dhundhi shrine 1 might have happened that pandits looked into the
matter and decided that, since Dhundat is not mentioned anywhere as having five heads, the
Paneamukna Vinayaka of Rani Bhavani could net be the actual Dhundhiraya. The Maratha
powers in the city probably then had the proposal to construct a new Dhundhi shrine accepted.
““Wewould be logical to beteve that Real Bhavam would have bye alowed to construct a Daundin shrine and
mage thers aligacw was one
199

--- Page 201 ---
Fig. 9. Sun Images in Banaras
(Map courtesy of Rana P.B Singh and J, McKim Malville (1995)
VARANASI
“She hend River 2 a si 7"
TASER eT To ee
| >
: i
uray ee
eect vaouny. Ss} a: Summer Solstice e
, _ 14@ ° wis STS
hoy UTTARARKA fi >. Weog » 4
tos. Me OY fh
| 1D Ate, ot (7 2
| ., ve “—y P Kesnava @
ay 2
| . x Ms % eee
® if Se netgrmervl- ef
BS u A tannocs 11-275 aot if
i 2 £7 OM EW es so
2 ware pe] Bb ate
3G y A eget oe a . ce VE Vernal € quinos
' a ee loge GP
: ie. maa Be M, Madhyomeshvora
a B b/s
. cn Sy 1% |
' SAMBA We. oe YAM A p: g'dion-Mororo Samtrann |
H d \ Ne , °° pe Ba. Be Bee want Sotstice |
| uy LC ‘ jot
' eed. Bt s é {
= . ° v Fg x Gop:
| { . Me ° Sy North A
: oN . hot
| \ © a“ ‘ 2 < * | 43%: tee
\ \ pf ° a, io
: Ate . t
. a> ry . .
| \ Mo ee {Sun/Aditya Shrines:
| | Aw goth % Cosmic order & Time
| 3 5 2
- 3 Aulvamol Equvot
| [veer y i\ % o 1 2
ais in
tree oy aA! © Rona PB Singh ‘
200

--- Page 202 ---
z
oF
Te - a ma an
ara . 2 TTY 5 Tee, ~ \
Jt : aa 22 Tt N € iN
/ z x a 2 mA SF rn
° a . in .
/ 27 oc v2 S on .
a Zz a“ ee Be. NS. EN \
/ v ay a a> a \ 9. N \
/ re - et ~S \EOON :
f Sy va ol ee N\ we \
: , ; . _ 4 . N g . .
. we oa S ~ Nog oN \
‘ So ae oe s a x 2 \
; ; J / al a2." ~ \a < \ ‘ 1
! / ! f oe 8 an \ , 7 :
i : , / &2 ee N\A 2 \ \ Hi
1 : : : , F aed toy \ + ‘ i '
1 I , : : ’ fee 4 \ \ 1 \ 1
I ' ! i foot : - rn 4 . 1a} \ te
! an a: al i 8: : I at i ‘2 is 4 ie
: Pa) pi Ps i 2! i 5 1 2 wh B 513 2
5 2 of ool eo alts yal od <1 wlk FR RB Sig GG ‘
Bt can ft py Sa ua ah : ~ : ba a “ a
ant Be wt at ran t 1; i i : i i
5 a i . ‘ \ \ & . ee : f t : :
. . \ . we gy ~ lat Pa oy Py ‘
& ‘ ‘ ‘ SRS, a 3 roid , .
a ‘ ‘ \ Ea ~. 4 - / 2 é
= \ \ O™. s, - < 2
> 5 \ Va 9 ON oe og a a Se f :
° \. ca ss. ao: ’ 2 oe
& ~ ad . q
eS \ wit NS "Ss a us 23 a
2 . YBN. ~ AE a“ as “
rs) s RON se §. nea na ae =
‘3 Na ~S me So. a 7 a7 °
3 ~ te ome weet - aay bey
a 44 ss es Coes oa ot
g . TE
FA
& Fal
2
3
3
s
a
<

--- Page 203 ---
fig 7 Map prepared by James Princep (1831)
an eee ae iS oF wr aKy page XN : a
SE, Pa a aed ea ie
Ti — eyo bie bay i pt ae x
mt] att wml 7 gi y wo ame:
got Et a ~ 4 ite "finn
ater AO / oa sii a Fine
CO Se ia So FeO *E; |
fF r a ae cam mi Ae + ( 8), 2 ng |
A... bi a ey and ee Se ABN Be
re coe i a wpa a
~ : 7 ses be goe A :

--- Page 204 ---
Fig. 12. Preliminary Findings by R. P. B. Singh and J. McKim Malville :
Q : -.
v { N v
wage. (sn) | . ne
it E ; f
, uy H Pe ines ©
wae wh a Sa de
1 ED
! I, , Sey! te .
I wl en a role é
a neo .
$2 84 8785 82 RB 22.9 82.92 82.94 22:96 s > 98 a3 ‘

--- Page 205 ---
CONCLUSION
Dating the fifty-six Vindyaka Mandala
This thesis has, for the tirst dime, documented and dated each of the fifty-six Vinayakas in
Banaras; it has shown that they mark out a mandala of Kasi itself which they protect and grant
agcess toa manner which guarantees success; it has alse shown that this concept of a Kasi
mandala and the role of the Vindyakas within it was well understood by those who compiled
(ie Kasi Avandia, even shough they never reter to the fifty-six Vindyaka grouping as a mandala.
The question that remams to be answered is when and by whom this concept of fifty-six
Vinayakas was first established Although 10 absolute and provable answer can be given te
tis guestion, since the required hustorical evidence docs not exist (and nosis it likely thas it ever
| did, at least not as an inscmpuion er record}, what can be done is iv offer a hypothesis of
gicatest probability based an the use of circumstantial evidence and the chmination of unlikely
candidates. [t1s this task which constitutes the Conclusion to this thesis.

The upper limit tor the date of the establishment of the fifty-six Vinadyaka concept inust
be the K4¢7 Khanda because this contams, for the first timy, a complete account of the fifty-six
Vinayakas, their focations, their functions and thei mythological role, fk will be recalled that the
date established here tar the Khanda is between 1250 and 1330 CE. It cannot be before 1200
CK, as at is a gierfication of Visvandtha as the Lord of Kasi, and, as is known froin
Laksinidhara’s Krfyakaipataru, Avimuktesvara still occupied that position during the twelfth
century; equally it cannot be later than 1440 Ch because that was the date Srinatha rendered it
into Telugu. Ir 1296 CE a Padmesvara temple was constricted at tie doorway to the
ViSvanatha tempte, which implies that the Vigvanatha temp.e had been reconstructed by that
date. If ane seeks to narrow the dating of the Kas: Khunda down further, then one could
suggest a daic of between 1275 and 1328 Ce. The question here is whether the people who
compiled the Khanda, and who add:tionally aad the Vigvanatha temple reconstructed, were also
responsible tor formulating the concept of the fifty-six Vinayakas within the overall purpose of
cosmologising Kasi and placing it under the Lordship of Visvanatha

There are a murnber of difficulues with this proposal, however. ‘The first is the name and
the nature af the god. The name used consistently throughout the Khanda is Vindyaka, a name
sll used of the images in Banaras today. Ganesa is used, as 1s Ganapati, but far less often and
nearly aways as ford of the Ganas, that is, as the Lord of another group of Siva's servants. By
the time of the Kasi Khanda, the rames Ganesa and Ganapati were more hkely to have been

206 |

--- Page 206 ---
used than Vindyaka, because by then Ganesa had developed further into an independent deny
and had ar established position im the sindrla paficopasana puja. The third quadrant of the Kas:
Khanda, chapters fifty-one to seventy-five, interestingly deals almost caclusively with the
members of the smdrta paticupasana puja, which was well established by this time, in that it
begins with Stirya, followed by his alternate, Brahma, then deais with Ganega, Visnu, Siva and
Durga. White w was certainly the purpose of the Khanda to subordinate all to the Lordship of
Siva, the reduction of Siva’s son to the slatus of Vindyaka would be strangely anachronistic for
tis period since by then Ganega had status, independence, and severaf const:tuencies of
followers Granted, Puranic works are often deliberately anachromstic, nevertheless, the
coreept of Vinayak used in the text is ar carly one and Ganesa’s method of deluding the
ciizers of Banaras reflects, in precise detai:, the technicue of Vindyaka possession given i the
Yapiavalkva Smrt: of between the third cad fitth centuries CE More will be said shortly 02 the
conception of Vindyaka used, butif'a grouping of such images were to have been established at
the Gine of the Khanda itis likely that a mere evolved vonception of the deity would have been
used, and probably a different name.

However, if the name and nature of Vindyaka seem anachronistic in the Khanda,
producing a representation of Vindyaxa-Ganesa which is unlikely for the period, it could be
argued thal the wealth of topographical detail given in the locatien of the Vinayakas was clearly
gained at first hand and that Laxsinidhere, writing in the twelfth century, mentioned only the
Patica- Vinayakas and Dhundli in his survey of Banaras, which argues against the grouping
being in place during the Gahadavala period. Taken together, (hese points would suggest that
the launching of the concept vf the fifty-six Vinayakas was broadly contemporary with the
compilation of the Khanda. But Laksimidhara cannot be taken as evidence because of the

' ‘Gosyneratic methodology he employed, only giving those sites and shrines which had already
been mentioned in a Purana, and thus of necessity eacluding Vinayakas other than those six
even if the fifty-six Vinayakxas did exist in Laxsimidaara’s ume he would net have recogmsed
them in his text. With the argument from [aksmidhara invalidated, the argument from the
precision of the topographical detaits given in the Khanda works against the case for a lite cate.
The individua: names and precise location of cach Vinayaka, it could be argued, implies that at
the trae of the Khanda they had been established and were widely known, a process which
could havg tacen centuries.

The wo most powerful arguments against associating the compilers of the Khanda with
Lhe fonnulahon of the concept of the fifty-six Vindyakas, however, are the locations and dates
of the mdividua! images. A significant number of the Vindyakas, twelve, are situated in what, in
the period concerned, were Muslim quarters of the city, and a number of others are logated in
mixed quarters. [tis unlikely that Vindyaka images could have been installed in these locations
even unéer the most benign Muslim rule. If this is the case ther the Vindyaka cancept musi

205

--- Page 207 ---
have beer estabrished before 1194 CE. This is further supported by the dating of the individual
images. At the end of Chapter Four there is a table winch shows the Vindyakas classified as la
then respecuve periods The first column contains eleven Vindyakas which, m spite of the
period being shown as seventh to twelfth century CE, could all belong to the tenth century or
earker. [Done adds to these eleven the Patica-Vindyakas, which were the prototype of the five
Moda Vinayakas and include Dhundhi, and if one also adds Dehali and Siddhi Vindyakas, whe
mark the west and east respectively and are ‘cnowr from cariy texts, then there are cighteen
which are known to be in place by the teath century, Furthermore, ail the directions ary
represented except for the south-west, and the circles are all represented except for circle six.
which was the area subject lo the greatest levels of iconvelastic destruction, Giving Uke number
ai the circle alter the name of the Vindyeka, the spread can be envisaged thus: north
Vikatadvija (2); north-east: Kharva (1), Varada (3), Kala (5); east: Siddlu (1), Modakapriva
(3), south-east: Abhaya (3); south: Exadanta (3), south-west: none; west: Dehali (1),
Kiismanda (2), Gajakarna (5); north-west: Cintamani (4), Jyestha (S$) The Pajica- Vindyakas
cannot be assigned to any particuiar direction, but belong to circle seven Thus one third of the
Vinayaxas, representing all but one direchon and ali but ong cule, were im existence in the
tenth century. ICcan be argued that their aligninents and their distribution in the circles ‘ater
described in the Kasi Khanda are sufficeat to suggest strongly that the entue group and the
concept itself was in place during the tenth century, and therefure that the compilers of the Kasi
Khanda cannot have been responsible for the formulation and execution of the concept of the
fifly-six Vinayvaxa group

The argument from the dag of the Vindyakas just given to disqualify the authors of
lay Kasi Khanda cqualiy disqualifies the Gahadavala dynasty. They certainly had great power
and prestige and they were known to have been patrons of religion and sacred sites all over the
north af India. They were Vaisnavas but they were known from their inscripuuns and edicts to
have been tolerant towards Saivas and Sauras. I they had established such a grand concep: in
Banaras, however, it would probably be known today either from inscriptions or from
Lakstmidhara, who could scarcely have ignored what lus awa patrons had done, Bul the dating
of the individual Vinayakas rules them out, as it does the preceding dynasty in Banaras, the
Kaiacuris. The Kalacuris were known to be ardent Savas: they made grants to Saivite causes
and institutions and one of their later kings, Karnadeva, moved his capital from Prayag to
Banaras and built the Kanyamery temple in the north of the city, But this did not happen antil
mudway through the eleventh century CE, which is too late if the circles of Vinayakas were
established by the middle of the tenth century

Its this necessary to investigate the reining dynasty of ninth. to tenth-century nerti
(India, the Pratharas, as the possible instigators of the fifly-six Vinavakas. As has been shown
1 Chapter One, the Pratharas had becn arouad for 2 long tune. Originally from the west of

206

--- Page 208 ---
Sadia. they made their way over the whole north of India and, having conquered the Rastrakitas
and the Palas, they were the sovereign power mn north India daring the ninth and the tenth
centuries. Under their rule, Iiterature, art and architecture flourished, and their remains give
evidence of highly sophisticated architecture and sculpture. They also proved to be great
patrons of the rehgious centres as well as of the various religious groups within their kingdoin,
be they Vaisnavas, Saivas, Sauras or Jains Although there ts no epigraphic evidence, 1 can be
assumed that the spread of the paficopasana piyd took place under their rule, as 1s shown by the
construction of pafcopasana temples. The sculptures dated to the Prauhara period show that
Vinayaka-Ganega worship was prevalent throughout their whole kingdom. Kakiaka, a locai
ruiz: of the Jodapur Pranhara clan, commissioned the Ghativala pillar on which four Viniyakas
faced Ue four cardinal directions, This pillar not only symbolises the dynasty’s affinity for
Vindyaka, also atludes to the directionai character the gad embodied m this sculptare and,
Nore importantly, gives evidence of Vinayaka being associated with the merchant classes, as st
was coustucted to protect the traders in all the four directions. Banaras was situated at the
eastern border of the Pratihara kingdom, but was of considerable importance. [t was during
Pratihara rule that Kasi became the foremost dirtha of India, thereby overshadowing Prayay and
Gaya. There are no inseriptions to demonstrate the rise of Kasi as a drtha, bul it is known from
Purame sources that by lhe tenth century Kasi was finnly established as the mest important
ortha of the country. The association between the Prathara rulers and the rise in the sacred '
standing of Kasi has never been demonstrated, and it does certainly not fall within the scope of {
Uns thesis. but it can be safely stated that, takmg into consideration the reyal patvonage of the |
Pratinazas to innumerable shrines, temples and tirthas, they must have played an nnportant role i
in the process.

That the Prauhdras were active in the Banaras arca is skown by thy presence of seine of
the earliest Pafica- Vinayaka panels, dated to the early ninth and to the early tenth century, and :
the remains of miniature temples, dated to the same period, all of which have been discussed |
above. The Pa‘ica-Vindyaka panels also provide evidence of the importance of Pafica-Vinayaka
worship, which was the prototype of the present veneration of the Moda Vindyakas. However,
the most significant evidence of the Prathdra presence in Banaras is a land grant issued by
Vinayakapala in 931 CE, in which a village outside the city was granted to a Bralimin
Histonans dealing with the Pratihara period agree that the identity of this Vinayakapdia is
vuscure, however, he is considered by many to be the same as Mahipala, the son of
Mahendrapala. Vindyakapala was possibly ar ypiiiel given to the king at a later date, a
suggestion which 1s supported by the fact that he also had the name Herambapala as another
epithet or title. The use of these epithets of Mahipdla needs to be examined within the context of
tis Conclusion. Why did a King who was known to be a Siirya worshipper receive two
epithels associated with Vinadyaka-Ganesa? The answer to this question is neither absolute nor
provable, but the most probable explanation would be that Mahipala, despite being a Surya

207

--- Page 209 ---
devotee, displayed an affimty for Vindyaka-Ganesa Could it be suggested, therefore, that this
Prat:hara ruler is to be considered the ¢ynamie force belind the organisation of the lilly-six
Vindyakas? There are several elements winch support this hypothesis. The first is the epithet
Vinayakapala itself. Why would a king receive such a name if he had no connection with the
eiephant-headed god? The name Vinayaka in this context is further sigmficant since it
demonstrates that in the Pratihara period this name was even more prevalent than the name
Ganapati or Ganesa, and it also shows the widespread standing of the god, sinec a king bore
his name A second element which supports the hypothesis proposed abuve is the daung of
Viniyakapala The land grant was issued in 93) CE, thus suggesting thal Vinayakapala was
ruling the nortia of India in the first half of the tenth century. This period corresponds with
some of the earliest Vinayakas. The presence of Paica-Vindyaka panels further indicates thal
the Prauharas had been in the area trom the beginning of the ninth century, which
contextualises the erganisation of the Vindyaka group as one of the many religious works these
relers undertook. Considering Vindyakapdla, ‘the protector of Vindyaka’, to be the passible
conmunissioner of the group of fifty-six Vinayakas, it 1s necessary to examine the possible
reasons that might have inspired such a commussion, as Well to consider sust what such a fifty-
six Vinayaka organisation implied
It has been argued above that by the middle of the tenth century Kasi had acquired the
supreme position amongst the tirthas of India. Considering the spread of the Pratihara empire
and the importance of thei reyal patronage, it can be surmised that if Kasi acquired such status
under their protection, it would not be unusual for the Pratihara ralers to want to emphasise
their role as the protectors of Kasi and AvimukteSvara, One of the main functions displayed by
. the proup of the fifty-six Vinayakas is that of protecting the sacred ‘territory of Kasi. Viniyaka
had nsen to prominence in the Pratihara period and his main characteristics were that he granted
protection, success in undertakings, and good fortune. His protccuve function and association
With Siva must have been the main reasons why Vindyaka, and not any other deity, was singled
out to provide the main protective circle around the holy terntory ef Kasi, although other deites
do play a supporting role. However, besides his protective role, Vinayaka performed a
scriptural function in the holy area, and here itis possivle fo see why, within a Saiva context,
there 1s no coullict between being a Siirya worshipper and bemg a worshipper of Vinayaka.
The Yajfavelkya Siyt makes it clear that Rudra appointed Vinayaka to create obstacles in the
performance of worship; that ailer lhe rites to propitiate the obstacle-creating Vindyakas and the
Granas, the goddess Ambika was to be asked for success; and that the fruits of the Vindyaka
Sant: were that ‘He who always performs the paia to the Aditya and makes the piji of the
Svami and Maha Ganapati (Siva), obtains success’ (verse two hundred and nincty-four), There
are a number of points here that need attention. First, the abave passage makes all the linkages
reeded between Vingyaka, Siva and Sirya. ln this context it needs to be remembered thal there
are bwo extremeiy claborate structures in Banaras, the fifty-six Vindyakas and the Aduya
208

--- Page 210 ---
i
temples which are arranged with astronomical precision. The original temples are lost but the
sues may wel. have been of the Pratihara period and may have belonged to the same initiative as .
the organisation of the Vindvakas. Certainly the Adityas are given a place of prommence in the
Kasi Khanda. But itis the concept of Vinayaka which is important here, Kagi is apaut salvation
and success in Kasi is to obtam salvation Success here :s nel about worldly success as might
he expected trom Ganesa the patron deity of traders. “* The siddiy that the Vinayakes guarantee
w the worshippers is that they are not obstructed in their worship of the other deities they
appruach, especially Siva, of course, and that this worship free from obstacles will be
successful; that is, it will guarantze xtlvation, This is a more sober and appropriate conception
of Vinayaka and one entirely in keeping with the sanctity of Kasi. It also retains scriptural
authority and must be why the name of Vinayaka is always used of the group, never that of
Ganesa with his more colourful and world!y associations.

But what is iC that was being proposed in organising the concent of seven circles of
Vinayakas? In examining whether the fifty-six Vinavakas constituted a mandala 1 was
conciuded that they did not, because there was oaly one mandala, and that 1s Kast itself which
the Vindyaxas mark out and protect in cach of the cight directions The fifty-six Viniyakas
cannot be separaled [rom this conception of the mandala of Kasi, which is a huge concepuion
implying that Kass ts a microcosm of the entire casmes as well as coutaining all the holy s:tes
of Inca. Certainly Banaras had obtained tie status of the preeminent drtha by this period, it
seems laat (Cwas also during this perio that the conceptien of taxing this further into a full
symbolic cusmolugisation Was intated, and that inherent in this conception was that Kasi was.
a mandala. The organisation of the fifty-six Vindyakas was therefore of much greater
significance than might at first sight appear.

Since the organisation of the Vinayakas in Banaras was accomplished during the tenth
century, the Kass Khanda should be considered as the textual and mythological finalisation of
the grand concept within the more specific purpose of estabushing the Lordship of Visvanatha
Wuthin the concept of Kasi as a mandala the Vindvakas have an important place, as 1s clear from
the detailed description and the gevgraphica! infermation provided by the Kasi Khanda which
shows an established tradition of worshipping these Vindvakas. It meht have been that there
were ritual texts or even small Mahatmyas which described the specilic warship of the fifty-six
Vinayakas; however, no such evidence has been found, and thus this is speculation. Once the
Kasi Khanda was written it was the blueprint for the numerous reconstructions of the city and
its sites which were made necessary by the exigencies of hisiery. In this capacity, as in many
athers, it has served the Vinayakas weii
“Lins isnot ta deny thet the Pritiharas cmght not have tad a secondary pontical motve in supporting Virdyaka-
Garesa, namely to cucourage the supporto! the metearuls classes

209

--- Page 211 ---
Tt is then necessary, in conclusion, to mvestigate the group of fifly-six Vindyakas
asking why certain Vindyakas were included and why others were excluded. Considering the
status that Vindyaka-Ganesa had acquired by the middle of the tenth century, there can be no
doubt that there were many Vindyaka statues in Banaras by that tune. An abvious answer to
dus question would be that Vindyakapala, or tae Bralimins whe actually conducted the
orgamsation of the Vinayaka group, chuse to include the most significant and important
Vinadyakas present in Kasi at that ime, Although this no doubt was an important criterion, there
are other factors which would have been taken into acceuat, Il has been shown in this thesis
that the fifty-six Vindyaka group was organised directionally, seven circles af Vindyakas in the
eight directions, The aspect of directionality, therefore, should nel enty be considered as a
significant criterion in the establishing of the group, it must have been the determining element,
Once it was agreed that the Vinayakas should be ordered accurding to the eight directions, il
then wes a matter of deciding to include those Vinayakas which occupied important posiions in
those eight directions Their proximity to water and to Devi shrines detinitely added to the
importance of the Vinayakas, The link between the Vinayakas and the goddess was suggested
as carly as the Manava Grhya Sétra and attained futher remforcement in the passage from the
Yanavalkya Suit referred lo above In iconography, Vinayaka became represented with the

| Matrkas from the sixth century CE onwards, thus suggesting that the assaciation wilh the
goddess was firmly estabhshed. Vindyakas such as Ktsimanda, Durga, Bhimacanda and
Mangala are still positioned in the shadow of Devi shrines. Other Vinayakas such as Dehah,
Siddhi and the Pafica-Vindyakas must have acquired a significant independent position within
the relytious I:fe of the esty and could therefore not be ignored. The position of Denali Virdivaka
at the western gate of the sacred territory of Kadi 1s interesting: he is not in the vicinity ef any
otier major shrine and lis function as ‘doorkeeper' clearly must have becn established by the
time the fity-six Vindyakas were organised, for hy :s the most western point, marking the
border.

One of the ways of establishing a new symbolic concept is to estabiish it ritually as well
as texluaily. An interesting point to make is that the outer circle of Vinayakas fonns the
Pancakros: Yatra. Purani¢e scurces composed around the month and tenth centuries describe the
Kasi ksetra as having its middle point m Madhyamesvara and the radial point on Dehal:
Vinayaka. Would it be too bold to suggest that the whole Paficaxros: Yatra originated from the
outer circle of Vindyakas, a circle which was based on the position vf Dehali Vindyaka as the
westem guardian, and that this was the device decided upon by the authors of the grand concept
to perpetuate the conception of the Kasi mandala ritually? Hf this was the case, it has proved to
be brilliantly successful, The more modest Vinayaka Yatra seems to have fallen into disuse but
it, too, logether with the fifty-six Vindyakas themselves, has done its job. In the first mstance
they have granted success lu pious people performing the rituals in a proper way. However,
wehin the context of the mandala this funcuon can be exphaned ina different way as weil. By

210

--- Page 212 ---
pertorming the Vinayaka Yatra the devotee also enters inta the sacred mandala of Kasi, and the
Vinayakas, through granting sucesss and removing obstacles, allow the devotee to obtain
inoksa, tor Kasi is "*Moksada’.
21:

--- Page 213 ---
Glossary

Adhaya inudra a gesture made with raised hand, signifying pratecnon

Abhuseka consecration, anointing, sprinkling.

Aditya a synonym for the Sun god. There are twelve Adityas in
Banaras.

Agamas Tantne or Saite treatises, scriptures.

Agastya the sain¢ who was the guru yf the Vindhya mountains and who
played an unportant part in the Kas: Khanda aad in’ Puranic
invthology.

Alravata the elephant of Indra.

Aksamala rosary of beads

Anibika goddess, in the Grhya Siitras one of the archetypal forms of
Parvati. Related to Vindyakas in the Yajfavalkya Simro '

Anandavana ‘forest of bliss’, an epithet for Banaras. '

Atal hol:owed hanes raised together to the forehead in saijutation. :

Ankusa a weapon with a sharp metal hook attached to a wooden handle,
a goad.

Annapoma ‘rich in food’, an epithet for the wite of Siva.

Aparajitaprchit a Sulpa Sastra of the turtesnth century.

Arat the circling of the vil lamp before the statue of the god ar
goddess

Asana a seal or seated posture.

Asrama a place of retreat for sages, yogis and students,

Asgvamedha the Vedic horse sacrifice.

Asi the rivulet in the south of the city of Banaras

Avalira incamation This term is mamiy used for the different
incarnavions of Visnu

Avinakta the ‘never forsaken’, another name for Banaras

Avudha purusa personification of Visnu's weapons, often represented in
doorways

Bah atype of offenng which was used lo propitiate vaksas

Bhadrasana a throne, a seated posture with the legs crossed for a yogin or

saint.

Bhairava the terrible aspect of Siva

Bhitta a category of evil spirits, ghosts

212

--- Page 214 ---
Bir a folk deity beheved by some to de a descendant of the saksas. |
Denved trom the term vira meaning ‘hero’.
Bodhisattva someone who has attamed enlightenment but remains on earth to
elp others attain nirvana
Brahma the ‘creato: gad, in iconography represented with four heads.
Brahmanas a group of lexts belonging to the Veda,
Brakinin aimember of the priestly class
Buddhi one of the wives of Vinayaka-Ganesa, aiso wisdom, intelligence,
Caitya a Buddhist shrine. ;
Cakra discus, one of the emblems of Visnu 1
Camara fly-whisk, originally the tail of a yak
Candra the inven
Candra bindu a crescent myoa with a dot.
Caturtht ‘the fourth’ day of a Hindu month.
Cauk a market place, a square (also spelled chauk).
Cratamani wishing-jewel
Chanar asmali city upstream from Banaras where there is a strategically
situated fort
Daksa the father of Sati, the wite of Siva. He performed a sacrifice to
which Siva was not ivited, thus causing Sati to burn herself.
Dana aritual gift,
Danda staff
Dandapani the staff-helder; in Banaras he is an attendant of Siva and 1s
situated near the Visyanatha temple:
Danta tusk, tooth
Darsana the auspicious viewing of a deity
Dasasvainedha the location on the Ganga where the ten-harse sacrifice took
place.
Deva a god, deity,
Devapatla carved stong slabs depicting the gods of a certain place
Devi a goddess
Dhanusa a how.
Dharma righteousness; cuties and laws, also translated as religious
duties.
Dhundh name of a Vinayaka in Banaras, means literally ‘the searcher’,
Dhupe Incense, fragrant gum; can also mezn ‘the heat of the sun’,
Dhyaaa mudra a posture of sitting in meditation position.
Diggayas thy four or eight elephants supporting the universe.
Dikpalas guardians of the direcuonal quarters.
213

--- Page 215 ---
Divodasa the king who ruled Banaras after the drought and expelied the
gods
Durga an epithet for the consort of Siva, represented as having eight
arms and riding on a hon or ager
Dvarapala doarkeeper.
Dvibhangha twofold bend, a graceful slightly bent stance
Tkadanta epithet for Vinayaka-Ganesa, the ‘one-tusked one’.
Gada the mace, ong of Ganega's weapons.
Gihadavilas a dynasty witch ruied over north India in the twelfth century Ch.
Gayjanane elephant-faced, epithet of Vinayaka-Ganesa
Gana grotesque dwarf, goblin-liks creature,
Ganapati ‘Lord of the troops’, an ep:thet for Vindyaka-Ganesa, the most
common name for the detly in Maharashtra.
Canapatyas the sect considering GaneSa as the one supreme deity.
Ganga the most sacred river of India, also is considered to be a goddess
Garbha Grha the sanctum sanctorum of the Hindu temple.
ciaya a sacred city situated in B:har, famous for its sraddha
assaciauons,
Gayatri a type of hymna,
Ghat literary anding places’ or ‘banks’ In the context of Banaras, the |
stone steps Ivading tv the Ganga.
Ghatiyala a small town near Jodhpur where the famous Ghatiyala pillar
topped with four Vinayaka statues was found
Ghee clarified butter, sometimes used 1 ceremonies and rituals.
Gugeula the name of a resin-like plant which was used in ceremonies of '
protection apainst the Vindyakas |
Gurncanua Marathi retigious treatise composed in 1538 CI by Sarasvati |
Gatigadhara. |
Harikesa a yaksa who, being a Siva devotee, received a boon from Siva
Hanscandra a fegendary king who, by a curse, lost his kingdom and had te
work on the burning ghdts of Banaras
Hastimukha ‘clephant-faced’, an epithet for Vinayaka-Ganesa
Hiuen Ts1ang Chinese Buddhist monk of the seventh century CE who traveiled
in the Indian subcontinent
Indra the warrier pad of the Vedie times, nding en the elephant
Airavata
Janapada a land division correspanding with a kingdom at the lime of the
Buddha
Jalaka the stones telling of the former lives of the Buddha
214

--- Page 216 ---
Jatamukuta a complicated arrangement of braided hair in chignon style.

Ifaina Vapi the well of wisdom, situated near the Vigvanatha temple

Jyestha the elder sister of Laksim, considered to be evil and creating
misery

dyoulnga a ‘Hinga of light’ or maniestalion of Siva as a shining pillar of
light

Kala Bhawava a form of Siva as ‘Lord of death’: in Banaras he 1s the Kotwal or
policeman of the city, offering protection to all its inhabitants.

Kalasa vase

Kamala lotus

Kamandalu an oblong water vessel with a handle and a spout |

Kapala skull i

Kapalamocana the place in Banaras where the skull of the murdered Braamin feil
out of the hand of Siva

Kapisa city in Afghanistan, aiso calied Begram

Karanda mukuta a crown shaped lke a conicai basket.

Khacdga Khetak a sword

Khanda a sechon ina text

Kogala princely state in the north of Bihar at the time of the Buddha

Krtvakalpataru twelfth-century Nibandha on the Dharmasistras of that time,
wnitten by Lakgnudhara, !

Ksemaka one of the raksasas taking up residence in the deserted city of
Banaras.

Ksetra literatly ‘field’, also used to denote a ‘sacred space’

Kubera king of the yaksas, the guardian deity of the northern direction
and the protector of wealth

Numbita pitcher.

Kunda pond

Kiipa well

KusSa grass a sorter grass wick is often used as an offering to the gads.

Laddus round-shaped sweets, especially aftered to Ganesa,

Laksmi the goddess of wealth and good fortune.

Uaksmidhara twelfth-century scholar and rajaguru af the Gahadavala kings.
Composer of the Krtyakalpataru

Laluasana a silting position with one leg crossed on the scat and the other
placed below or hanging.

Lambedara big-belly, one of the epithets of Vindvaka-Ganesa.

Langala a plough.

Ling: the phallus, the symbolic emblem ot Siva

215

--- Page 217 ---
Uopamudra the virtuous wife of Agastya

Lota a small copper or brass water vessel

Mapadha the ancient Bodh Gaya !

Mahabharata Epre describing the war detween the Pandavas and the Kauravas |
Contains the Bhagavad Gita. Written belween 200 BCE: and 200
CE, although it reecived many appendices throughout history

Mahasmasina the ‘great cremation ground’, an epithet for Banaras.

Mahatmya glonfication; a literary genre glorifying a sacred place or a god.

Makara a sea manster resembling a crocadile

Mala garland.

Manava Grhya Sitra a collection of teats deserbing dumestic ntuals, composed
detween 600 and 200 BCE

Mandala Iterally a ‘e:rele’ or ‘circular representation’, depicting the cosmos

Mancupa hall, pavihon

Mandara the mountain on which Siva retreated after being expelled from

Maiukamik3 the place where the earring fel; one of the tive most important
tirthas in Banaras, now associated with the main burning ghat

Math(a) monastery

Mathura one of the seven sacred cities of Lndia, known as the dirthplace
of Krishna

Matrka mother-goddess.

Matsya the fish incatnation ef Visnu

Maya Llusion.

Modaka swecuneat, the favounte sweet of Ganesa.

Modaka patra modaka baw]

j Mohatla nesghbourhood, quarter in a town or cily.
| Mudgara a mace or club used for pitysical exercise.

Mudra hand gesture.

Mukuta crown.

Miaka a radish,

Marti image, picture, idol

Miisala a pounder

Mitisaka the rat vehicle of Ganesa

Naga mythical snake divimty

Nagayajhopavila a snake used as a sacred thread.

Narayana Bhatta the composer of the Tristhalisetu, Irved in Banaras in the
sixteenth century

Nava Grahas the nine planets of Indian mythology.

216

--- Page 218 ---
Nibandha Uagests or compendia of Puranie stories.

Nidhi wealth,

Nicumbha an some of the Puranas he 1s deserived as a riksasa, whereas in
others he fulfils the role of ‘Ganapan'. In the Kass Khanda he is
one of the ganas sent by Siva.

Nrtya mudra dancing pose.

Nupuras anklets.

Pada lotus

Pad:nasana a seated position in which the crossed legs are kept on the thighs

Pane) five

Paitcayatana a type of temple which has four subsidiary temples at the sides
of the main shring.

Pattcopasana pia worship in which five deitics are honoured: Siva, Visi, Devi,
Stirya and Gane§a or Brahmi

Paragu batlle axe

Patvan a segment of the Mahabharata

Pasa neose,

Payasa mulk-rice.

Pigacas sort of goodlin, evil-spirited being

Pisdcamocana a sacred place in Banaras where the pisacas were liberated

Pitha base, sacred seat of a goddess

Pratihara literally ‘doorkeeper’; name of a dynasty coming from Gujurat
and reigning over the whole of north India in the ninth and tenth
centuries.

Prayaga the epithet for Allahabad, which used to be the most important
artha of India before Kasi took over that rote

Paja public or private worship. The ritual of the paja normally
consists of seventeen steps, but caa vary according to the region
and caste.

Purana a collection of stories, composed to mammtain the tradition of
inyths, legends and ntuais

Qila fort.

Rajehat the plateau north of the Varana river on which the first sctuement
of Banaras was found.

Raksasa a category of demons.

Ramayana the epic describing the hfe of Rama, the cighth mcamation of
Visnu.

Ratna Kumbha gem pitcher.

Ratna Mukuta a beyewelled crown

217

--- Page 219 ---
Reveda one of the most ancient, 1f not the most ancient collection of
Vedic hymns

Rsi a sage

Rocana a red lotus flower, also a substance used in the rituals for
protection against Vinayakas

Rudra the Vedic prototype of Siva

Rudravasa epithet for the ‘forest af bliss’, the dwelling place of Rudra.

Samabhanga standing position without the bedy being bent

Sanga confluence.

Samatha place north of Banaras where the Buddha ts said io have given
his first sermon

Sadi the consort of S:va who bumt herse:f to death when her nusband
was not invited to the sacr:fice arranged by her father,

Sarva a Siva worshipper

Saku Itevary ‘energy’ or power’, mainly appiied to denote ‘female
energy’, also used to describe the consorts of Siva

Sankla conch shell, one of the emblems of Visnu

Saptandtrkas seven mother goddesses

Sara an arrow.

Sastra a scriptural work deaang wilh the sacred teachings.

Seti caste af moneylenders |

Siddhi one of the wives of Vinayaka-Ganesa

Salpapatta a carved stone slab representing the gods or a sacred city.

Silpasastras collection of texts dealing with art and architecture

Sindir red powder niide {tom lead, used to anoint murtis.

Sia one of the main dvities of Hinduism, considered to be doth
creator and destroyer, The protecuing deity of Banaras

Swwasarman character in the Kasi Khanda, a virtuous Brahmin who makes a
Gip to the seven holy cities of India and after his death visits the
lokas of the directional deities.

Sanda the other son of Siva and Parvati, brother of Ganega, born from
six mothers, the Kritikas Has a peacock as vehicle and is
considered to be a bachelor. Other epithets include Kumar and
Karukeya.

Simasana the cremation ground.

Sraddha rituals performed for the dead, lo propitiate the uncestors

Srotriya a hymn of glorification

Stambha pillar.

Stipa a domed Buddhist mound m which relics of the Buddha are kept

218

--- Page 220 ---
Suxhdsana sitting position of bliss

Sukla paksa the bright half of the month,

Sala a spear.

Siirpakarna vlephant ears.

Surya the Sun deity. :

Svadhi an invocation when making an offering.

Svaha exclamation to the gocs when making an oblation .

Svasti wel!-heing, good fortuny.

Svayambhit setf-manifesting, often used lo described Angas and other
images

Talab Arabic synonyin for Kanda. a pond

Tanka a hoc, hatchet

‘Taraka mantra the ‘manta of the crossing! uttered by Siva in the cars of the
dying

Tila asinail hill or mound.

Tirtha a ‘crossing place’, meaning a place from where one transcends
The mundane world; mainly used to describe sacred and
pilgrmage placcs.

Tinhacmiaman ‘the wishing jewel of the Urthas’, written by Vacaspati Mishra in
the fifteenth century CE.

Tirthaprakasa ‘the light of the Githas’, written by Mitra Mishra al the beguusing

| of the seventeenth century. Nibandha dealing with the pilgrimage
sites of India

Tirtha Yatra a pilgrimage.

Tribhanga madra ‘thrice bent’; standing position in which the body is bert three
lumes

Trilocane, one of the five sacred tirthas in Banaras

Tristhalisetu “the bridge to the three c:ties', a Nibandha written by Narayana
Bhatta in the sixteenth century, describing the p:lgrisnage sites of
India.

Trisila trident.

Torana ornamental gateway at the entry af stipas and temples

Urdhvalinga ithyphallic.

Vahana vehicle of the gods, usually an animal

Varahadamstra the tooth of a boar

Varana the river north of the city, Nowing into the Ganga at Rajghat

Varanas: epithet for Banaras, the city between the Assi and the Varana,

Vasatcara the exclamation during a pia.

Vindava sanee of mountains north of the Nannada river

219

--- Page 221 ---
Vighnakarta the ‘creator of ubstacles’, epithet of Vindyaka Ganesa
Vighnadina the ‘giver of obstactes’, epithet of Ganesga.
Vihara a Buddhist monastery.
Vitasana ‘position of the hero’, a silung position
Visnu the ‘preserver god’, depicted ho.ding a conch shell and a disk
Visvanatha ‘Lord of the universe’, an epithet for Siva and name of Siva in
Banaras.
Vrata rilual fast, a vow
Vyalayaiopavita a yayiopavita made of a snake
Yarfia a sacrifice
Yajfiavalkya Smrti a collection of domestic rituals, compiled between 280 and 600
CE, i
Yaplopavita sacred thread.
yaksa‘yaksi acategory of demi-gods depicted with dwarfish features. In carly '
times they were connected with the fertility cult.
Yatudbana a demon,
Yogi a femate divinity
|
220

--- Page 222 ---
|
I
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abbreviations

ATTM Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythalogy

BHU Banaras Hindu Caiversity,

EI Fpigraphica Indica

KKH Kasi Khanda.

MW Monier-Wiliiams, A Sanskrit-Enelish Dictionary.

TC Tirthacitamani.

TP Tirthaprakasa

Ts Tristhalisetu,

A. Primary Sources and Translations.

(in alphabetical order by title of text)

Agni Purana 2984-1987 ed. J. L. Shastri, trans. N. Gangadharan. AITM 27-30. Delhi Motilal
Banarsidass.

Brahma Purana. 1985-1986. ed. J. 1.. Shastri and G. P Bhatt, trans. Gi. V. Tagare. AITM 33-36.
Dell: Motila: Banarsidass

Bralunanda Purdna. 1983-1984. ed 1.1. Shastn, trans. GV. Tagare AETM 22-26. Delln Motilal
Banarsidass.

Ganesa Purana. 1993 (reprint). ed. RK. Sharma. Delhi: Nag Publishers

Kasi Khanda (with the commentary of RAmananda and Mishra Nardyanapati). 1996. ed K.
Tnpathn, Varanasi: Sampurnanazd Sanskrit University.

Kasi Rahasya. 1987. S.M. Vyasadeva. Calcutta: Gurumandalagranthamalaya, vol XIV.
1984, cd and Hindi trans JD. Dubey. Varanas:: Adargan Prakagan Mandir

Krtyakalpataru (Tirthavivevana Khanda). Bhatta Laksmidhara. 1942. ed. K. V. Rangaswam1

| Aqyangar. Gackwad's Onental Series, vol XCVUL Baroda: Oriental Insutute

Kurma Purana 1981-1982 ed. J.J Shastri, trans. G. V. Tagare. ATTM 20-21, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass

fanga Parana, 1973. ed. JL. Shastri, ans. board of scholars. ATTM $-6. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.

Mahabhirata. 1893, ed. and trans. M. N. Dutt. Calcutta: Elysium Press.

—— 1933. cdl. VS. Sukthankar ef af Poona: Bhandarkar Onental Research Institute
22)

--- Page 223 ---
Merutantra. 1990 (1904). Raghunatha Sastn Bombay: Ksemraja Srikrsnadasa Prakasgan.
Pudina Purdna. 1988-1990, ed. J. 1. Shastri, trans. N. A. Deshpande. ATTM 39-48. Delhi Motilal
Banarsidass
Siva Purana, 1973 (reprint of 1970). ed. J. L. Shastri, trans. board of scholars. AITM 1-4. Delhi
Motilal Banarsidass.
Srigurucaritra. 1912 (1862). Sarasvati Gafgadhara. Bombay: Keshav Bhikaji Dhavale.
furthaprakasa (of the Viramitroddva) 1917. Mura Misra, Chowknamba Sanskrit Series, vol. 30, |
part 10 :
Trsthalisetu, 1915. Navayana Bhatta. Poona: Anandagrama Sanskrit Series, vol. 78
Vayu Purana. 1987-1988. ed. G. P. Bhatt, wans.G VY Tagare. ALM 37-38. Delhy Motlat |
Banarsidass. ‘
Yajnavalkya Smvu (with the commentary of Vijianesvara, called the Mitaksara) 1918. trans. R. 6
Sirsa Chandra Vidyarnava. Allahabad.
—. .. 1937. trans. Gharpure.
B. Sources in Indian Languages.
{io alphabetical order by author)
Apte, Hari Narayan. 1906. Srimadganedagita: Nilakanthaviracitatikasameta Srmadganesagita,
Anandagramasatiskria Granthavali.
Avasti, Ramashraya. 1967. Khajurdiho ki Deva Praumaé. Agra: Oriental Publishing House.
Baybihariial, BV S. 1914.Varanasi Adarga. Kaixhand ka Adhyay. Varanasi: Hitacintak Press
Diksit, Gaursankar, VS 1924. Kasisthadevasmaranavali. Varanasi: Hitacintak Press
1983. Sri Kasidhyanmala Varanasi. Hitacintak Press
Dubey, Dwarakanand. VS, 1906. Kasivatraprakas Apiirvasang. Varanasi.
loshi, N. P. 1979. Bharatuya Miirtisastra, Nagpur: Kalpana Printing Press
Lo 1989 ‘Gawahor Sangrahalay ka Varanasi Silapatia latha Anya Samakalin Ankan’, Purdtan VI
151-183
Harisarskar, Dr. 1996. Kagi ke Ghat. Kalatmak evam Samskruk Adhyayan, Varanasi:
Viévavidydlay Prakagan
Khemrdja, K. VS. 1965. Kadaivatra. Bombay: Venkatesvara Press,
Motichandra, 1985 (1962). Kasi ka Itihas. Varanasi: Visvavidyalay Prakagan.
Sampimanand, V.S. Ganega. Varanasi: Kasi Vidyapith.
Sarasvat, Siwaaand. 1989. Paiickosi DaréanYaua. Varanasi: Himalayan Press.
.____ 1990 Kagi Dargan. Varanasi: Himalayan Press
Sarma, Vidvanitha. V.S. 1992. Pafickrogi Yatra. Varanasi: Gupta Brothers
sharma, Rachana. 1996. Skandapuranantargat Kasikhand: kk Samiksatinak Adhyayan. Banaras
Hindu University: unpublished thesis.
222

--- Page 224 ---
Shastn, RLV. V.S. 1984 Kasiuhas
Singa, Avades N_ 1974, 'Kasi ke Chappan Vinayak’, Kalyan: 448-450.
Singh, Rambacan. 1973, Varanasi, Ek Paramparagat Nagar. Varanast: sharativa Vidya Prakasan.
Singh, Umarendya Kumar. 1990. Yaksa, Kimara aur Dikpala. Allahabad: Parimal Prakasan.
Singh, V. P. 1990, Kasi ke Mandir. Banaras Hindu University: unpublished thesis.
Sircay, 1). CL 1972-1973. ‘Tantrasaradheta Dhyammala, Journal of Ancient History I, vol VI: 186-
278
Srivastava, AP. 1988. Flora ki Brahman Dev Praumaé, New Deihu: atab Mahal
Srivastava, Saritkisun. 1985, Varanasi ke Sthannamé ka Sanskytik Adhyayan. Varanasi:
Visvavidyalay Prakasan.
Suxul, Kubernath. 1977. Varanasi Vaibhav. Pata: Bihar Rastrabhasa Pavisad.
Verma, K. V.$. 1992 Sri Vigvanatha Darsan. Varanasi: Ramesvara Press |
Verma, Satyaxiim. 1986. "Kes: Divodasa aur Varanasi’. Varinasi through the Ages. Proceedings of i
the All India Seminar ed. Verma, Singh and Mishra. Varanasi Bharatiya IGhas Sankalan
Samu: 83-87. f
Viraya, Jina (ed). 1931 Vividha ‘Tirtha Kalpa (inaprabha Sun) Santinixetan: Adhisthata, Singh!
Jaina Jiianapitha
ViSvakarma, 1. S. 1987. Kasi ka Aithas:k Bhugol. Delh:: Ramanand Vidya Press.
Vyas, Kedamath. 1987. Pafickrosatmak Jyourlingaur Kagimahatmya. Varanasi: Ivous Prakas
Press
Tiwan, M.N. and Gin, K. 1991 Madhyakalin Bharatiya Mirtikala. Varanasi: Vigvavidyalay
Prakasan
Tripatn, K. 1991. Kasiyatra. Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sansknt University.
C. Secondary Sources.
Acharya, P. K, 1933, Architecture of Manasara. London: Oxford University Press.
Agarwala, PK. 1977 (a). ‘Some Varanasi Images af Ganapati and their Iconographic Problem,
Artibus Asia¢ 2:129-185,
_— 1977 (b). "A Pafic-Ganesa Panel trom Vranas’, Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda
XXV:70-73
__ 197K. Goddess Vindyaki: the Female Gianega. Benares: Prithvi Prakasan.
1987 “The Kumbhanda Figures in Sanchi Sculpture’, East and West 37, nos. 1-4:179-189
Agarwala, R. C, 1987 (a). “A Unique Matrka Relief from Rajasthan’, Journal of Bihar Research
Society XLIN11-114
____ 1987 (b). ‘Some Interesting Sculptures of Yaksas and Kubera from Rajasthan’, Indian
Histor:cal Quarterly, Sep: 201-207.
____ 1963. Unpublished Prauhara remains at Ghatryala, Rayasthan', Journal of the Onental
223

--- Page 225 ---
Institcte, Baroda XIL no. 3:285-287
____ 1968. "Urdavaretas Ganega in Afghanistan’, :ast and West 18.166-168
1977 (a). "Matrka Reliefs in Early Indian Art, Mast and West 21:79-x9, :
— 1971 (bo). "Newly Discovered Pafic-Ganeéga Panel from Jaipur, Rajasthan’, Journal of the :
Onental {nsatate, Baroda XX1:i07, plates T and I.
Aparwala, VS 1949. ‘Images of Brahm, Vishnu, Siva ete, Catalogue ef the Mathura :
Museum, Journal of the Uttar Pradesh Historical Society 22:1-4
1982 Mathura Museum Catalogue. Part Hl Jaina Tirthankaras and other Miscellaneous
Figures. Lucknow: U.P. Historical Society
___., 1960. 'Yaksa Worship in Varanasi, Matsya Purina Chapter 180", Purdua 1:198-201
_ 1963 (a). ‘Meaning of Ganapati’, Journal of the Oriental Research Institute, Baroda i3:1-4
1963 (b). Afatsya Purana: A Study. Varanasi: All India Kashiray Trust.
ue L964. ‘The Puranas and the Hindu Religion’, Purana 6 (2):333-346,
—__ 1970. Ancient Indian Folk Cults. Varanasi: Prithvi Prakasan
Aryangar, K. V. Rangaswami (ed.). 1942. Kytyakalpataru of Bhatta Laksniidhara, Gaexwad's
Oriental Series XCVILL. Baroda: Oriental Institute
Allchin, FOR. 1964. Kavitavali. Translatedwuh a Criacal Introduction. London: George Allen and
Unwin
____ 1966. The Petiton to Réim, A Translation of Vinaya-patika with an Introduction, Notes and
Giossary. London: George Allen and Unwin
Ab. S. Muzaler. 1966. The Geography of the Purdnas New Deli:: People's Publishing House
Alickar, A.S > 1947 Benares and Sarnath. Varanas:: Banaras Hindu University
Anderson, Leona, $992 “The Head's Bone connected to the Neck Bune of is it? Ganesa and
Wilfred Cantwell Smith, Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 4:1-2:81-95
‘ Aravamuthan, T.T. 1949 ‘Ganesa: Clue to a Cult and a History’, Journal of Oriental Research
. 18:221-245
| Awastlu, A.B. 1. 1966. Studies in the Skanda Purana. Lucknow: Kailash Prakagan.
, Bagcin, P.C, 1933. 'Some Linguistic Nows’, dndtan Historical Quarterly March 258-265
Bakker, Hans. 1992 (a). The Sacred Centre as the Focus of Political Interest. Proceedings of the
Symposium held on the Occasion of the 375th. anniversary of the University of Groningen,
March 5-8 1989. Groningen: Egbert Farsten.
.—_ 1992(b). ‘Throne and Temple. Political Power and Religious Presuge in Vidarbha’, The
Sacred Centre as the Focus of Political interest, ed, Hans Bakker, Groningen: Fgbert
Forsten:#3-100,
1993 ‘Tiar'y Mythology relating to Varanas?. Banaras, Cosmic Order Sacred City, Hindu
Traditions, ed RP 1S Singh, Varanasi: Tava Book Ageney:2! -28.
—_. Gsith R.Adriacnsen and H Isaacson) 1994. ‘Towards a Critical Idition of the Skanda
Purdna’, Indo-Iranian Journal 37:32§-331
224

--- Page 226 ---
Ball, ¥ 1889 Travels m India by Jean-Baptiste Taverner. Translated trom the Original French
Edition of 1676. London: Macmillan
Baneryea, J. N. 1938. "Indian Elements in the Coin Devices of Karly Foreign Rulers of India’,
indian Estorical Quarterly X1V- 293-308.
1941 Development of Hindu feonography. Dell: Munshiram Manoharlal
Baneni, Arundhati. 1993. fmazes, Attributes and Motifs (2 Volumes). Studies in Early Indian Art
and Numismatics. Delhi; Sundeep Prakasan
Banera, S C1991, Studies in the Maha-Puranas, Calcutta: Puntht Pustak |
Basham, A. 1. 199! (1954). The Wonder That Was India. New Delhi: Rupa. i
Bayty, C A. 1981 "From Ritual to Cerginony” Death Ritual and Society in Hindu North |
India since 1600", Mirrors of Mortality: Studies in the Social bistory of Death, ed. Joachun
Whaley, London: Furopa Publications: 144-186.
1993 (1983). Rulers, Tawnmen and Bazaars. North Indian Socicty in the Ave of the British
Expansion 1770-1879, Dethi: Oxtord University Press
Beai, Samuel. 1963. Chinese Accounts of India. Translated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsang.
Calcutta Sushil Gupta.
Beck, Brenda EF, 1976, The Symbolic Merger of Body, Space and Cosmos in Hindu Tamil |
Nadu’, Contirbutions to Indian Sociology 10 (2):213-244 |
Bedeker, V. M. 1969-1970. ‘Kubera in Sanskrit Literature, with Spevia! Reference to the |
Mahabharata (from an Inscript to a God)’, Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Research
Institute 2$-26:425-45 3
Berkemer, George. 1992. "The Centre out There" as State Archive. The Temple of Simhacalam',
The Sacred centre as the Focus of Political Interest. ed Hans Bakker, Gromagen. Egber
Forsten 119-130)
| Bhandarkar, D. 8. 1907-1908 'Ghatiyala Inscriptions of Kekuka, Samvat 918", ELIX.277-28)
Bhandarkar, R. C. 1904. '‘Epigrapiie Notes and Questions’, Journal of the Bombay Branch of the
Asiatic Society X X1:405-412.
1913. Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Rehigious Systems. Strasbourg
Bharati, Agchananda, 1963. ‘Pilgrimage in the Indian Tradition’, Listery of Religions 3-1.138-167,
_—__.. 1970. “The Hindu Renaissance and its Apolugete Patlems’, Journal of Asian Studies 267-
28?
Bhardwaj, S$. Mohan. 1973. Hindu places of Pilgrimage in India, A Study in Cultural
Geography. Berkeley: University of California Press
Bhatt, G@ P. (ed.) $992, Skanda Purana. ALTM 49-89, Deili: Motila: Banarsidas.
Bhattacharya, B A. 1978, Indian Images-The Brahmanic Iconagraphy. New Delhi: Cosmo
Publications
Bhattacharya, N. N. 1982. History of the Tantric Tradivion. A {istorical, Ritualistic and
Philosophical Studv. Deili: Manchar.
Bhattacharya, Ram Shanxar. 1934, ‘linpartance of the First Words of the Ganapatyas', Bharatiya
225

--- Page 227 ---
Vidya XV:29-34
Brybhushan, Jamia. 1990. Sultan Raztyya. Her Life and Tames: A Reappraisal. Delt; Manohar.
Brown, Robert L. (ed.). 1992. Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God. Delhi: Manohar
a... 1992 ‘Ganega in Southeast Asian Art Tudian Connections and Indigenous Developments’,
Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God, ed. Robert Brown Della, Manohar
Biilnemann, Gudrun, 1988. Puja: a Steady in Smarta Ritual, Leiden: Brill
ww. +988 The Worship of Mahaganapat according to the Nityotsava. Wichtrach: Institut fir
Indologie
1989. Forts of Ganesa Wichtrach Institut tur Indologie.
___1995%. “Aspects of Tanine Gancsa’, Ganesa, the Benevolent, ed. Pal Pratapaditya. Bombay:
Marg: 26-42
Cape, C. Philips. (uo date). Benares, the Svonghold of Hinduisin, London: Robert Calley
Chakravarti, Chintaharaa. 1963. Tantras. Sidics on their Religion and Literature Calcutta: Panthi
Pustak.
Caandra, Ray Govind and Vidya Prakash. 1968. Vardnast ata Glance. The XXIV Session of All
India Onental Conference. Varanasi’ Varanaseya Samskrt Visvavidyalay
Chandramoul:, K. 1995) Kashi, the City Lumunous. Catcutta: Rupa and Co
Charher-Vishnulingam, Elizabeth. 1993 'Rhairava, the Kotwal of Varanasi, Banaras, Cosmic
Order, Sacred City, Hindu Traditions, ed. Rana PB. Singh, Varanasi: Tara Book Agency:
163-177
Chmmayananda, Swann 1987 The Glory of Ganesa. Bombay: Cenual Chinmaya Mission ‘Trust
Catragopekar, Nilima. 1991-1992. ‘Some Aspects of Scavism in Madhya Pradesh ca. 580-1300
| CE, Procecdings of the Indian Llisterical Congress, 52nd, session, New Delhi.121-128
Covvari, Diane M. 1986. The Bur Babas of Benares: An Analysis of a Folk Detty in Northern
indian Hinduism. Madison: University of Wisconsin, (Pi 1. thesis)
Cohen, Lawrence. 1992. 'The Wives of Ganesa', Ganesa, Studies of an Asian God, ed. Robert
Brown, New York: Stite University Press:
Cohn, Bernard S$. 1960. “The Invial British Impact on India. A Case Study of the Benares Region,
Journal of Asian Studies XIX (4), August:418-431,
__ 1962. ‘Political Systems in Fighteenth-Century India: The Benares Region’, Journal of the
American Oriental Socicty LX XXII (3), July-September.312-319
..— 1987. An Antwepologist among the Histotians and other Essays, Oxtord: Oxford
University Press
Constable, Archibald. 1891. Travels in the Mogul Finpire, CE 1636-1668, by Frangois Bernier.
London: Westminster.
Coomaraswamy, A. K. 1928. 'Ganega’, Bulletin of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 34-30-31.
1928-1929 “Karty Indian Iconograpay. Sri Laksini, astern Art l.175-189
— 1938. ‘The Yaksas of the Vedas and the Uparisads’, Quarterly Journal of the Mythic
226

--- Page 228 ---
Society 28:23. -240
1971 (1928). Yaksas. New Delhi: Munshirain Manoharial

Courtright, Paul. 1980 ‘The Beheading of Ganega', Purana 22:67-X0
1985. Ganesa, Lord of Obstactes, Lord of Reginnings. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Cribb, Joc. 1982. "The Earliest Ganesa. A Case of Mistaken Identity’, Numusniatic Digest 6:30-34,

Cunningham, A. 1962, The Ancient Geography of India. Varanasv Indological Book House.

Cumungiam, JD. 1848. ‘Inscriptions of the Vijaya Mandi, Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal XVIL68-73. .

Daniclou, Alain, 1954. ‘The mearing of Ganapat', Adyar Library Bulletn 18:107-129

Das, Veena. 1976. ‘The Uses of Laminal:ty: Saciety and Cosmos in Hinduism’, Contributions to
Indian Sociology (New Series} 10, na, 20:245-263.

Dehepa, Vidya. 1986. Yogi Cult and Temples, a Tantric Tradition. Delhi: Natuonal Muscurn
Publications Division.

Derreu, J and Duncan, M. 1973, Dharmasastra and Jundical Litcrature, Wiesbaden. Oo
Hartassowitz

Desai, Devangana. 1980 ‘Dancing Ganesa’, Pushpanjall, Bombay:30-38
1996. The Religious Imagery of Khajuraho. Bombay: Project for Indian Cultura, Studies.

Dey, N. 1. 1971 (1927). The Geographical Dictionary of Ancicnt and Medieval India. Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlai

i Dhaky, M. A. 1967. 'Kiradu and Maru Gurjara Styic of Temple Architecture’, Bulletin of the
American Academy of Benares.35-45,

Daal, UN 1978. Goddess Laksm1; Origin and Development. New Delhi: Oriental Publishers
1983. ‘Iconography of Ganapati in the Purdnas’, Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Sanskrit
Vidvapecth.25-36

Dhavalihar, Mo. LO7T1.'A Note on Two Ganese Statues from Afghanistan’, Fast and West
24:331-336.

1992. 'Ganesa, Myth and Reahty'. Ganesh, Studies ofan Asin God, ed. Robert Brown,
Delhi: Manohar.49-68
1980-1981. ‘Antiquity of Ganesa: The Numismatic Evidence’, Jndelogica  Taurinenssa
8-9 141-142

Dikshit, D. P. 1980. Political History of the Chalukyas of Badami. New Dellu: Abhinav Publications.

Dikshitar, ¥. R. Ramachandra. 1933, Some Aspects of the Vavu Purtina. Madras University.

Dillistone, Fo W. (ed.). 1970 (1966) Myth and Symbol. Lendon: S$. P. C.K.

Disalkar . B. 1932. ‘Sculptures in the Mathura Museum’, Journal of the GO. P. Historical Socicty45-
4

Domper, Wendy. 1976. The Origins of Evil in Hindu Mythology. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

227

--- Page 229 ---
Dresden, Mark Jan. 1941. Manava Grhya Siitra. A Vedic Manual of Domestic Rites. Translation,
Commentary and Preface. Groningen: Wolters Uitgeven)

Dathey, Lal Mani. 1987. Aparayitaprecha: A Crincal Study. Allahabad: Laks Publications.

Dut. N. 1986. Development of Buddhism in Uttar Pradesh. Lucknow Publication Bureau,
Government of Uttar Pradesh

Dyczkowski, Mark S$. G. 1989, The Canon of the Sarvagama and the Kubpika Tantras of the
Western Kaula Tradition, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidas.

Eck, Diana L., 1978. 'Kas:, City and Symbol’, Purana 20°2;169-192

____ 1980. "Sanskrit Sources for the Study of Varanasi, Purina 22/1-81-101,

_ __ 1986. ‘Benares: Cosmos and Paradise in the Hindu Imaginatien’, The Word and the World,
ed Veena Das, Dell: Sage Publications India:40-45,
1993 (a) (1982) Benares, City of Light. Penguin Baoks India.
1993 (b). "A Survey of the Sanskrit Sources for the Study of Varanasi’, Banaras, Cosmic
Order, Sacred City, Hindu Traditions, ed. R. PB. Singh, Varanasi. Tara Book Agency:9-
20

Lgeeling, Julius, 1963. "Satapatha Bréhmana’, Sacred Books of the Fast, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass.

Ehade, Mircea. 1958. Patterns in Comparative Religion. New York: Sheed and Ward.

. 1969. Yoga, Immortality and Freedom. Translated trom the French by Wilham R. Trask

Bollingen Series LVI. Princeton: University Press

_— 1987. The Encyclopedia of Religion New York: MacMulan,

_ (991 (1961), Images and Symbols, Studies in Religious Symbolism. Princeton, Uaweisity
Press

Edhot, 1H. M. (ed. John Dowson). 1984 (1867) The History of india. As Told by Its Own
fistorsans. Vol. 1. London: Tribner and Co.

Ensink, J. 1974. ‘Problems of the Study of Piler:smage in India’, fndologica Taurinensta 2:60-79

Enthoven, RF. 1922. The Tirtbes and Castes of Bombay, Bombay: Government Central Press.

Iwen, J. 1886. Benares, « Handbook for Visitors. Calcutta: Bapust Mission Press

Farquhar, J. N. 1967 (1920), An Outline of the Religious Literature of India. Delhi: Motilat
Banat sidass.

Fleet, J. FL 1886. ‘Sanskrit and Old Kanarese Inscriptions. Bengal Asiatic Society's Plate of the
Maharaa Vinayakapala’, fidian Antiquary XV.138-141

Fréderic, Lous 1987, Dictionnaire de la Civilisation indienne. Paris: Rebert Lalont

Freviag, Sandra B. 1989. Culture and Power in Benares. Comniunity, Performance and
Envirvament 1800-1980. Berkeley’ University of California Press

Ferrer, A. 1969. fhe Monumental Antiquities and Inscriptions in the North-West Provinces and
Oudh, Varanasi: Indological Book House

228

--- Page 230 ---
Gail, Adalbert. 1977, Parasuraima: Brahmane und Krieger Wissbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.

Gangadharan, N. 1978. The Linga, Origin of its Concept and Worsinp', Purana 20.78-92

1980. Langa Purana, a Study. Delhi: Ajanta Publications.

Gangely, D.C. 1933. "Early [istory of the Gdhadavela Dynasty’, Iedian Historical Quarterly
TX:951-956

Gardner, Percy. 1966. Coins of the Greek and Scytic Kings of Bactria and India in the British
Museum. Chicago: Argonaut.

Getty, Alice 197] (1936). Ganesa: a Monograph on the Elephant-faced God. With an introduction
by Alfied Foucher, Delhi: Munshiram Manchazlal :

Ghurye, GS. 1902) Gads and Men, Bombay: Popular Book Depot

Goode, P.K. 1941. "Varadaraja and his Works’, A Volume of Stadics in Indalogy Presented to
Professor PV Kane on his Gist. Birthday, 7th May 1941, Poona: Oriental Book
Agency: 188-199.

Gole, Susan. 1989 indian Maps and Plans From Earliest Pimes to the Advent of European
Surveys. Delhi: Manohar

Gonda, Jan. 1966 Loka; World and Heaven in the Veda. Austerdam: N,V. Noord-Hoilandsche
Untgevers Maatschappij

_____ 1977 (a). Medieval Religions Literature in Sanskrit. Wiesbaden: Otw Harrassowitz,
1977 (b). The Ritual SGtras, Wiesbaden: Oulo Harrassowitz.
1978. Die Religionsn lndicns (i. Veda und alterer Hinduismus) Stuttgart: W. Koklhammer

Goyal, S. R. 1986 A Religious History of Ancient India (upto 1200 CE.). Meerut: Kusumaiyal:
Prakasan

| Guafeniorst, Rainer. 1993. Das kosmographische System der Puranas. Zur Funktion und

Struktur indischer Kosiographic. Reinbek: Verlag fiir Orientalische Fachpublikavonen

Granoff, Phyllis 1992. ‘Ganesa as Metaphor ‘he Mudgala Purana, Ganesa, Studies of an Asian
God, ed. Robert Brown, Deihiy Manohar-85-100

Grant-Duff, 1. 1826. A History of the Mahrattas. London

Cireaves, Edwin. 1909, Kasi, the City [Hustrious or Benares Allahabad: The Indian Press

Grierson, G. R. 1908-1926. 'Ganapatyas’, Eneyelopedia of Religion and Pthics, ed. 1. Hasunys
wit assistance of Jahn Selbie, VI:175

Gupta, A. S$) 1976. "Puranic Heritage’, Proceedings of the First Latemational Sanskrit Conference,

H vol. U, ed. Ragiavan, Ministry of Education and Social Welfare

Gupla, Om Prakash, 1986. "The Iconoclasts and Varanasy’, Varanasi duough the Ages.
Proceedings of the All India Seminar, ed. Verma, Singh and Mishra, Varanasi: Bharatyya
ltthas Sankalan Samiti: 1-54

Gupia, Parmanand. 1973. Geography in Ancrent Indian Inscriptions (upto 650 Ck). Delhi: D.K
Publishing House

Gupta, SoS. 1973, A Stady on Ganesa, a Distant Member of the Durga Family in Bengal’,

229

--- Page 231 ---
Folklore, Sep 2324-337.

Gapte, Rat Bahadur. 1919 Hindu Holidays and Ceremontals With Dissertations on Origin.
Folklore and Symbols. Calcutta: Thacker, Spin and Co,

Giuischow, Niels and Michaels, A. 1993 Benares, Tempel und religioses Leben in der heiligen
Stadt der Hindus. Kéln.

Giyani, $. D. 1960) The Date of the Puranas’, Purang 1:213-219

Halder, R. R. 1928. Who were the Impenal Pratiharas of Kanauj', fndian Antiquary |.V11 181-184

Hail, Pitz-Edward. ] $62. “Vestizes of Three Royal Lanes of Kanyaxubja, or Kanay, with Indications
af its Literature’, Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal XXX11-45

Halpeany, Philip. (966-1967. The Dunension of Ganesa Worship in Benares. University of
Wisconsin One Year Abroad Programme Ycarwork. (Unpublished)

Havell, E. 1B. 1905. Benares, the Sacred City. Sketches of Hindu Life and Religion. London:
Blackie and Sen

Mavell, b. B. 1933. Benares, the Sacred City. Calcutta: M. K. tha, for Thackers. Spinck and Co

Hazra, R. C. 1940. Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs. Dacca. University
of Dacca

oe ee, 948 ‘Ganapati-worship and the Upa-Purdnas dealing with it’, Joumal of die Ganganatha
Jha Research Insitute $-203-276,

. 1981 ‘Ganesa Purana’, Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Research Institute 9:79-99
i ____ 1978-1983, ‘The Upa-Puranas’, The Cultural Heritage of India, vol. I], Calcutta:

Rama‘rishna Mission Institute of Culture:

Heras, H. 1984, ‘The Problem of Ganesa’, Tarn! Culture:1 51-213

Herbert, Jean. 1987 Benares, Guide to the Pate Kosi Yatra. Calcutta: Saturday Maii Publishers

Hertel, Bradley R. and Humes, Cynthia Ann (eds.). 1994 Living Banaras. Hindu Religion in
Cultural Context New York: State University of New York.

Phrarlai, R. 13.1928 ‘The Kalacuris of Tripurr, Annals of the Bhandarkar Oricntal Research
Instittite, Poona [X:280-295,

i Tluntington, Susan. 1985. The Art of Ancient India. Buddlust, {indu, Jain, New York: Weather

trl!

Inden, Ronald. 1992 (1990). Imagining India, Oxtord: Blackwell

Iyer, Srixanta. 1901. "The Popular View of Ganesha im Madras’, fndian Antiquary XXX:255-256

Jain, HL. 1943-1945 ‘The Chief Political Divisions of India During the Lighth Century’, Jadian
Culture X-X1:161-170.

Jaiswal, Suvira. 1967 The Origin and Development of Vaisnavisin (Varsnavisin from 209 BCF to
300 CE). Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal

Joshi, Mo, and Ramachandran, K. S. 1971. “A Rare Wooden Sculpture of a Five-Faced Ganeés’,

230

--- Page 232 ---
{
Fast and West 21, 2-4°337-340
!
Kale, MR. 1966. fhe Dasakumaracarita of Dandin. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. i
Kane, P. ¥. 1968-1974. History of Dharmasastra (S volumes), Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
Rescatvh Institute.
Keene. 1896 Handbook of Allahabad, Kanpur, Lucknow and Benares. Calcutta. Thacker
Keshavadas, Sadguru Sant. 1988 Lord Ganesha. Bangalore: Suhindra Book House.
Kunsley, David. 1987. Hindu Goddesses. Visions of the Divine Feminine in the Hindu Religious
Tradstion. Deli: Motilal Banarsidass
Karle), W. 1920 Dic Kosmographie der Inder. Nach der Quellen dargcstellt. Bona
Knauer, Friedrich, 197. Das Manava Grhya Sétra nebst Commentar in kurzer Fassung. St
Petersburg
Kosambi, Damodar Dharmanand. 1962. Myth and Reality. Bombay: Popular Prakagan
Krishna, Brajesh. 1989. The Art under the Gurjara-Pratcharas. New Delhi: Harman Publishing
House
Krishan, ¥. 1981-[982. ‘The Or:gins of Ganesa', Artibus Asie 43:235-301
1990. "Is Ganesga a Vedic God?', Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Rescarch Institute
ILXX1:61-70.
1992-1992, ‘Vindyaka as Vipbnaharta in the Manava Grhyva Suta and the Yapiavalkyia
Ssnrti. a Comparative Stady', Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute LX XII-
LX XII1:363-367
wae, 992. The Birth of Gauesa: his Parentage’, Purana 34-74-79.
Kumar, Nita, 1988 The Artisans of Banaras. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kurnar, Krishna, 1970. ‘Some Brahmanical Sculptures in the Archacological Museum, Sarnath’,
Bharati137-151.
Kumar, 8. ¥. 1983 (a) 'Kasi: Its Meaning and Significance in the Laight of Advaita Vedanta and the
Puranas’, Purdna 25:114-128.
1983 (b). The Paurdnte Lore of the Holy Water. Places with Special Reference to the
Skanda Purana. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Lalun, A.N. 1968. Corpus of the Indo-Greek Coins. Calcutta. Poddar Publications.
Ladtaw, James. 1995. Richey and Renunciation. Religion, Lconomy, and Society among
the Jams. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
Lancaster, Lew:s Ro! 992. 'Ganesa in China: Methods of Transtorming thy Demonic’, Gianesa,
Stadies ofan Asian God, ed. Robert Brown, Delhi Manohar:277-286
Law, B.A. 1954. Historical Geography of Anctent india. Paris: Société Asiatique de Paris.
Leshe, Juha. 1991. ‘Sri and Jyestha: Ambivalent Role Models for Women’, Roles and Rituals for
Hindu Women, ed. J. Leslie, London: Pinter Publishers: 107-128
Levi, Sylvain. 1905. Le Catalogue CGiéographique des Yaksa dans la Mahaimiyari', Journal
231

--- Page 233 ---
Asiatique 519-138,
Levi, Robert 1. 1992. Mesocosm- Hinduism and the Organisation of a Traditional Newar
City in Nepal. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Lewis, C. A. 1962 "The Geographical Text of the Puranas A Further Critical Study’, Purana
4:112-145
Lingat, R. 1973. The Classical Law of India. Translated from the French, with additions by J.
Duncan and M. Derrett . Berkeley’ University of California Press
Lutgendort, Philip. 1991 The fife of'a Text. Performing the Ramearitmanas of Tulsidas. Berkeicy
University of Cai forma Press
Macdenell, A. A. 1900. A History of Sanskrit Literature. London: Heinemann
Majumdar, R. C. 1962 (1954). ‘Northern India after the Break-up of the Gupta Empire’, The
Classic Age, ed. R. C. Majumdar, Bombay: Bharauya Vidya Bhavan,
____ 1964 (1958). The Rise and Fall of the Pratihara Empire’, fhe Imperial Age of Kanayy, cd
RoC. Majumdar, Bombay; Bharauya Vidya Bhavan
_ 1966. The Straggle for Empire. Volume V. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
Matandya, Gert H. 1997. Gnfolding a Mandala. The Buddhist Cave Temples at EHora, New York
| State Uiuversity of New York
Martin-Dubost, Paul. 1997 Ganesa, The Fnchanter of the Three Worlds. Bombay: Project for
Indian Cultural Studies, project V1
Maury, Curt. 1969. Folk Ongins of Indian Art. Calcutta: Oxtord and [3H Publishing Company
Maxwell, T.S. (ed.). 1992 Basten Approaches. Pssays on Asian Art and Archaeology, Dell:
Oxford University Press.
MeGvegor, R. S. 1998 (1972). Outline of Hind! Grammar. London: Oxford University Press
McKim Malviile, Jolin. 1985. ‘Sun Worship in Contemporary India’, Maa in India 63 wo, 3;207-
233
Michaei, S. M. i983.The Origin of the Ganapati Cult, Asian Folklore Studies 42:91-116,
Mirasiu, Vasudeyv Vishnu. 1958. Corpus Inseriptionum fndicarum, Volume 1V. parts Land I The
dnscriptions of the Kalachurt-Ched: Era. Qotacamund: Government Epigraphist for India.
Mishra, J. P. 1986. ‘Souial Change in Varanasi in the Ninth Century’, Vardnasi through the Ages
Proceedings of te All India Seminar, ed. Verna, Singh and Mishra, Varanasi: Bharauya
Itihas Sankalan Samit:171-178
Mishra. K.P. 1975. Banaras in Transition (1738-1795) A Socio-Economic Study. Deilu.
Munshiram Mancharlal
Misha. O. P. 1989, [conography of the Saptamatrhds, Dei: Agam Kala Prakagan
Mishra, R.N. 1981, Yaksa Cult and feonography. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
_ _ 1987, Sculptures of Dahala and Daksina, Kosala and their Background. Delhi: Agar Kala
Prakasan
Miwa, Hardas. 1931-1932, ‘Ganapat’, Visvabharati Quarterly, [st series, VII] no. 4:461-481
232

--- Page 234 ---
Mitra, Rajendralala. 1865. ‘On a Landgrant of Mahendrapala of Kanauj', Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal XX XI1:321-327
Monier-Williams, M. 1990 (1899) A Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Manns, Alan FE. 1984. Pilgrimage mn the Hindu Tradition. A Case Study of West Bengal Delhi:
Oxford University Press.
_— 1992. Sacred Journeys. The Anthropology of Pilguimage. Westport, Conneticut
Greenwood Press
Mukiah, KS. 191) Smiling Renares (A Sketch from the Vedic Days to Modern Tunes)
Madras.
Muxhopadhyay, M. M. 1984 Sculptures of the Ganga- Yainuna Valley Delhi: Abhinay Publications
Mulay, Sumati. 1972. Studtes in the Historical and Cultural Geography and ethnography of the
Decean. (Based enarely on inscriptions of the Deccan tiom the first to the thirteenth century
CE) Poona Deccan College
Mandkur, Balaji. 1975. ‘The Enigma of Vindyaki', Antiqus Asiae 37, no. 4: 291-302
Nagar, Shano Lal. 1992. The Cult of Vinayaka. Delhi: Intellectual Publishing House
Nagarajan, S. 19%9-1990. 'Ovigins of the Ganesa Worship in lamil Nadu and Ganesa in
South-East Asia - Indonesia, Burma and Thailand, Bulleua of Indian Tradition and
Calture:28-53,
Nara, AK. and Roy, T. N. 1976. Excavations at Rajehat, vols i, I. Banaras: BHU
Narain, A. K. and Singh P, 1977. Excavations at Rajghat, vol HT. Banaras: BHU
Narain, A. K. and Agrawala, P. K. 1978 Excavations at Ryghat, vol iV. Banaras: BHU
Narain, AK. 1988. Tconographic Origins of Ganvsa and the bvidenee of the Indo-Greek
Comage’, Orrentalia losephi Tucer Memoniag Dieata, ed. G. Gnoli, and L. Lanciotti, Serie
Oriental Roma 56, 3:1007-1019,
_ 1992. ‘Ganesa, A Protohistory of the Idea and the Icon’. Ganesh: Studies of an Astan God,
ed, Robert Brown, Delai: Manohar:19-48
Narain, VA. 1939. Jonathan Duncan and Varanasi. Calcutta Firma K 1. Mukhopadhyay
Publishers,
: Navangui, Vayayant. 1992. '‘Sapramatrkas (With Special Reference to Textual Study)’, Quarterly
Journal of the Mythic Socrety LXX XIIL.198-208,
j Newell, HA. 1936 Benares: The Hindu’s Holy City. Madras: Higginbottoms Ltd.
Niyoua, Roma, 1959. The History of the Gahadavala Dynasty Calcutta: Oriental Boak Agency
Olivelle, Patrick 1992. Samnyasa Upamsads - Hindu Scriptures on Asceticism and Renunciation
New York: Oxtord University Press
Pal, Pratapaditya, 1981. Fiindu Religion and Iconography according to the Tantrasara. Los
Angeles: Vichitra Press.
232

--- Page 235 ---
Pande, A.N. 1948. ‘The Evil Spirits of the Grhya Siitras’,, Joumal of the Bihar Research Society
34.89.74,
Pandey, R. B. 1969. Varanasi, The Heart of Hinduism Varanast: Orient
Pandey, R. 1979, Kast through the Ages. Delhi. Sundeep Prakasan
Pargiter, Fo. 1922. Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. London: Oxford University Press,
1962. The Pordna Text of the Dynashes of the Kali Age (With Introducuon and Notes)
Varanasi: Chowkhaimba Sanskrit Series, vel. XIX
Parker, A. 1898 A Handbook of Benares. Benares: Lazarus and Co
Parry, Jonathan. 1994. Death in Benares. Cambridge: Cambridge Un:versity Press
Pathak, V. S. 1957. Religious Sealings trom Raghat, Journal of the Nunusmatic Suciety of India
19. 168-179.
. 1960. History of the Saiva Cults in Northern India from Inscriptions (700-1200 CE).
Varanasi: Tara Prinung Works
—____ 1987. Smarta Religious Tradition. (Being a Study of thy Epigraphic Data on Smairta
Religious Tradition of North-india, ca 600 Ck to 1200 CF). Meerut: Kusumanéals
Prakagan,
Paul, D.R. 1973 (2) Cultural History from the Vayu Purana. Delhi: Matilal Banarsidass
Pieper, Jan (ed.). 1980 "Ritual Space in India: Studies im Architectural Anthropology’, Art and
Archacology Research Papers.
Pollock, Sheldon, 1993. Ramayana and Political Imagonation in India’, Journal of Astin Studies
£2, no. 2 (May}:261-297
Pou. P. H. 1966. Yoga and Yantra: Their Correlation and The Significance for Indian
Archacology (Translated from the Dutch by Rodney Necdham). Den Haag: Martinus
Nyhoft. i
Pradhan, S. N. 1979. Chronology of Ancient India, Varanasi: Bharatiya Publishing House |
; Prakash, V. and Roy, T.N. 1965. ‘Sites and Monuments of Cuar Pradesh’, Bulletin of the Utear |
Pradesh Historical Sovrety 4. I
Preston, Laurence W. 1980. ‘Subregional Cenues in the History of Maharashtra’ The sites sacred
to Ganesa’, Images of Maharashtra: A Regional Profile, o¢. NK. Wagle, Toronto: 102-128
Puna, DS. 1979, ‘Toons of Ganesa tram South Haryana , Bharauva Vidva XXXX:20-22
Pun, BLN 1966. Cities of Ancient Indra, Meerut. Chandra Prakash - Meenakshi Prakasan
. .. 1970, ‘GaneSa and the Ganapati Cult in India’, Journal of Indian History 48, no, 2403-413
1986. The History of the Guryara-Pratibaras, Dell: Munsluram Manoharlal
Qanungo, K. R. 1960 (a). ‘Religious Policy of the Maratha Frpire under the Peswas', /istorical
Fssays, Agra: Shiva La) Agarwata and Co, 102-117
_____ 1960 (b) “Some Side-hehts on the History of Benares, Political and Social’, Historical
Fysays, Agra Shiva Lal Aganwala and Co,: 118-123
234

--- Page 236 ---
|
Raghavan, V. 1960. “Tamil Versions of the Puranas’, Purana 2:225-242,
Ralunan, Ab 19800 Art and Architecture of the Kalachuris. Delhi: Sundeep Prakagan .
Rahuia, B. ‘T1978. A Critical Study of the Mahavastu. Delhi Motilal Banarsidass :
Rai, G © and Prakash, V. 1963. Varanasi at a Glance. A Souvenir Issued on the Live of
the XXIV Sessron of All ladia Oriental Conference. Varanasi: BHU
Ramipubramamam, V. 1971. The Ganapati-Vmayaka-Gajanana Worship: Analys:s of an
Integrave Cult, insutute of Traditional Cultures Bulletin:97-3 53,
Rao, S. K. Ramachandra. 1988 (a). Yantras and Mandalas in Temple Worship. Bangalore
Kalpataru Research Academy,
1988 (b). The Yaneras, Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications.
1992. Ganesa Kosha. Bangalore: Kalpataru Research Academy.
Rao, T A. Gopinatha. 1981 (1908). Elements of Hindu iconography New York Garland.
Rae, U, Venkataknshna. 1949 “The Ganapati Cult, Quarterly Journai of the Mythic Society 4i:92-
99
Rassat, Hans Joachim 1984, Ganesa: Fine Uatersuchung tiber Herkunft, Wesen und Kult der
blephantenképtigen Gotthert Indiens. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Tibingen.
Rawson, Philip S. 1991, 'The Syinbolism of Indian Art, Symbols in Art and Religion, cd K
Wemer, Deihi: Mottlal Banarsidass: 14-26
Ray, FL C. 931. The Dynasuc History of Northern India (Karly Medieval Period) Caleutta:
Liuversity Press.
Ray, M. A. 1928. 'A Note on the Chronelogy of the Later Pratuaaras’, Indian Aauquary LVN230-
234,
Raychaudhuri, Hemachandra. 1983 (1829). Political History of Ancient India. Calcutta: Universily
| Press
| Redig, 1 Wayan. 1996, Ganesa Images trom India and Indonesia. Debi: Sundeep Prakasan
Rivitre, Juan-Roges, 1962. ‘The Problem of Ganesa in the Puranas’, Purana 4°t:96-102
Rocher, L 1986. The Purdnas. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowity,
1992. ‘Ganesa's Rise to Prominence in the Sanskrit Literature’, Ganesa, Studics of an
Asian God, ed. Robert Brown, Dell: Manohar.69-84
Rosenfield, J. M. 1967. The Dynastic Art of the Kushans. Berkeley: University of Califorma
Press
Roy, P. B. 1985 (3). Banaras’ the Soul of Hinduism. Calcutta: Saturday Mail Publications.
. Sachau, ©. E 1988 (1910). 4/-Brrunr's India London: Tribner and Co.
Sadhashiv, C.1 1987) Eneyelopedia of Puranic Beliefs and Practiscs New Delhi: Navrang
Publications
Sa'ved, Mian Muhammad. 1972. The Sharq: Sultanate of Jaunpur, Karachi: Unversity of Karachi
Press.
235

--- Page 237 ---
Sahai, B. N. 1970. "The Sacred Geography of Kashi’, Research Programs on Cultural
Anthropology and Alhted Disciplines, Calcutta: Anthropological Survey af India‘ 15-19

Saha, Bhagwant. 1975. Iconography of Minor findu and Buddhist Deites, New Delhi. Abhinav
Publications,

Sahar, Sudha. 1976, 'Saiva Sects found in the Skanda Purana’, Annals of the Bhandarkar
Orrenial Research Insttate LVI 188-191

Sahin, D. R. Benares Inscription of Pantha’, ELIX, no. 8:59-62

Salomon, Richard. 1979. Tirtha-Pratyamnayah: Ranking of Hindu Pilgrimage Sites in Classical
Sansknt Texts’, Zertschrit der Deutsche Morgendtindische Gesellschaft 1292102-12%
iO8S The Bridge to the Three Holy Cites. The Sanidinyu Praghattaka of Narayana Bhatta’s
Tristhalisetu. Delhy: Moulal Banarsidass.

Sanfurd, James H. 1992. ‘Literary Aspects of Japan's Dual Ganesa Cult, Gianesa, Studies of an
Astan God, ed. Robert Brown, Delhi: Manohar: 287-336,

Sankala, Wasmukh 19. 1949. Studies ut the Historical and Cultural Geography and
Ethnography of Guyurat, Poona: Deccan College Monograph Series.

Saraswati, Baidyanath. 1970. ‘Studying the Sacred Complex in Kasi’, Research Programnics on
Cultural Anthropological and Allied Discaphnes, Calcutta: Anthropylogical Surs ey of India
8-15

1975. Kashi; Myth and Reality of Classical Cultural Tradition Simla: Indian Institute oF
Advanced Study

(98S. "Kashi Pilgrimage-The End of an Endless Journey’, Duncnsions of Pilerunage - An

Anthropological Appraisal, ed. Makhan Jha, Delhi: Inter India Publications:9 1-104,

Sarkar, Anal 1969. ‘GaneSa: Gad of the People’, Indian Museum Bulletin, Caicutta 84-87

Sarma, B. R- 1975. ‘Ganapati in the Epics’, Bharatiya Vidya XXXV, nos. 1-4 1-13

Sarma, N. D. 1984. (Ganesga and the Antiquity of same Saiva Myths’, Bharatiya Vidva XV.21-28

Susi, Ho. 1974 (1916). South Indian Images of Gods and Gaddesses, Dell: Biaratiya
Publishing House.

Sasui, S.M. Natesa. 1903. fiindu Feasts, Fasts and Ceremonies. Madras: M. LE. Publishing

House.

Satpuru Sivaya Subramunyaswann, 1996, Loving Ganesa. Hinduism’s Undearme Elephant-faced
God. New York: Himalayan A. ©

Sedyawati, Fi, 1994. Cranesa Statuary of the Kadi and Simhasari Periods A Study of Art
History. Leader: KROL TOL.

Seetharain, C 2B. 1952 ‘Tlindu Varieties of Ganesa linages', Bharativa Vidya 13:29-50

Sen, Rajendra Nath. 1920 The Brahma Vaivarta Puranam (Brahma and Prakrti Khandas)
Allahabad: Panini Office.

Sen, RLR. 1912. The Holy City. Chittagong: Minto Press.

Seshadri, P. 1930 (1928). Henares. Cawnpare: Tara Press.

Shakuataia, JNO, 1992. Ganesa, the Auspicious .. the Beginning. Bombay: Vakils, Felfer and

236

--- Page 238 ---
Simons Ltd.
Skarma, LK. 1987. ‘Same Guhyas and Ganas: ‘Their Caaracter and Prowess', Vaypeya Essays on
Evolution of Indian Art and Culture. Prof. KD. Bajpai Felicuation Volume, Delhi: Agam
Kata Prakaéan
Sharma, B, N. 1970, “Vainavik! in Medieval Indian Art, Orrental Art XV1V-i69-172,
- —. '972.°A Note on Vaindyik: Images’, Oriental Art XVUI:277-280
Sharma, B. R. 1978 (a). ‘Ganapati and his Most Sacred Places for Pilprimages in India’, Bhavan's
Journal 22 no. 317-27
-—— — 1975 (b). 'Ganapati-Vindayaka in Smrti Literature’, Kurukshetra University Research
Journal, June:10-14.
-— —!976. ‘Ganapati in the Paivadevopisana’, Bulletin of Indian Tradition and Culture, January-
June:6§-79.
-a.. 1981. Agra-ptyd of Ganapati’, Bharatiya Vielya 41:92-95,
-~ — 1983. 'Ganapau worshipped as Vighnesga’, Journal of Indian History 61:41 -46.
sharme, D. 1943-1944. The Imperial Pratilaras - A Revised Stady', Journal of Indian History
XXII-XXIII 93-105.
Sharma, J. P. (989. Jaina Yukshas. Meerut: Kusumanjali Prakagan
Sharma, R. K. i980. The Kalachuris and their Times. Delhi: Sundeep Prakdgan
Sbernng, M. A. 1975 (1868). Henares. The Sacred City of the Hindus Dethi: B. R. Pubiisiung
Corporation
Shukla, H. L. 1994, Semiotica Indica. Encyclopedic Dictionary of Body Language sn indian Art
and Culture. New Delhi: Aryan Books Intemanional.
Shulman, David 1D. 1980. Tamil Temples Myths: Sacrifice and Marnage in the South India Saiva
Tradidon. New Jersey: Princeton Publications
Singh, B. P. 1985. Life in Ancient Varanasi: An Account Based on Archacological Evidence
Delhi: Sundeep Prakasan.
Singh, M. R. 1972. Geographicai Data in the Early Puranas: A Critical Study. Calcutta: Punthi
Pustak.
Singh, O. P1983. feonography of Gaja-Laksini, Varanas:: Bharati Prakagan,
Singh, R. D. 1986, Bengal and Varanasi: A Study of Cultural Synthesis and National fntegration
Calcutta: Bibliographical Society of India.
Singh, R. L. 1955. Banaras: A Study of Urban Geography, Banaras: Nand Kishore and Bros
Singh, R. [.. and Singh R. P. B. 1987. Trends in the Geography of Pilgrimages. Varanasi National
Geographical Society of India.
Singh, Rana P. B. 1987 (a). "Towards Myth, Cosmos, Space and Mandala in India: A Search in the
Geography of Belief Systems', National Geographical Journal of Indi 33, no. 3308-326.
-—__— 1987 (b). "The Pilgrimage Mandaia of Varinasi (Kasi): A Study in Sacred Geography’,
National Geographical Journal of India 33, no. 4:493-524
-—_— 1988. The Image of Varanasi: Sacrality and Perceptual World’, National Geographical
237

--- Page 239 ---
dournal of India 34, no. 1:1-32 |
wu. 1991. Pafic Kosi Yatra, Varanasi. Sacred Journcy, Ecology of Place and Faithscape.
Varanas! Tara Book Agency.
_ 1993. Banaras (Varanasi), Cosmic Order, Sacred City, finda Traditions. Varanasi: Tara
Book Agency
1995 'Varanasi: Ganesa Images and Shrines in the Cityscape’, Sacred Places, Sacred
Traditions, ed. 1D. P. Dubey, Allahabad: Society of Pilgrim Studies:209-220.
Sirear, D.C. 1960 Studres in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India. Delhi. Motilal
Banarsidass.
.___ 1966. Indian Epigraphical Glossary. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
___ 1967. Cosmograpay and Geography in Barly Indian Literature, Indian Studies, Past and
Present
Sivasainy, V. 1986. ‘Some Aspects of Ganapatyam ia Sri Lanka’, Quarterly Journal of the Mythic
Socrety 76 323-336
Smita, Jonathan 7. 1978. ‘Map 1s not Termtory’, Studies i the Listory of Religions, Leiden: Brill:
288-309
Saath, VA. 1919. The Oxford History of India. Prony tie Earhest Times to the End of 1911
Oxtord: Clarendon Press.
____ 1924. Early History of India (including Alexander's campaigns). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Séhnen, Renate and Schreiner, Peter, 1989. Brahniapurana - Suminary of Contents with Index of
Names and Morits. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz
Sumayayi, K. N. 1983, Concepts of Ganesa. Bangalore: Kalpataru Research Academy.
Serensen, S. 1963. An index to the Names in the Mahabharata, New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass
Spate, O. TL KK. and Enayat Aimad. 1980. 'Five Cities of the Gangeuc Plain - A Cross-Section of
Indian Cultural History’, Geographical Review XL:260-263
Srkantaya, S$. 1948. 'Symbohsm of the Yajfiopavuta (The Sacred Thread of the Twice-Borm
Ilindus), Quarterly Journal of the Mvtuc Society 3950-08.
Srivastava, IC. $8. 1989. The Hlephant in Barly Indian Art (Prony the Indus Civulsation to
CE 650). Delhi: Moitlal Banarsidass.
Srivastava, M,C. P. 1972. 'Ganesa and Jyestha’, Jommnal of the Bihar Research Society £8, nos. |-
4168-170
Srivastava, VC, 1979. ‘Ganesa Images trom Afghanistan’, Bharatiya Vidya XXXX:14-19
Stein, Burton. 1977 (a) ‘Temples in Tamil Country 1300-1750 CE, Indian Economic and Social
Historical Review (January-March): 11-45,
—— 1977 (b) ‘Circulation and the Historical Geography of Tamil Country’. Journal of Asian
Studies XXXVII (Nev.):7-26
Stevenson, R. 1846, ‘Analysis of the Ganesa Purana with Special Reference to the History of
Buddhisny, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 8, no. 3-19-24
Stoddard, Robert H 1987. ‘Pilgrimages along the Sacred Paths’, National Geographical Journal of
238

--- Page 240 ---
India 33, no, 4:44%-856.

Sutley. Margaret and Janes, 1977. A Dictionary of Hindtusus: its Mythology. Folklore and
Development, 1500 BC-1500 CE. London Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Sudha:, Sakai. 1992. "Siva in the Skanda Purana’, Purdna 36,0 1-G8-73,

Sudhu, Padma. L988. Symbols of Art, Region and Phiiosophy. New Dellii: Intellectual Publishing
House:

Sakul, Kubernath. 1970. ‘Original Sites of some Important Temples of Varanasi’, Umesh Mishra
Commemoranve Volume, Ganganatha Jha Research Institute.71 7-724.
1974. Vardnast Down the Ages. Varanasi: Bhargava Bushan Press.

Sar, Atul Krishua, 1929. ‘The Gahadavalas in Kanauj', Indian Historical Quarterly 5:86-102

Sutherland, Gail Hinich, 199!. Yakshas in Hinduism and Buddhisin, the Disguises of the Deron
New Delhi: Manohar.

Tarn, Wo W.1951. The Greexs in Bactia and India. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

Thakur, Umakant, 1973 ‘Holy places of Narth India as mentioned in the Skanda Purina’, Purana
15:93-120 and 201-223,

1974. The Holy Piaces of North India as mentioned i the Skanda Purana’, Purana 16:90-

113

Thapan, Ania Raima 1997. Gnderstanding Ganapati. Insights into the Dynamics of a Cult. Delhi
Manohar.

Phaplyal, K. K. 1970. ‘Gajataksmi on Seals’, Laksini and Saraswati in Artand Literature, ed DC.
Sirear, Caleutta: 112-125

Thomsen, Margrit, 1980. ‘Numerical Symbolism and Orientation in Some Temples of the 64
Yormnis’, Art and Archaeology Research Papers:53-56,

Tiwant, M. N. and Gin, K. 1992. ‘Images of Ganesa in Jainism’, Ganega, Snidies of an Asian God,
ed. Robert Brown, Delhi: Manohar:101-114.
| Tripatin, L. K. 1962-1963. “Lhe Kardamesvara Temple at Kandava', Bharati 6:137-156.

lov. ‘Sr Laksmi in Early Indian Literature and Art, Laksnif and Sarasvati in Art and
Luteratare, ed. D.C. Sircar, Calcutta: 158-162

—. 1974-1975. "Chausatha Yogini Temple, Khajurahe', Joumal of the Indian Society of
Onental Art (new series) 6:33-42

Tripathi, Maya Prasad. 1969, Development of Geographical Knowledge in Ancient India
Varanasi; Bharatiya Vidya Prakasan

Trivedi, RD 1989 Temples of the Prathara Period in Central India, Delhi: Archaeological Survey
of India

Tucci, Giuseppe. 1961, The Theory and Practise of Mandata with special Reference to the Modern
Psychology of the Subconscious. London: Rider and Co.

Tulpule, Shankar Gopal. 1979 Classical Marathi Literature, froni the Beginning to CE 1818.
Wiesbaden Ouo Harrassowilz

239

--- Page 241 ---
Vaidya, VS. 1979 (1926). History of Medieval [Hindu India, Volume fl: The Downtall of Hindu
fodia, New Delh; Cosmo Publications.
Varadpande, M. L. 1973. ‘Ganega in Indian Folk Theatre’, Sangect Nathak 27.64-75.
Valsyayan, Kapila. 1983. the Square and the Cucie of the Indian Arts. New Delhiv Rakesh Press
.. .. 1992, Kalatattvakosa - A Lexicon of Fundamental Concepts of the Indian Arts, Delhi
Indira Gandhi Naonal Centre for the Arts; Motilal Bazarsidass.
Vermi, B.S. 1962. Socio-Religious, Econonue and Literary Condition of Bihar (from ca. 319 CE
to 1000 CE). Delhi: Munshirain Manoharlal.
Verma, TP. 1984. “The Temples of Benares', Bharate - The Professor Pamlay Volume 15:194-
205
Verna T. P., Siugh D. P. and Mista J. S$. 1986. Varanasi through the Ages. Proceedings of the
All India Seminar, August 1-4, 1985, Varanasi: Bharatiya Iuhas Sankalan Sanit
Vertam, Mani. 1993 (1975). Purane Encyclopaedia, Dellu: Moulal Banarsidass.
Vidyarth, L.. P1979, The Sacred Complex of Kashi. Delhi: Concept Publishing Company.
Vinayakam, N. i. 1966. ‘Worship of Vighnesvara in India and Abroad’, Indian Review 6$:299- |
303.
Visvakarma, 1. S. 1986 ‘Tistoricai Perspectives of the Boundaries of Kast’, Vardnasi through the
Ages. Proceedings of the All India Seminar, ed. Verma, Singh and Mishra, Varanasi
Bharatiya [lihas Sanka!an Samiti:83-87.
Watt, George. 1908) The Commercial Products of India: An Abridgement of the Dictionary of the
Economic Products of India. Londew Joan Murray.
| Watters, Thomas. 1905, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in india (ed. T. W. Rhys-Davids). Lendon
Roya! Asiatic Society
Wheeler, TT. 1864, Farly Travels in India, being reprints of rare and curious narratives of old
travellers i India in the sixteenth and seventeenth century. Calcutta: Englishman Press
Wilkinson, Christopher, 1992. The Tantric Ganega: Texts Preserved in the ‘Tibetan Canon’,
Ganvasa: Studies of an Asian God, ed. Robert Brown, Delhi: Manohar:235-276
Wink, Andre. 1992. 'Kanauj as the Religious and Political Capital of Karly Medieval India’, The
Sacred Center as the Focus of Politreal Interest, ed. Hans Bakker, Groningen, Figbert
Forsten: LOL-127,
Winternitz, Maurice. 1988 (1927). A History of Indian Literature. Calcutta: University of Calcutta
Press
Yadav, Numata. 1997, Ganesa in Indian Art and Literature. Jaipur: Publication Scheme
Yaruk, JU: §871-1874. “Nouces of Hindu Tribes and Castes in Gujurat’', Joumual of the Bombay
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society X,
Yorol, Kayosli. 1968. Ganesa Gita: A Study, Translavon with Notes and a Condensed Rendering
240

--- Page 242 ---
of the Commentary of Nilakantha. Den Hazg: Mouton,
Zamuier, Heinnch. 1962 (1946) Myths and Symbols 1 Indian Art and Civilisation, New York
Harper Torchbooks.
