--- Page 1 ---
ALICE
GETTY
a,
‘wd
ea |
aed . a a
“RI, 5515
a GET

--- Page 2 ---
: CM aa A ESS 5% .
mo, Lg Oe a ee x" . .
| CANBY 2a
; oS Sheen ek «er :
ie Me ee ee
> . - Dames a? £5 ae wo ee nS
hak . nye ES OS 8 oa ys a eee <a
oe . - RE OTN AD Oo pe
F Rent ornae te ed oy ees
; fibeipl. ah GPar oa. i oh peg “NAR aren
a eo ee Oy a ge le fete ee eee
OE Lg Leet Sel ea Ua BER een *
Ros : iar Seer te Re Len tee ete Ber
Fae ieee PE Ss Le Ren nee Rgbenprget rk PERE +
fae nn ee Ec dae ge TEE ace? he RT gta vo .
cel oR rah ae 2 Ba eC TG a ee Bese
SENS eat Say ae ilae Teac Ne tes a “2s ae gee
A ee. LEAST SSE eat aa oe ve :
Stiga kiss cans wae ee DA a ea .

RS Poe 3 iti ea Se ie ees se . ls .
SEE st coke Se ine Perea ie. Re loumloy oe .
see peers are ae eg Se sc

Re ee tees og kai ae Rae oy rg eg wove t . a ee

--- Page 3 ---
>
a noe we UR : . ae
* . . ee «
> . ongrn OE ee r om .
' EDT” Re One
aS” > ap i. ee ae ae OGM a
A a nd . See A?
ne " ° en ve eal’
Be. : : 1o°°£ ;
Sas ak al
: @.. . Ga owed GES ps a ie
Re +E gee 8 Pe Owe gl
Siva and Parvati receiving Brahma, Ganeda, Karttikeya, Krisna and other Hindu
gods in Durbar on Mount Kailaaa

--- Page 4 ---
GANESA
A MONOGRAPH
ON THE ELEPHANT-FACED GOD
ALICE GETTY

--- Page 5 ---
Second edition December, 1971
FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1936
BY CLARENDON PRESS. OXFORD
c
29. 55
. yey
wv US
AONCA tig ~ ;
ee
4% ~
if 867 43l S,
i Deptt of Arta 3 .
3-86 7
Ooi Se HO,
PUBLISHED BY SRI DEVENDRA JAIN FOR
MUNSHIRAM MANOHARLAL. NEW DFLHI AND PRINTED BY
SRE ANIL MEHTA AT MEHTA OFFSET WORKS, OFLHi-7
AND ART PLATES PRINTED BY SRI BRAHMA DATTA AT
OXFORD PRINTCRAFT INDIA (P} LTD., NEW DELHI

--- Page 6 ---
eT ee, eee +f
PicRME Oy apie egt SS SS. 2 reo wee ge a TS ey ste AR alee S
Sie PO Be RS SS ET Ps eS as BES ee Set ge
S EP ae ae OE EC gow fe ae haere ean :
eae E 2 ae Pio een TE ge park eras are
Bek we Roe Mat er Ee Ve
Re aide a ere be AOR tg sat tg TR A ee |
Fo oe ER A oo SS. oS A ee
eel Dake dee SEL gy See fm RE Pe ene Faery
Bee Set Boe Sgt gee Ee Speer RR Ae
ree ie Fe Te ES Ne ntage o eee ge TE
DEI Sete Ren oS Se soi iron oh Ae waa i Ey, RS Cede >
Me ge rel el me oR Oo ia oi ok Er rs Peat titges Gamat eT gh eG
2 wey PRL Rae har Std Og ST eR SI gee i A ae H
pa peste gs Ae EPO ER OE I, rr Se ge ie 1? gn EN
aa Sy Pe ee aie ctr weet MORE A,
PARP SEEN ES gy CF Ba eRe Seek to ry TO ee pg S ae: eseig
Se poe st ARN Se eae SS apg ee REE
rE oe Semen ee ede eee eee a
Be wma tht paki MOST ong aCe, PP Eee rece a ee dee Bk
eS EE ET
“Tat aoe ek gregh oe atm Rance Lee De gay OS raven phi gS ES $e js es ages Soca reed
ieee Sacra a re Rg Seay STs hk ABET Rw REY Oe ES
pe EO ot “ahs eheans vee Sees | ee Ea a cee 2 ae!
: SREPEE Seale ME Ee TAS ee ee Mee Li tie Cee re ie a
ee ne te eg Be

--- Page 7 ---
CONTENTS
LIST OF PLATES. . . . : . . : ix
LIST OF TEXT FIGURES . . : . . . . xiii
LIST OF COLOURED PLATES. . . . . : . xiii
INTRODUCTION BY ALFRED FOUCHER . . . . . ox
VARIOUS NAMES AND QUALITIES OF GANESA . . . . axv
GANAPATLSTOTRA . . : . . . . : . axvi
HYMN TO GANESA . . : . : . : : + xKvii
ABBREVIATIONS. . . . . . : : xxviii
Cuarren I. INDIA: ORIGIN OF GANESA. GANESA IN INDIAN LITERATURE 1
Carter I. INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND
IMAGES. . . : : : . . . .
Carrer IIT. INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS . 25
Cuurter JV. INDIA, NEPAL, CHINESE TURKESTAN, TIBET: GANFSA IN
BUDDHISM . . . . . . : : . 37
Cuarten V. GANESA IN BURMA, SLAM, INDO-CHINA . : . . 4
Cuarrer VI. GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO. : . : . 8S
Cuarter VII. GANESA IN CHINA . . . . . . . 67
Cuarrer VILL. GANESA IN JAPAN : . . : : . 78
BIBLIOGRAPHY —. . . . : : . : . 89
TEXTS OF REFERENCE, SANSKRIT, TIBETAN AND JAPANESE. . 93
GLOSSARY. . . . . : : . . . 94
INDEX . . . . . . : . . . 97

--- Page 8 ---
LIST OF PLATES
(AT END)
1. a. Vylse dictating the Mahdbhdraia to Ganess, Rajput painting in the Boston Museum
of Fine Arte. By courtesy of Mr. Coomaraawamy.
&. Lesf in a Nepalese book with miniature of Gapapati-Heramba and formula for hia invoca-
tion. Collection of the author.
¢. Nepalese miniature: Ganeds as ecribe and the Siva-liriga. By courtesy of Mr. Prabodh
Chandra Bagchi.
2. a. Baa-relief in Mathura spotted stone from Sankisa Mound. Museum fur Volkerkunde,
Munich. By courtesy of Dr. Schirmer.
8. Sinhalese stone figure in the Colombo Museum. By courtesy of Sir. Paranavitane.
c. Ganeéa with the SaptamAtrkas in the Ravana-ka khal at Ellora. By courtesy of Mr. G.
Yazdani.
3. a. Stone utatue of Ganeds and dalti from Bhumara. Boaton Museum of Fine Arts. By
courtesy of Mr. A. Coomaraswemy.
6. Ganedga ‘with the bells’ from Bhumara. Boston Muscum of Fine Arts, By courtesy of
Mr. Coomaraswamy.
4. a. Stone atatue of Ganeda and dalti from Bundelkhand, West India, belonging to Dr. Stella
Kramrisch, Temporsrily in the Indis Museum, London.
5. Ganspati-Heramba and dak. Stone. Indian. British Museum, London.
5. a. Dravidian stone image from south India. Collection of Mr. C. 'T. Loo.
6. Dravidian stone statue, Museum fiir Volkerkunde, Munich. By courtesy of Dr. Schirmer.
6. a. Rajput miniature: Siva and Parvati as ardhandriéa. Collection of the author.
6. Rajput miniature: Siva dancing the tdndava before Brahms, Ganeéa, and other Hindu
gods. Collection of the author.
7. @. Ganeéa dancing on rat. Carved pillsr in the Menachi temple, Madura. By courtesy of the
India Office.
6. Ganeda holding wine-jer in trunk. Carved pillar in the mandapam of the Menachi temple,
Madura. By courtesy of the India Office.
8. a. Stone atatue of Ganeda in the Ravana-ké kha, Ellora. By courteay of Mr. K. de B.
Codrington.
6. Siva dancing the tdndava with Ganeés in attendance. Bas-relief in the grotto-temple of
Bad&mi. Photographed by the author.
c. Marriage of Siva and Parvat! with Ganeds at their fect. Bas-relief in cave 21, Ellora.
By courtesy of Mr. G. Yazdani.
9. cg. Kangra ministure: Siva aa Bhiteévars, with Parvati, Ganeéa, and Karttikeya. Indis
Muscum, London. By courteay of Mr. A. J. D. Campbell.
4. Kangr& miniature: Adoration of Siva aa ‘Destroyer’ by Kriana, Brahmé, and other
Hindu gods and pishis. India Museum, London.
10. a. Kangra drawing: Siva as Gangaé-dhara, with Parvat!, Ganega, Karttikeys, and the Saint
Bhigirathe. Boston Muscum of Fine Arta. By courteay of Mr. A. Coomarsawamy.
6. Kangré drawing: Parvat! with Ganeda and Karttikeys. British Museum, London. By
courtesy of Mr. Laurence Binyon.
«ms b

--- Page 9 ---
x LIST OF PLATES
11. Rajput miniature in scroll manuscript of the Bhagavata-purdna: Ganeés accompanied
by two females. Bibliothéque Nationale, Paria. By courteay of M. Blochet.
12. Rajput miniature: The adhiseka of Gaja-Laksmf with Ganeds, Kyisna, Brahma, and other
Hindu gods in adoration (in colour). Collection of the author.
13. a. Primitive bronze image. Indian (%). British Museum, London.
6. Ganeéa seated on a rat(?). Bronze. Provenance unknown. Collection of Mr. Nahar,
Calcutta.
¢. Bronze image cated on a rat. Indian. Museum fiir Volkerkunde, Munich. By courteay
of Dr. Schirmer.
d. Figure eeated on a rat. Bronze. Provenance unknown. Collection of Mr. Nahar, Calcutta,
14. a. Early Nepalese image. Bronze. Collection of the author.
6. Ganeda holding the Ganapati-lviga. Bronze image in the collection of the author.
¢. Ganeda with ten arma, holding the dekti in normal left. Indian bronze. Collection of the
author.
d, Bronze figure with Saivite tilek, third eye, and third tusk. Collection of the author.
15. a. Altar of the Five Great Brahman Goda: Siva (liga), Ganess, Parvati, Vianu, and Aditya
= the Sun (Brahm). Collection of the late Professor Sylvain Lévi.
4. Bala-Kriana. Indian bronze. Collection of the author.
¢. Rala-Ganeéa. Indian bronze. India Museum, London.
16. a. Standing figure. North India. Collection of the author.
». Standing figure. South India. Museum at Madras, India.
¢. Six-armed Nepalese figure. Bronze. Collection of the author.
@, Ganeda bolding radish. Stone sculpture from Dhanuka District, Bengal. Dacca Museum.
By courtesy of Mr. N. K. Bhattaéali.
17. a. Mahakéls etanding on Ganeds and GaneéAni. Tibetan bronze. Collection of the author.
6. ‘Black’ Maftjudrl treading on Ganeda. Tibetan bronze. Collection of the author.
c. Standing figure with @ lion under each foot. Nepalese bronze.
@. Mahakala overcoming Ganeéa. Tibetan bronze. Collection of the author.

18. a. Ganeéa overcome by Vighnantaka, the Nepalese ‘Destroyer of Obstacles’. Nepalese

bronze. Collection of the author.

6. ’Black’ Maiijusri treading on Ganega. Tibetan bronze. Collection of the author.

¢. Vighnantaka overcoming Ganeis. Nepalese bronze temple lamp. Collection of the
author.

d, Ganapati-Heramba treading on the aeven-headed snake, Seshs. Nepalese bronze. Collec-
tion of the author.

19, Ten-armed Ganapati-Heramba and dakii atanding with one foot on a lion and the other
ons rat. Nepalese bronze. Museum fiir Volkerkunde, Munich, By courtesy of Dr.
Schirmer.

20. a. Nrtta-Genapati on the rat surrounded by four manifestations of himself. Nepaleec
painting. Collection of the author.

6. Ganapati-Heramba, Nepalese painting. Collection of the late Profesor Sylvain
Lévi.
21. a. Ganapati-Herambs and éadti. Tibetan stone sculpture polychromed.
6. Image from north India. Alabaster. Collection of the suthor.

--- Page 10 ---
LIST OF PLATES xi
22. a. Ganeds and the ganas. Stone frieze from Pangal Nalgunda, India. By courtesy of Mr. G.
Yazdani
4. Ganeda in niche on s atone-carved pillar in the Siva devale, Polonndruva. By courtesy
of Mr. Paranavitane.
¢. Ganega and the ganay. A frieze on the Kantaka Cetings atdpa, Ceylon. By courtesy
of Mr. Paranavyitane.
23. a. Ganesa shrine under the trees, Trichinopoly. Photographed by the suthor.
6. Ganesa shrine near Hampi, Central India. Stone statue 20 feet high. Photograph taken
by the author.
¢. Ganeia shrine at the entrance to the Hoyesledvara temple at Hallabid, Mysore state.
Photograph taken by the author.
24. a. Stone stela from Pagan, Burma. Copyright, Archaeological Survey of India.
4. Cham figure of Ganeéa. Musée Louis Finot, Hanol, Indo-China.
25. a. Pre-Khmer seated image found at Tio! Phak Kin, Kandal. Bronze. Musée Albert
Sarraut, Phnom Penh, Indo-China, By courtesy of M. Georges Groslior.
6. Seated Khmer figure. Stone. Musée Guimet, Paris.
¢. Pre-Khmer standing figure. Musée Albert Sarraut. Phnom Penh.
d. Cham standing figure from Mi-so'n. Tourane Museum, Indo-China.
26. Khmer seated image. Bronze, Brahman Temple, Bangkok, Siam. From Bronzes
Khmeéra by M. G. Coedéa, in Ars Asatica, v (Van Oest, Paria).
27. a. Ayuthian image of Ganeéa and rat. Side view. Siamese bronze. Presented to the author
by H.R H. Prince Damrong.
6. Idem, front view.
¢. Four headed figure from Spean Thmas, Kandal, Indo-China. Bronze. Collection of
Mr. Péank Mak. By courtesy of Mme G. Groslier.
28. a, Khiner image. Bronze. Collection of Dr. de Frey.
6. Khmer figure. Bronze. Collection of the Marquise de Chasseloup-Loubat.
e. Khmer figure with Buddhist features. Bronze. Museum fiir Volkerkunde, Munich.
Front view.
a. Idem, side view.
29. a. Primitive Javanese bronze. British Museum, London.
4. Karly Javanese stone carving. From Inleiding tot de Hindoe-Javaanische Kunet, by
Dr. N. J. Krom (N. V. Martinus Nijhoff, ’s Gravenhage).
¢, Javanese bronze figure. Front and back view. Collection of M. G, Coedés.
30. a. Seated image from Hara, east Java. Stone. Front view K. V. K. Listitute, Amsterdam.
d. Idem, back view.
c. Seated figure from Tjandi Parikait, Dieng plateau, Java. Stone eculpture. K. V. K.
Institute, Amsterdam
d. Seated figure from the Dieng plateau. Stone. By courtesy of Dr. J. Ph. Vogel.
31. a. Figure seated on ekull~isana from Tjandi Singseari. Javanese stone eculpture. By
courtesy of Dr. P. Vogel. .
4, Standing figure, now in the Ethnographic Museum, Leyden. By courtesy of Dr.J. Ph. Vogel.
¢. Standing figure on akull-<dsang near Karang Katés. Stone.
d. Ramaseé type of seated Javanese image. Musée Guimet, Paris,

--- Page 11 ---
xii LIST OF PLATES

32. a. Seated figure holding the radish. Javanese bronze. Ethnographic Museum, Leyden.
By courtesy of Dr. P. Vogel.

b. Stone-carved seated figure from Kombeng, Borneo. From Oudheidkundig Verslag, 1925.

¢. Bronze image from Bali. Balinese or Indo-Chinese ? Presented to the Kern Inatitute in
Leyden by Dr. Kern.

d, Seated Figure. Bronze. From Borneo?

33. a. Stone image of Ganess in role of Fudd (1), from Desss Djembaran, south Bali.

4. Ganeéa with enakes. Balinese stone stela. From Oudheiden van Bati, by Dr. W. F. Stutter-
heim.

%. a. Geneda on okull-deana. Javanese bronze. Museum fur Volkerkunde, Munich. By courtesy
of Dr. Schirmer.

5. Gilt-bronze seated figure. Chinese? Collection of Dr. de Frey.
¢. Four-armed figure holding the radish. Nepalese bronze. Bequeathed to the author by
the late Professor Sylvain Lévi.

35. Painting on panel from Endere, Chinese Turkestan. From Ancient Kholun, by Sir
Aurel Stein. By permission of the Secretary of State for India in Council, and the
author.

36. a. Freaco at Tun-huang, China. From Lea Grottes de Tonen-howang, Mission Pelliot.

6. Ganeda “King of Elephants’. Bas-relief on Chinese atela, formerly in the collection of
M. V. Goloubew.

37. Temple banner belonging to the Shingon Buddhist Monastery of Kaye-san, Japan. By
courtesy of Mrs. Suzuki.

38. a. Kangi-ten. Carved andal-wood with gold-lacquered cover. Collection of the author.

6. Kangi-ten in a zuchi. Monastery of Kéya-san, Japan.
¢. Kangi-ten. Bronze. Collection of the author.
@. Kangi-ten. Gilt-bronze. Formerly in the Musée Guimet, Paria.

39. a. Drawing in Siamese manuscript of Ganeds as Kojicandnedvars. Library of the Eoole
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient, Hanol, Indo-China. Kindness of M. G. Coedas.

6. Idem. Ganeda an Mahavighnesvars riding on a turtle.
¢. Idem. Ganeés an Mahdvighnedvara standing on a rat.

40. Female form of Ganeds or Ganedani in the arcade of the Gauri-Sankara temple at Bhera-

ghit. Photograph taken by the author.

--- Page 12 ---
LIST OF TEXT FIGURES
1. GanesaJayanti. From the Asiatic Researches of Bengal, 1806.
2, Esoteric form of Ganapati. From The Hindu Pantheon by E. Moor.
3. Ganeda as ‘Lord of the Universe’. Drawing by the author.
4. Outline drawing of Ganeds from a freaco at Bazaklik, Chinese Turkestan. From
Althuddhistische Kultstitten in Chinesisch-Turkestan, by A. Griinwedel (Reimer, Berlin).
5, Outline drawing of Vinayska in the Vajra-dhatu mandala.
6. Outline drawing of Viniyaka in the Garbhs-dhéta mandala.
7. Ganeéa aa Vajra-Vinayaka. From the Himitsu Jirin.
8. Kangi-ten. From the Himitsu Jirin.
LIST OF COLOURED PLATES
Rajput miniature: Siva and Parvati receiving Brahmé, Ganeéa, Karttikeya, Krima, and
other Hindu gods in Durbar on Mount Kailéus. Collection of the author. Frontispiece.
12, Rajput miniature: The abhiseda of Gaja-Lakyml with Ganedés, Kyigns, Brahm’, and other
Hindu gods in edoration. Collection of the author. Facing page 24,

--- Page 13 ---
INTRODUCTION

EED we be surprised if Ganeda, God of Succesa, achieved for himuelf a truly
Nyemeneute career? As the reader will gather from the present work, his striking
figure won all the Eastern countries in turn. His presentation to the European
and American publics was all that was required to make him known throughout
the world, and every one will agree that for the last step he could not have chowen
better sponsors than the author of The Goda of Northern Buddhism and the Clarendon
Presa.

Blinking his cunning little eyes on either side of his huge trunk, he can boast,
with a certain feeling of gratification, that in spite of his uncouth looks, or perhaps
because of them, he is now universally accepted; and this must be all the more
flattering to his self-esteem, since as he himself is quite aware—his humble origins
are evident to every one. A mere glance at him shows that he still beara unquestion-
able signs of his modest lineage. Even if we ignore for the moment his ungainly
elephant’s head, yet his short arms, the bulging girth overhanging his stunted legs,
are enough to place him at once in the class to which he belongs. Obviously, Ganeéa
is linked with those stout, thickset goblins with which the earliest sculptures of
ancient India have made us familiar, and that appear so often in the texts, now as
the imps of Mara, the Buddhist Satan, now aa the yakeas of Kubera, God of Wealth,
now as the rikgasas of Kubera’s brother, Ravana, and sometimes as the ganas ofthe
‘King of the Mountains’, Siva. For sheer antiquity their race can hold ite own.
Those grotesque dwarfs spring from a family which can be traced, since time began,
from one end of the old continent to the other. By their misshapen bodies, their
guardianship of treasure hoards, and by their freakish and too often evil characters,
the gnomes of India (known under the various names already mentioned and many
more besides, such as kumbhanda, pisdca, vetdla, &c.) are unquestionably the cousins,
morally and physically, of the Scandinavian trolls, the Celtic korrigans, the Anglo-
Saxon goblins, the German kobolds, the Thraco-Phrygian Kabiri, not to mention
the Arabian jinn. Even to-day we find them doeply rooted in our countryside,
diaporting themselves on moora, in woods, and in caves; but venerable die-hards as
they are, those spirits occupy the lowest rung in the hierarchic ladder. Ganeéa,
as his name implies, rose to the rank of chieftain (iéa) ; yet in attaining the dignity
of ‘Lord of the Hordes’, his appearance remained like that of his followers, the
ganas.

In this respect he was not so fortunate as the other ‘army-leaders’ who form the
‘General Staff’ of Indian genii. ‘The artist is only too willing to give them a pleasing
form, as in the case of Field-Marshal (mahd-send-pati} Skanda. It is rare that he will
ever do more than spoil this elegance by adding plumpness, necessarily associated
in the Indian mind with wealth, as, for example, in the representation of General
(send-pats) Paficika, What, however, differentiates Ganeda from his fellow-spirita
is not only his excesaive corpulence, but a still greater handicap, equally impossible
to conceal—his elephant’s head: nothing more ia needed to suggest, in fact to prove,

--- Page 14 ---
xvi INTRODUCTION

his animal origin. In the pantheons of Groece or Egypt, of Mesopotamia or India,
deities with heads of animals or birds are not wanting, and it would seem as if there
were some fixed law of iconography in regard to them. As far as we know, no human-
shaped deity, even in the case of a metamorphosis, thinks of adopting an animal
mask otherwise than en passant; whereas all the theriomorphic gods, on the con-
trary, show a tendency to shed their original bodies of lions, monkeys, jackals,
ibises, falcons, &c., and permanently to assume human form. During the period of
transformation, morphological compromises of all kinds were imagined by artists
and by devotees, from goat-hoofed genii to deities with horns. But as a general rule,
the part of the animal body which the god or goddess in process of anthropomor-
phosis clings to Jongest is the head, just as the piece of national dress that Asiatic
peoples in the throes of Europeanization relinquish last ia the head-dress, On che
other hand, this very conservatism, so easy to understand, betrays the preceding
stages of a transformation still incomplete, Thus, when dealing with a therianthropo-
morphic figure of Ganesa’s type, we can easily trace it back to the animal prototype
from which it came; and here we plunge into the oldest layer of superstition which
our developed minds can grasp: totem worship and agrarian rites, Ts it surprising,
then, that Ganesa’s biography, thrusting its roots into the most obscure beliefs of
the human race, should be difficult to write ?

One guiding ray, however, seems to pierce the darkness surrounding him and his
origin, An objective analysis of the figure of Ganesa and the convincing analogy
provided by every ancient form of religion lead us to admit that he made his entry
into the world of things sacred under the guise of an elephant. Now while the
existence of goblins is a matter for personal belief or disbelief, that of the elephant
is an obvious fact. Moreover this odd creature was bound, through its great height,
unequalled strength, and surprising docility, through the extraordinary dexterity
of ita trunk as well as its intelligence, wrongly or rightly praised, to hold a lange
place in Indian folklore. Yet these data only add to our sense of frustration, since,
Curious as it may seem, we are unable eo far to discover any relation between the
worship offered to Ganeda and the surviving manifestations of old popular super-
stitions, such as, for instance, the peculiar regard in which the white elephant is held
in those parta of Indo-China where Indian influence once prevailed. We are not
more euccessful if we search for clues in the innumerable puns and comparisons
which abound in Sanskrit literature concerning the protuberances above ita fore-
head and the honied liquor that oozes from its temples during tho mating season.
Nor are the legends more helpful than the poems. In several of the jatakas or tales
of the past lives of the Buddha, tho elephant plays an important part, his role being
inspired by a whole range of emotional contrasts, from the fury of the savage
solitaire destroying everything in his path to the sublime generosity of the dying
King of the Herd, who forgives his murderer, the hunter, and bestows his ivory
tusks upon him. During the last existence of the Buddha the elephant reappears
frequently: the future Sakya-muni is said to have come down from heaven in the

form of a young elephant; and when he retired into solitude, he was waited upon
by an elephant, while one of his most important miracles was the taming of a mad

--- Page 15 ---
INTRODUCTION xvii
elephant that his enemies let loose against him in the main thoroughfare of Raja-
griha. Herc again though, in whatever light we examine these edifying stories, we
find no means of linking them up with the little that we know of the personality and
cult of Ganega; and our efforts are equally fruitless when we turn to the Brahmanic
mythology; for we see no connexion whatever either between our hero and the
famous mount of Indra, the elephant Airavata, or between him and the eight cosmic
elephants which, facing the four cardinal points and the four intermediary regions,
are believed to support the earth on their backs. It is true that on either side of
the bay of Bengal, in the Buddhist as well as the Brahmanic texts, we are dealing
with Indian ideas; but even if those beliefa, metaphors, and legends have sprung up
from the same soil, it is none the less clear that they do not follow the same trail nor
develop on the same plane.

The almost complete absence of ancient documents relating to Ganega is eome-
what disconcerting, for it is evident that without them no historical reconstruction
is possible, Yet must one necessarily succumb to the habitual failing of the philo-
logist whose learned candour leads him to infer that all things have their beginning
from the time of their first mention in the texts ? Such a conclusion would be absurd,
for in any given place and moment there are always many more social facta than
those recorded in writing. It is obviously true even of our own days, and the farther
we delve into the illiterate past of humanity the more we understand this to be the
case. One must be as short-sighted as a bookworm to deduce from the lack of any
mention of Ganeéga in the early epics, that the god did not exist before the fourth or
fifth century of our era, and it would require a certain amount of naiveté to believe
that this divinity could have suddenly been conceived ex nihtle, and his worship
established throughout the whole of India at such a comparatively recent date.
Whoever is experienced in the waye of that country knows well that by then the
Elephant-god had already behind him century upon century, if not thousands of
years, of silent waiting at the foot of the sacred tree of the pre-Aryan village, stand-
ing on the roughly built platform which he shared with the other rustic deities: with
the snakes which were to give birth to many Naga-kings, with the monkey which
was to become Hanuman, with the vulture which would later grow into Garuda,
with the lion, the boar, the tortoise, and the fish, all of which were in time to be
looked upon as avatars of Vignu. For those more or leaa shapeless stones, those
roughly carved pieces of wood or summarily outlined figures in clay, all those totems
or fetishes—once bathed in the blood of human victims and to-day still emeared
with minium-—were so deeply rooted in an unfathomable past that the aristocracy
of the new gods, introduced by the immigrant Aryans, were compelled to adopt
them in some form or other. Had they not come to terms with them they would
soon have found themselves estranged from the worship of the populace, and their
pricsts deprived of gifts and followers. It is probable that the Brahmine, the chosen

interpreters of the Divine Will, submitted to this but reluctantly; yet, as Manu
himself must admit, ‘in all things, necessity conetitutes law’.
Shall we now try to conjecture retrospectively what underlying idea or procise
- °

--- Page 16 ---
=x INTRODUCTION

frieze, a seventh goblin is represented with broad clephant’s ears on each side of his
human face, just like those little Atlantes discovered at Jaulian near Taxila, right
at the other end of India. For the time being we must wait as late as the fifth century
of our era to meet, in the temple of Bhumara in Central India, the first complete
realization of Ganeda’s type: the panels of its walls are decorated with numerous
ganas having either the head of a man or that of a lion, a boar, a monkey, or a
parrot; while the ruins of the central cella contained the oldest known representa-
tion of Ganega at last deified (Pl. 34). It may be interesting to note that this idol,
like the two mentioned above, has only one pair of arms; according to Professor
J. Ph. Vogel, this is also the case with a Gupta statue from Bhitari noticed by General
Cunningham. However, a second image of Ganesa, enshrined in one of the blank
dormer-windows at Bhumara, has four arms, It is the same with the one discovered
at Bhitargaon, where the god is depicted on the terra-cotta panels of the temple in
an attitude which is not absolutely hieratic, for he seems to be defending his plate
of cakes from the unwelcome attentions of a genius in human form- probably his
brother Skanda.

Such appear to us, up to the present, to be the débuts of the iconography of Ganeéga.
The gropings of his early representations reflect his first hesitating steps in the world
of divinities of highest rank where the texts will henceforth enable us to follow him.
Indeed, the creation of so curiously blended a figure, a stroke of genius on the part
of the sculptor, was also a stroke of luck for his model: we have no doubt that the
image itself contributed largely to the fame of the god. Yet we must not forget that
originally Ganeéa waa a kind of demon, or, to put it more politely, a jungle genius,
That he should become included in the retinue of the ‘Great Lord’ who, followed
by innumerable spirits more or less malignant, was believed to haunt the mountains
and forests, was an easy step, and one that seemed natural for him to take, since it
is written that.‘ while Vignu is the God of the Gods, Siva is the God of the Demons’.
To rise in rank until he became commander of those hordes and thus to enter the
inner circle of the cortege of Siva was a justifiable promotion, whether due to
seniority or to choice. He might then have remained in this capacity attached to
the God and his Goddess, side by side with the bull of the one and the tiger of the
other, on the same footing as Timbaru (or Tumbury), king of the Gandharvas and
conductor of the divine orchestra, whose horse’s head is still found in modern minia-
tures... had his devotees been satisfied with thisadvancement; but the latter aspired
to raise him up to the same level as Skanda, son of Siva, and thus set themselves
a difficult task. The purdnas faithfully reflect the perplexity in which his composite
figure involved them. It will be realized below (p. 6 et segg.) how Inborious were their
efforts to provide him with a divine ancestry, when it was alternatively claimed that
he was begotten by Siva alone, or by Devi alone; and these legends, depriving him
either of a father or of a mother, once admitted, there still remained the awkward
question of his elephant’s head. How was his divine birth to be reconciled with the
abnormal coupling in his body of man and beast? The least that could be done was
to declare that this peculiarity was accidental not congenital ; and from this again
wa8 born another geries of myths attempting to give a seemly, if not satisfactory,

--- Page 17 ---
INTRODUCTION xxi
explanation of an anomaly which might be pardonable in a rustic environment, but
was scarcely in keeping with the Olympian summits of Mount Kailaéa. The dis-
crepancies of those tales, even more than their inconsistency, would be enough to
prove that they had been invented as an afterthought for the needa of the cause and
by leas than indifferent scholara. This, however, was of no consequence; for no
sooner was Ganeéa established on the steps of the throne, so to speak, than the
G&napatya rect sought to promote him to the supreme rank, and make him usurp
the sovereign power, ousting in his ‘Conquest of the Cardina! Pointe’ (dig-vizaya)
even his putative father Siva.

As our task consisted in leading Ganeda to the threshold of his august career, we
shall leave him now that he is about to enter into the full light of art and literature.
Up to what point it is already possible to sketch the broad lines of his proto-history
is for the reader to judge. In the penumbra, becoming more obscure as one gropes
farther and farther back into the past, we have tried to discern, thanks to some
analogies and traditions, the first stage of Ganeéa's embryonic existence when he
was etill the ungainly, but already sacred, image of a genius-elephant. After that
long and dim period, comparable in a way to the larva stage in insect life, we then
attempted to follow him through his next development which, mysterious as the
traneformation of the chrysalis, ended in the ultimate type of a genius with the
head of an elephant. Undoubtedly the progress of research work and new archaeo-
logical discoveries cannot fail to add much, in time, to the frame-work of the present
brief analysie, and will lead in a more secure manner to the third and last period,
the one described below---the glorious éclat of which, it would be useless to try to
deny, is already on the decline owing to the profound changes now taking place in
the East. But to our way of thinking, what really matters ia the light which Gancéa’s
ascension throws on the religious evolution of India. It supplies a typical instance
of those devotions, in appearance new, in fact extremely old, which one usually
groups together under the appellation of Tantrism from the name of the books (tantra)
in which they are exposed at great length; a most conveniont way of designating
them, the evasiveness of the term being an excellent reason for avoiding a more
precise definition.

When one consults Indian echolars in regard to Tantrism, one would gather from
their writings that it was a kind of leprosy which broke out suddenly during the fifth
or sixth century of our era, rapidly contaminating the texts as well as the pantheons
of the various sects, whether Brabmanic or Buddhist. So it might seem indeed
at first glance; but, as Ganega’s concrete example shows, the evil was far deeper and
dated much farther back. A vast uprising, a veritable religious revolution, brought
forth through the intermediary of the sculptor’s chisel and the pandit’s calamus a
whole set of doctrines and a cohort of deities, just aa disquieting the one as the other,
that until then had lain hidden and almost unsuapected by archaeologists as well
aa by philologista. From the depths of India sprang forth those unrestrained magical
and spiritualistic divagations as well aa those abnormal or even ghastly idols, bring-
ing with them to the surface all the dregs of the old orgiastic rites at the same time

--- Page 18 ---
axii INTRODUCTION
as the whole rabble of evil spirite—thus provoking among the historians a not un-
justifiable outcry against such a moral, intellectual, and artistic regression. Only
it a0 happened that the tidal wave, meeting the thousand ramifications of the pro-
viously established secta, simply brought to each particular channel a new rush of
religious fervour. Ite rapid division into 60 many branches was the reason why the
fundamental breadth, unity, and antiquity of its overtiow became scarcely discern-
able. It is nevertheless responsible for what was achieved by India during the
medieval period and down to modern times in the way of religious literature and
iconography. On the other hand, if one sought to claim for it patents of nobility
in the early Indian past, it would not be difficult to recognize the precursory symp-
toms of thie movement in the passages of the Atharva-veda which were not entirely
disguised under a Brahmanic garb, thus reverting without effort to the pre-Aryan
epoch. In short, if we take Ganeda as a witness, Tantrism was not a contagious
malady which, at a comparatively recent date, suddenly attacked Brahmaniem,
Buddhism, Jainism, and so on; but like them it was a distinct religion, and what is
more, by far the oldest and the most widely epread in the peninsula. No wonder
that it finally absorbed all the others, forming now the basis as well as the link for
the extraordinary medley classified under the general label of Hinduism.

If Ganeda’s case helps us to understand the true nature of Tantrism, the new con-
ception thus gained about the latter gives us, in its turn, the possibility of placing his
biography more accurately in its real onvironment; and the astonishing good fortune
of the Elephant-headed god immediately loses much of the exceptional character
that we might otherwise have felt inclined to give it, his advent becoming only one
element of the general reappearance of old superstitions and beliefe. These had
remained inveterate but latent, since they were refused the double means of expres-
aion and propagands provided by literature and plastic art. It was largely due to
the ever increasing diffusion of the latter that, in tho midst of the severe social com-
motions brought about by the barbaric invasions, they succeeded in getting the
upper hand and revealed themselves as completely as they did. Like so many of hia
kind, fairies or genii, Ganeéa, although more fortunate, was merely carried along on
the tide of a great upward movement, analogous to that which, since all time, has

urged the caates of India to rise to a superior level, yet with the important difference
that the lower grades of deities have reached their goal far more rapidly than mere
humanity: therefore we ventured to call their ascent a revolution.

This may require an explanation: that a revolution suddenly and inevitably
carries the lower strata of the people to the top is undeniable; but it is not unusual
for those who have benefited by the upheaval to try to adopt the manner and style
of those whom they have supplanted ; and Gareéa, the divine Opportuniat, did not
escape from the common law. If it ia true that certain among his representationa,
by their unseemly or gruesome character, still betray some regrettable remains of
vulgarity, the ex-Demon of the Jungle assumed more and moro the aspect of a bon
bourgeois, We soon find his corpulent figure at the entrance of temples, opposite
to that of Kubera (otherwise Maha-kals or Jambhala), the Dispenser of Riches.
Except for their faces, the two gods resemble each other like twin brothers; and

--- Page 19 ---
INTRODUCTION xxiij
to the worshippers passing to and fro, the one murmurs: ‘May you be rich!’ while
the other whispers in their ear: ‘May you be successful in your enterprises!’ What
could be more reassuring to well-to-do people? Let us mention, by the way, that
Ganeéa’s rat, upon which the mythologista have built such far-fetched theories (p. 1),
is simply the counterpart of the mongoose of Kubera; as we know with certainty
that the mongoose symbolizes a well-lined purse, it is more than probable that the
rat evokes the well-filled granary where it is always an assiduous guest, Indeed
we meet him again just as busily engaged near the bales of rice on which the merry
Dai-Koku, the Mahakdla of the Japanese, is crouching.

In short, the aspect under which the ‘Prince of Obstacles’ likes to reveal himself
is, aa a rule, wholly benevolent. The great Indian scholar, to whom it would have
fallen to write this Preface had not his sudden death left it for us to fulfil hia promise,
summed up perfectly the impression that the images of the Elephant-faced God make
upon us, when he wrote (Sylvain Lévi, Le Népal, 1, pp. 383-4), that Ganesa with
his accessories forms a most captivating whole: ‘His atrange but good-natured
physiognomy arrests our attontion as well as our sympathy '—an opinion which the
following pages will prove to be true.

A. FOUCHER.

--- Page 20 ---
GANESA
He who causes and removes Obstacles.
He who withdrawa or bestows Success.
Ho who ignores or fulfils all Desires.
VARIOUS NAHES
Vakra-TUypa. : . He of the Twisted Frank.
Exa-Danta : . . He of the one Tusk.
VINAYAKA . . : . Remover of Obstacke.
GanapaTl . . . . Leader of the Gana.
VIGHNRSVARA . . Lord of Obstacles. :
Aunu-RatHa . . . He who rides on a rat.
Swwowrpata . . . Beatower of Perfection.
HERAMBA . . . . Protector.
Dv1-Dewaka . . « Double-bodied.
LAMBODARA . . . He of the Full Belly.
GasiNnana « . : . He of the Elephant-Face.
Baua-GaxaPaTl . . « The child Ganapati.
Tamil: Puiatyar (Noble child). Cambodian: prin Kents.
Tibdan: ts’ oga-bdag. Chinese: KUAN-SHI T'IEN.
bgege med p’ai bdag po. ‘SHO-TEN.
Burmese: MAwA -PIENNE Japanese: Visdyaxda.
Mongolian: Torkitar-ous KuagHan. OPOME Ke waNZAN-3HO.
Kanat-TEx.
CONSORTS: Buddhi and Siddhi
SAKTI; Lokami
Mudra: vitarka, tarjani.
Colours: red, yellow, red and yellow, white.
Symbols: broken tusk, modaka, bowl of batasa, water-veasel, celestial creeper, vigora fruit (citron),
axc, rosary, elephant-gosd, pomegranate, radish, stylus and book, jamby (wood-apple).
Vija: gan. (98).
Vahana: rat or lion.
* pot Sri-Lakemi.

--- Page 21 ---
GANAPATI-STOTRA
Narada uvica:
1, Pranamys sirasd devar Gauriputrari Vindyakam
Bhaktavdsath emaren nityam ayuhkamarthasiddhaye,
2. Prathamam Vakratundam ca Fkadantan dvitiyakam,
Trtiyam Xrenapitigdksam Gajavaktram caturthakam,
3. Lambodaram paficamath ca eagtham Vilatam eva ca,
Saptamam Vighnarijam ca Dhdmravarnara tathdstamam,
4. Navamarh Bhdlacandram ca dasamam tu Vindyakam,
Ekadasari Ganapatim dvadagarh tu Gajdnanam,
5. Dvadaéaitani namani trisandhyari yah pathen narah
Na ca vighnabhayata tasya sarvasiddhikaraia param.
6. Vidyarthi labhate vidyarn dhanarthi labhate dhanam,
Putrarthi labhate putran moksarthi labhate gatim.
7. Japed Ganapatistotrarh sadbhir mAsaih phalar labhet,
Satavatearena siddhim ca labhate natra sardéayah.
8. Astanam brahraanandrh ca likhitva yah samarpayet,
Tasya vidy& bhavet eadyo Ganedasya praeadatah.
Iti Sri-Ndradapurdne Samkatandéanam nama
Gana patistotrans sampiirnam.'
. Published in the Brhat.stotra-ratndkara by the Sri.Venkatedvara Prose (Bombay, 1885) p. 5, and
seperately, with alight variants, by the Niroaya-uigar Preas (Bombay, 1888),

--- Page 22 ---
HYMN TO GANESA
Narada said:
1. With bead bowed, let him unceasingly worehip in hie mind the god Vinayaks, the aon of
Gauri,
The refuge of his devotees. for the complete attainment of longevity, srmorous desires and
wealth,
2. Firatly, as the One with the Twisted Trunk; secondly, aa the One with the Single Tusk;
Thirdly, aa the One with the Fawn coloured Hyes; fourthly, aa the One with the Elephant’s
Mouth;
3. Fifthly, as the Pot-bellied One; sixthly, as the Monstrous One;
Seventhly, as the King of Obstacies; eighthly, as the Smoke-coloured One;
4. Ninthly, aa the 3foon-crested One; tenthly, as the Remover of Hindrances;
Eleventhly, as the Lord of the Hordes; twelfthly, as the One with the Elephant's Face.
5. Whosoever repeate those twelve names at dawn, noon, and sunset,
For him there is no fear of failure, nay, there is constant good fortune.
6. He who desires knowledge obtains knowledge; he who desires wealth obtains wealth ;
He who desires eons obtaina sons; he who desires salvation obtains the Way.
7. Whoeoever mutters the hymn to Ganapati reaches his aim in six months,
And in a year be reaches perfection, on this point there is no doubt.
8, Whosoever makea eight copiea of it, and has them distributed to ay many Brahmans,
He reaches knowledge instantaneously, by the grace of Ganesa.
Here ends, in the holy Narada-Purdna, the hymn to Ganapati called the ‘Destroyer
of Difficulties’.
KINDLY TRANSLATED FOR THE AUTHOR RY
MADAME E. BAZIN-FOCCHER.

--- Page 23 ---
ABBREVIATIONS
USED IN THE NOTES
LBL Bhattacharyya, Indian Buddhist Iconography. London, 1924.
1. of B. and B.S. Bhattasali, Jconography of Buddhist and Brahmanical Sculptures in the
Dacca Museum. Dacea, 1929.

B. of the B.M. of F.A. Budletin of the Boston Museum of Pine Arts.

BCAL Bulletin de la Commission Archéologique de I Indochine.

B.E.F.E.O. Bulletin de Ecole Francaise d'Extréme Orient.

P.RF. of NI. Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India. London, 1898.
H. and B. Sir Charles Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism. London, 1921.

Antiq. LT. Francke, Antiquities of Indian Tibet. Calcutta, 1914.

Art G-B.G. Foucher, L’Art Gréco-Buddhique du Gandhara. Paria, 1900.

H. del’E-0. Grousset, Histoire de I’ Eztréme-Orient. Paris, 1929.

Myth. Buddb. Grunwedel, Mythologie du Buddhisme. Leipzig, 1900.

HLF. of G. and G. Gupte, ‘Harvest Festivals of Gauri and Ganesh’, Indian Antiquary,

Nov. 1906.

Encyel. of R. and E. Hastings’s Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.

1H.Q. The Indian Historical Quarterly.

JSRAS. Journal of the Royal Aniatic Society.

AS. de l'Inde Jouveau-Dubreuil, Archéologie du Sud de U' Inde. Paria, 1914.

R.N.A. of ALAM. Kennedy, Researches into the Nature and Affinity of Ancient and Hinds

Mythology. London, 1882.

E. of HI. Rao, Elements of Hindu Teonography. Madras, 1916.

BG. in B. Ray, Brahmanical Gods in Burma. Calcutta, 1932.
8.LI. of G. and G. Sastri, South Indian Images of Gods and Goddesses. Madras, 1916.
A. of I. and J. Vogel, The Relation between the Art of India and Java, London, 1926,
B. and H. Monier- Williams, Brahmaniem and Hinduiem. London, 1887.

--- Page 24 ---
SRI GANESAYA NAMAH
CHAPTER I
INDIA: ORIGIN OF GANESA. GANESA IN INDIAN
LITERATURE

Gare. Lord of the Ganas,! although among the latest deities to be admitted

to the Brahmanic pantheon, waa, and still is, the most universally adored of all
the Hindu gods, and his image is found in practically every part of India. The
popularity of Ganega extended to Nepal and Chinese Turkestan and croased the
seas to Java, Bali, and Borneo, while his worship was not unknown in Tibet, Burma,
Siam, China, Indo-China, and Japan.

Certain authorities believe that Ganega was originally a Dravidian deity wor-
shipped by the aboriginal populations of India who were sun-worshippers ; and that
Ganeéa on hia wihana, the rat, symbolized a sun-god? overcoming the animal, which,
in ancient mythology, was a symbol of the night.$

Others are of the opinion that his elephant-head and bis mount, the rat, indicate
that, although he may have been taken over from indigenous mythology, he belonged
originally to an animal cult.* This veems a plausible theory, since his image is found
in Hindu temples worshipped in company with the animal avatare of Vianu.

It is not known whether Ganesa is to be looked upon as an original or a derivative
deity ; but it is probable that he was primarily the totem of a Dravidian tribe. The
primitive effigies were often animal-headed; and the elephant, being the largeat
animal in India as well as the shrewdest, would assuredly have figured among them.

We do not know what was his ancient Dravidian epithet ; but if we judge from
the earliest sanskrit name that is known to us, Ekadanta, be was probably designated
as He of One Tusk. The Dravidian worda pajlu and pella both signify tooth, tusk
of the elephant.® It therefore seems possible that his Tamil name, Pillaiyar, is a
corruption of his ancient Dravidian title although, in ita present form, there is no
meaning of ‘tusk’. Pie is the Tamil word for child and Pillaiyar means ‘noble
child’; but Bagchi is of the opinion that pifle originally meant the ‘young of the
elephant’, for the Pali word pillaka haa the significance of ‘a young elephant’.®

In a collection of Vedic mantras in the Taittiriya-dranyaka,’ there is a mystic
prayer addressed to a god, Dantin, He of the Tusk (danta), which secms to refer to
the Elephant-faced god, for the mantra comes in a suite of mantras addressed to two

1 The ‘troope’ of demi-gods, attendants of Siva. © Notes eur des Villes Indiennes, Prryluaki, B.
* There is » form of Ganeda in Nepal called do 1s 8.d. L. d. P., tome 27, faac. 112, no. 83.
Sarya-Gapapati; v. p. 30. In India he wan sume. —* ‘Some Linguistic Notes', The Ind. Hist.
times represented accompanying the god Sarya; Quart. vol. ix, no. I, March 1933.
p. 31. 7 latpurupiya vidmahe valratunddys dhimals
* Zoological Mythology, Gubernati, p. 68, II. tan no Dantih pracodayat (Taitt.-dr. x. 1. 5), kindly
+ PR. and P.N.1, by W. Crooke, p. 287. translated by Mr. Sylvain Lévi.
am Bg

--- Page 25 ---
2 INDIA: ORIGIN OF GANESA

deities Karttikeya and Nandi, the bull, with whom Ganesa is often associated not
only in the purdnas but in the most ancient Indian sculptures of the deity. Besides
which, the commentator, Sdyana, apparently indicates an elephant-faced god when
he explains that he was possessed of a tunda (nose, beak, trunk) which was mkra
(twisted, curved); and that he carried a pile of corn, a club, and a sugar cane, all of
which might be attributes of Ganega.! He was known later in puranic texts as Vakra-
tugda or ‘He of the Curved Trunk’, for the epithet is to be found in a list of twelve
names of Ganeéa mentioned in a Ganapati-stotra® for his special worship ; while in the
Mahénindna-tantra, he is addressed as Raktatunda or ‘He of the Red Trunk’.4

Although he is apparently referred to in the above Vedic text, he is not to be
found in the Assembly of Vedic deities, at least, not under any name that is known
to us. The reason for this may be that in ancient times he was possibly an unim-
portant village god, worshipped exclusively by the lower classes. In fact, a verse
attributed to the ancient version of the Laws of Manu‘ seems to indicate his lowly
origin, for it runs as follows: ‘Siva is the god of the Brahmans while Ganeéa is the
god of the #idras’,* who were the aboriginal population.

There is no ancient legend, that is, earlier than the purdnas, which explains why
he was possessed of only one tusk; but it seems to have had an important significance
since his title ‘Ekadanta’ has followed him down to the present day. The explana-
tion may possibly be found in his connexion, at a very early date, with the harvest
ceremonies; and his promotion, in time, to the important role of ‘Lord of the
Harvest’. The rites and ceremonies as well as the deities associated with the Harvest
Festival were full of symbolic meaning; and undoubtedly the form of the Ekadanta
was invested with mystic significance. It seema natural that the one tusk of the
Harvest Lord, which gave him his ancient name, should symbolically stand for
the most important implement of the harvest, the plough, eapecially as the word
ekadanta may be translated: ‘ono tusk’ or ‘plough-share’.?

As the Elephant-faced god seems only to have been known to the uneducated
classes up to the sixth century, it is not surprising to find that he does not figure
in the Epic pantheon of deities. Even the name of Ganeéa or Ganedvara (Lord of
the Ganas) which is found both in the north and south India recension of the
Mahdbhérata® may not be attributed to him until much later, for it is the title of
Siva, his reputed father in puranic myths; nor does the epithet Ganapati® found in
the Rig-Veda (1. 23. 1) refer to him but to the important Vedic deity Brahmanaapati,!®
‘father of the goda’. Certain Indian pandits, however, look upon Ganeda as 6

derivative of this Vedic deity. Przyluski, on the contrary, is of the opinion that
Siva and Ganeéa were originally one and the same god; that is, that although
Ganeés does not figure in the Mahabhdrata as distinet from Siva (Ganeévara), he was
none the leea an aspect of Siva and might therefore have been considered identical

* Several of tha Gakti-Ganapeti carry these * Harvest Festival of G. and @., Gupte, 1.4.,
attributes. vol. zxxv, Nov. 1906.

* See above. * Trans. Avalon, p. 251. * Authorities vary an to the date of the MaAdbAa-

* Red is the usual coloar of Geneds. rata between 400 8.c. and a.p. 400.

* The Ordinance of Mams, Burvett and Hopkins, * Gandndm Gonapatih.

* Band H., Monier- Williams, note p. 212. % Or Brhaspati,

--- Page 26 ---
GANESA IN INDIAN LITERATURE 3
with Rudra-Siva, even although he was introduced into the Indian pantheon as
Ganeéa, Lord of the Ganas.'

The ganas, attendante of Siva, were benevolent deities of nine classes dwelling
on Mount Kailaéa; and mentioned in the Mahdbhdrata in connexion with the ganas
was another group called vindyakas who, although malevolent, were not insensible
to propitiation. According to Bhandarkar, propitiatory rites and ceremonies in their
worship were set up before the Christian era.? In the Afdnavagrhya-sttra the Vina-
yakas are mentioned as a group of four gods, but in later texts they are referred to
as ‘one’ deity; and in the Atharvasiras-upanishad, Rudra is identified with one
Vinayeke. In the Smrti of Yajiiavalkya, the group of four vindyakas was addressed
as ‘one’ god, who was looked upon as the son of Ambik&.* Keith is of the opinion
that this deity is akin to the later god, Ganeéa. At any rate, puranic myth explains
that the group of four rindyakas was merged into one definite deity whom Rudra
(Siva) appointed ‘ Leader of the Ganas’ or Gana-pati; and Ganapats- Vindyaka,* who
may be considered the carliest form of Ganesa as known in the purdnas, was given
the role of creating difficulties and obstructions if not properly propitiated. Accord-
ing to Bhandarkar, the cult of Ganapati-Vinayaka may already have been set up
by the end of the sixth century.’ The earliest mention of the demon-god ia in the
Smrti of Yajiavalkya which was possibly written in the sixth century ;* but no
reference to Ganeda as an elephant-headed deity ia to be found until the eighth, when,
in the opening stanzas of the Malatinuidhava, he is described as having the face of
an elephant.”

Although the Elephant-faced god is not referred to in either of the texts of the
two Hindu Epics—the Mahabhdrata and the Rémayana—we find a Ganeda distinct
from Siva (although alao called Ganeddna) with god-like qualities in the introduction
to the north India recension of the Mahabharata.

He is referred to as scribe to the sage Vyasa, writing down with super-human
rapidity Vyéaa’s dictation of the Mahabharata. There is reterence to this legend in
the Balabharata, a poem written in the ninth century, where Valmiki, author of
the Raméayana, on meeting Vyasa, aska him how the Mahdbhdrata is progressing.
The sage replies that after severe austerities he has been able to secure Mahi-Ganeéa
as his scribe, &c.*

Winternitz believes that the legend waa known long before the ninth century and
was not inserted into the introduction to the uorth India revision of the Hindu
Epic until 150 years later.* In the Introduction to the south India recension of the
Mahabharata, there is neither mention of Ganeéa nor reference to the legend.

Although he is often met with in the purdénas, Ganeda is never presented in India

) Letter to the author. mention of the demon-god was in the Atlaréya

2 Vaignavien, p. 149. Brékmana, i. 21; v. H.1., vol. i, part i, p. 48.

In the Vedas Ambika was called the sister of 7 Vaignaviern, Bhandarkar, p. 170.

Rudre, but in later texts she was identified with © This legend was narrated by Indian papdits
Uma (Parvati). to A)-Birani in the tenth century; /ndia, tranw.

* Vaspgnavism. Bhandarkar, p. 148. Sachau, vol. i, p. 1%.

> Idem, p. 149. * J.B.A.S., Apeil 1898, p. 380.

* Idem, p. 148. According to Rao the earliest

--- Page 27 ---
4 INDIA: ORIGIN OF GANESA

as a scribe.) No ancient Indian frescoa or sculptures depict him in this role,? nor
should we know whether Ganeda, the acribe, is to be identified or not. with Ganesa,
the clephant-faced leader of the ganas, were it not for two miniatures, one Nepalese
and the other Rajput, wherein he is represented with the face of an elephant and
unquestionably, aa a scribe.

The Nepalese miniature’ is in the Pivigaldmdld, a tantric manuscript of the thir-
teenth century now in the Nepal State Library. The painting is on one of the
board-covers holding the manuscript leaves. Ganeda is seated cross-legged on the
rat with the right hand holding the broken tusk point downward as if it were a
stylus. Very likely, as the text is Tantric, he ia represented in this instance as acribe
to Siva, for in the Gdyatri-tantra‘ he is referred to aa writing down the Tantras to
the dictation of his father, Siva.

‘The second miniature is a Rajput painting of the seventeenth century, now in the
Boston Museum of Fine Arts,® where Ganeéa is depicted four-armed standing before
the worshipping Vy4sa. In the upper right-hand corner is Brahmi, at whose sugges-
tion Vyasa has appealed to Ganeda. The text relates® that while Vyisa was wor-
shipping Brahma, the god Ganeda suddenly appeared before him, whereupon he
worshipped Ganega, who then consented to become his acribe. In the lower left-
hand corner is the scene of dictation. Ganeda, seated, has placed the water-veasel
before him and has taken the rosary in his lower right hand. As the upper right is
still in vttarka-mudrd and the upper left holds the axe, it would seem that Gancéa
had finished his task of amanuensis and was presenting, with his normal left hand,
the completed text to Vyasa.

There is a divergence of opinion as to how Ganega, ‘Remover of Obstacles’,
gained this reputation of ‘Patron of Letters’.

Prabodh Chandra Bagchi’ suggests that Ganesa was associated with writing
because of a confusion in regard to the word ‘siddhi'. From very ancient times, the
Hindu alphabet was called ‘siddham’ and the enumeration of the alphabet began
with the word siddht. As one of the epithets of Ganeda is Siddhidata, ‘Giver of
Success’, he believes it to be probable that his association with the word gave rise
to the legends depicting him as a scribe.

Bhandarkar’ is of the opinion that his reputation for wisdom was bom of a con-
fusion between Ganeéa and the Vedic god of Wisdom, Brhaspati; while Rao® identi-
fies him with the celestial guru, Brhaspati, himself. It is interesting to note here
that Brhaspati, an important god in the Rig-Veda, is described as carrying the axe
or ‘golden hatchet’, an attribute particularly ascribed to Ganeda, and that he also
was referred wo as Ganapati.

Coomaraswamy”? attributea his reputation as Patron of Letters to the double
meaning of the word gana which, besides being the name of tho followers of Siva,

ype. B. of the BM. of P.A., Coomarsawamy,

* v. Pl. 26 from J. Coedée, Bronzes Khmérs. vol. xxvi, p. 30.

Are Asistica, v, Pl. xv. 7 Letter to the author.
> v. PL 1 (¢). Kindness of Mr. Bagchi. ® Vaipnaziom, p. 149.
‘ Makdnirviga-tontra, Avalon, p. 4, note 7. ° ALL, vol. i, part i, p. 45.
* v. Pl. 1 (a), Kindness of Mr. Coomararwamy. ™° -B, of the BM. of F.A., vol. xxvi, p. 30.

--- Page 28 ---
GANESA IN INDIAN LITERATURE 5
is also the ‘technical designation of carly lists or collections of related worka’. But
whatever may have brought about his association with writing, Ganega’s reputation
as Patron of Letters was sufficiently established to last through centuries, and no
pious Hindu would risk publishing any work without asking his benign patronage.
The growing popularity of Ganega was not founded, however, on his title of
Protector of the Literati. Under the name of Ganapati, he became a most important
deity toward the tenth century, when a mystic and powerful sect, the Ganapatyas,
established his worship to the exclusion of every other Hindu god, even of his
reputed parents, Siva and Parvatt. Temples were erected to him alone, with hia
vahana, the rat, guarding the entrance as did Nandi, the bull, the templea dedicated
to Siva. The largest one built in honour of Ganeda waa a rock-cut temple near
Trichinopoly known as Ucchi-pillaiyar Kovil.*
The cult of the Ganapatyas, who bore as a distinguishing mark a red circle on the
forehead, was esoteric; and Ganeda, looked upon as a Supreme Deity, waa believed
to be superior to Brahma, Visnu, and Siva, as may be seen in the following Gana-
patya hyma used in his worship.”
Om Jam: Praise be to thee, Ganapati!
Thou art the visible Reality. ... Thou art the Creator, the Preserver, the Destroyer,
the Supreme Brahma, the Spirit Manifest. The Universe is born from thee. . . .
‘The Universe is manifeated in thee: earth, water, fire, air and ether.*
Thou art Brahma, thou art Visnu, thou art Rudra. Thou art superior to the
Three Bodics (‘Trimirti).
Orn, praise be to thee, Ganapati!
The word om, which precedes every Brahman mantra, is composed of a-u-m; a for
Frahm, u for Vignu, and m for Siva, It is symbolized by the sanskrit eign 9%. The
sign attached on the right is called ‘Ganega’s trunk’. Ganeda is thus associated
with Brahma, Vignu, and Siva, since no Tite, except those dedicated to Brahman,
may be performed without his invocation.
Although in certain purdnas aa well as in their upapurdnas, Gancéa was raised to
the rank of Creator, higher than the Trimarti, in other puranic accounta such as the
Skanda-purdna, he was described aa owing his popularity, if not his very existence,
to a dispute between Siva and Parvati, fomented by a host of minor deities.
The legend rune as follows: Siva had instituted to himeelf a ypecial worship at
Somnath* and in order to gain popularity with the massea he had promised that
every one could count on going directly into the heavens of the gods, who adored
him at this special shrine with all the prescribed sacrifices and offerings.
Indra and the minor gods resented the arrival in their midst of the hordes of Siva's
faithful adorera such as ‘women, barbarians, sédras, and other workers of ain’ who
were not only without proper qualifications to be there, but were originally destined
for the seven hells.®
) Ind, Antiquary, 1877, Burgess, p. 361. * Kindness of Mr. Sylvain Lévi,
? Ganapatt-upanishad, kindly translated for * Or Someévara.

the author by Mr. 8. Lévi. * Hinds Mythology, Kennedy, p. 354.
3 yep. 2l.

--- Page 29 ---
6 INDIA: ORIGIN OF GANESA

In great indignation, the minor deities, led hy Indra, repaired to Mount Kailaéa,
where dwelt the Lord of the Trident, Siva, and protested against thie incursion into
their midst, saying that they were practically turned out of their own heavens by
beings who wandered wherever they pleased, claiming that they were greater than
the gods themselvea.! They implored the All-powerful Siva to find some obstacle
by which these undeserving beings might be hindered from causing them so much
annoyance.

From here on, there are several versions of the legend regarding the creation of
Ganeéa as Vighnesvara,? ‘ Lord of Obstacles’.

(1) Siva, much perturbed by the unforeseen consequences of his decree, fell into
deep meditation, and while immersed in profound thought a great brilliance
emanated from his forehead* and there sprang into existence a wondrous being
endowed with all the qualities of Siva. When the goddess Uma (Parvati) aaw the
surpassingly beautiful youth whom Siva had created of his own will and without
her participation, she uttered the following powerful curse: ‘May thy head resemblo
that of an clephant and thy body be deformed by a huge belly.’

Siva seems to have accepted this curse as final, and without demur acknowledged
the elephant-headed youth as his son in the following terms: ‘Thy name shall be
Caneéa, Vinayaka, Vighnaraja, the son of Siva. Success and disappointment shall
proceed from thee. Thou shalt be worshipped and invoked before the other gads on all
occasions‘ or otherwise the object and prayer of him who omits to do so, shall fail.’S

The second veraion eliminates all participation of Siva in the creation of Ganeéa.

(2) Siva, after listening to the supplications of Indra and the minor gods, replied
that he was unable to grant their request, for baving given his promise to his faithful
followers worshipping at hia shrine of Somedvara, it could not be withdrawn. But,
he suggested, why not appeal to the goddess Parvati, his consort, who might find
some meana of extricating them from their present predicament ?

Indra then turned to the goddess Parvati, and kneeling before her with bowed
head and clasped hands, addressed her as follows: ‘Praise to thee, O, Supreme of
Goddesses. Supporter of the Universe. O Lotus-eyed. O Beloved of Siva. Grant
us thy aid and save us from this fearful dilemma.’*

Parvati, moved with compassion, brought into existence a ‘Creator of Obstacles’
(Vighneévara); but legends differ as to the mode of creation. The Skanda-purdna
has it that, after gently rubbing her body, Parvati produced a youth with four arms

and the head of an clephant. There is a curious version of the legend which runs
as follows:’ ‘Taking the unguents with which she anointed herself, Parvati mixed
with them the impurities from her body; and repairing to the mouth of the sacred
river Ganga, where dwelt the elephant-headed rakgasi Malini, she offered her the
potion, The rdksasi accepted the unguents, and after drinking them she gave birth
+ Skanda-purina ‘ Exception was, however, made in funeral
? Vigbnesa, Vighnapeti, Avighnapati, Vigh. ceremonies.
naraja. © Vardha-purins.
> Vardha-purdaa. According to Reo, Gapeéa * H.1., Rao, vol. i, part i, p. 43.
was the ‘akssic’ or etherial part of Siva. He was? ‘Brahmaniara', Jacobi, £. of R. and B., ed.
said to be ‘mind-born’. Haatings, p. 807.

--- Page 30 ---
GANESA IN INDIAN LITERATURE 7
to a male child with five clephant-heads. Parvati claimed the child as her offepring
and Siva, accepting him as the son of Parvatt, willed the five heada to be one and
proclaimed him ‘Remover of Obstaclea’.

From another source, we learn that with the oil and ointments used in her bath,
she formed, with the impurities of her body, the image of a youth with the face of
an elephant; and sprinkling the image with water from the aacred Gasiga, it sprang
into life. Whereupon Parvati, turning to Indra and the gods, explained that she
had created thia wondrous being for the sole purpose of putting obstacles in the
path of all those who wished to worship at the ehrine of Siva and ‘thus shall they
fall into the seven heils’.

To Ganeda she gave special instructions that by the allurement of their wives,
children, possessions, as well as with the tempting of riches, he was to persuade
would-be pilgrims to the shrine of Somnath, to give up their project. ‘But,’ she
added, ‘from those that propitiate thee by the following hymn, do thou remove all
difficulties and allow them te worship at the shrine of Siva’

The hymn referred to by the goddess ia the following: ‘Om, I praise thee, O Lord
of Difficulties. .. . Ganapati, invincible, and giver of Victory. Opposer of Obstacles
to the success of men who do not worship thee. I praise thee, O Ganeda.’

Indra and the gods, overjoyed at the creation of a Lord of Obstacles, withdrew
to their heavens, freed from all fear of further incursions of mere mankind.

There are certain accounts that eliminate both Siva and Parvatt from partiocipa-
tion in the creation of Ganega who was looked upon by certain worshippers as a
manifestation of Krisna in human form,? and it is interesting to note that Krigna
in the Mahabharata ia referred to as ‘Remover of Obstacles ’.*

According to the devotees of this doctrine, Parvati, in deapair at having no off-
spring from Siva, undertook to perform the panyakavrata or worship of Siva which
consisted in making offerings of flowers, fruits, &c., at his shrine daily for a year.
But although she faithfully accomplished the prescribed rites, she remained childless.

One day, plunged in deep grief because her request had remained ungranted, she
heard a voice from the heavens telling her to go to her private apartmenta where she
would find her son (who was in reality a manifestation of Krigna). Great was her
jey on hearing the mesaage; and repairing to her private apartments she found a
beautiful youth whom she and Siva accepted as their eon. Ln honour of the event
they invited all the gods to a great feast for the purpose of looking upon the won-
drous youth. Sani (Saturn) was the only god who kept his eyes fixed persistently
oa the ground. Parvati reproached him with thia and bade him gaze upon her
beautiful son. Hardly had he raised his eyes when the head of the youth separated
from his body and disappeared into Goloka, the heaven of Krisna.*

The gods in despair threw themselves on the ground weeping and wailing at the
disaster, but Visnu, mounting on Garuda, his uihena, flew away to the river Pusps-
bhadra, where he found an elephant asleep with ita head turned to the north; and

1 Afateys-purdna. 2 Epic Mythology, Hopkins, p. 207, note 1.

* Brohma-vaivarta-purdaa. v. Rao, J.1., vol. i, * There are several variations of this part of the
part i, p. 46. legend.

--- Page 31 ---
8 INDIA: ORIGIN OF GANESA
cutting off the head, he flew back again and placed it on the headless child (Bala-
Ganeéa), who sprang into life, to the great joy of Siva, Parvati, and the host of goda,

‘The devotees of the Krigna-Ganeéa cult represented Bala-Ganega in the attitude
of the child Krisna crawling with one hand raised and the other posed on the ground,!
but with this difference —that the child Ganesa was represented clephant-faced and
with four arms.? In their religious ardour, they took over the Bhagavad -gitd, insert-
ing the name of Ganeséa wherever occurred that of Krisna, and called it Ganesa-gita.$

‘According to certain accounts, the elephant, whose head was cut off by Visnu, waa
the son of Indra’s véhana, while other legends give Indra’s mount itself, the elephant
Air&vata ; but this seema improbable since the rahana of Indra, according to puranic
myth, was represented with three trunks,

There is, however, still another puranic legend which descrihes Siva as explaining
to Ganeéa why he ia Gajdnana or elephant-faced, in the following terms: ‘1, in
company with Parvati once retired to the forest on the slopes of the Himalaya to
enjoy each other's company, when we saw a female elephant making herself happy
with a male elephant. This excited our passion and we decided t enjoy ourselves
in the form of elephants. I became a male elephant and Parvati, a female elephant
and we pleased ourselves; as a result you were born with the face of an elephant.’

Here, we have Ganeéa, the son of both Siva and Parvati; and this seeme to have
been the popularly accepted veraion of his creation.

Ganesa figured not only in the above puranic myths but in many mystic and magic
texts, both Brahmanic and Buddhist, from the fifth century onwards. Stotras were
offered in hia praise such as the hymn found in the Tandjur® where he is addressed
ag the great hero, conqueror of Mara, without equal, incomparable, great magician,
king of incantations, master of secret formulas. *To the Lord with the trunk of an
Elephant, homage!”

He was invoked in tantric sddhanas or mystic formulas for the invocation of a
deity when he was to be visualized with three eyes and many arms, and in forms
unknown in paintings or sculptures, such as in the Sarvadurgatipariéodhana,® where,
as Vajra-Ganapati, he is deacribed as holding a vajra and a sword ; and as seated on
@ toad instead of his usual rat. He is often found in dhéranis, that is, magic charms
or spells where, as in the Séraddtilaka-tantra,” he is associated with triangles and
circles, Unfortunately most of the dhdranis in this tantra are not suitable for
publication. There are other dhdranis where he is referred to as being ignominioualy
trodden under foot by the goddesa Aparajita* or hy other gods or goddesses.
Sfantras, or short hymns of invocation believed to bave mystic or magic virtues,
were addressed to him ; and like the other Tantric gods, he was allotted a vija, that
is, a mystic ayllable by which he might be invoked. The Tantric vija of Ganeda was:
gan (we).

tv. PL 15 (0). + 83, 94°. Kindly translated by Mr. Sylvain

2 vy. PL 15 (ec). Kindness of Mr. Campbell of the Lévi.

Indie Museam, London. * Mus. in the Bibliothtque Nationale, Sanskrit
pew Dictionary of Hindu Mythology, 59, pe Kindly ranaleted by Mr. 8. Lavi.

«HLL, Rao, vol. i, part i. ty pa. y

--- Page 32 ---
GANESA IN INDIAN LITERATURE 9

In spite of his apparent popularity in the Tantraa, he was, nevertheless, referred
to as one to whom the secrets of the tantric mysteries may not be revealed. In the
Mahd@nirvina-tantra, for example, when Parvatl, the primordial 4akti, aaka of Siva:
‘Who else but thee, O Lord of the Three Worlds, is able to solve these doubts of
mine? Thou who knowest all’, Siva replies: ‘What is that thou aayest, O Great
Wise One and Beloved of my Heart? I will tell thee anything, be it ever so bound
in mystery, even that which should not be aaid before Ganega and Skanda. .. ."!
The author knows of no other text where Skanda is thus associated with his brother
Ganeéa, who, unlike Skanda, seema never to have been admitted to the Tantric
mysteries. In the Kula? rites of initiation, for instance, Gancéa was first supplicated
to remove all obstacles to the success of the initiation, after which he was invited
to depart by the following mantra of dismissal: ‘Lord of Obstacles, pardon me!'*;
and not until his auppoxed departure had taken place were the mystic rites of initia-
tion begun. It seems apparent from this that he was looked upon aa a god to be
feared until properly propitiated ; but the question arises as to why Ganeda, alone
of all the gods, should be excluded from the Tantric mysteries, and especially, from
the Kula rites of initiation, when the group of ‘Divine Mothers’, with whom, as
will be scen below, he was always associated, waa not only admitted to the mysteries,
but was worshipped several times during the Kula ceremonies. As a matter of fact,
very little is known of Ganeéa in the Tantra and not until more Tantric texts are
accessible for atudy will it be possible to determine the exact position of Ganeda in
relation to the other goda who were worshipped in the mysteries, or to find the key
to this puzzling Tantric aspect of the Elephant-faced god.

» Trans. Avalon, p. 5. * Sakis worship. ‘The formals: ‘Vighnardja, Kpomasveti!” is given

9 MoAdnirvino-tantra, tram. Avalon, p. 251, in the commentary. (Kindnews of Mr. Burcett,)

aad o

--- Page 33 ---
CHAPTER II
INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU
TEXTS AND IMAGES
HERE is no trace of a Ganeéa cult in India before the fifth century a.v.,
Tathoweh aa we have seen above in the Vedic mantra addressed to the ‘One
with the Curved Trunk’ (Vakra-Tunda), a deity with the face of an elephant was
known long before the Gupta period. Nor is there reason to put faith in the tradi-
tion according to which his worship was carried from India to Nepal in the third
century u.c. by the daughter of the Buddhist king Asoka.) There would seem, how-
ever, to be conclusive evidence of his having been known under the epithet of
‘Ganega’ at least ag early as the beginning of our era, if the peculiar characters on
a Huvigka coin in the India Museum of Calcutta are, as Vincent Smith believed,
old Brahmi for ‘Ganeéga’.? The image on the coin, however, is that of Siva and the
epitbet may possibly refer to him ; but it may also illustrate Przyluski’s theory that
Siva and Ganeéa were originally one and the same deity. The name ‘Ganapati’ is
found as early aa the middle of the fourth century, in a Gupta inscription on the
Allahabad Pillar,® where the king Samudragupta mentions, among the kings that
he has ‘exterminated’, the king Ganapati Naga. This is the earliest instance of a
king being called ‘Ganapati’ and does not occur again until after the tenth century.
As thie name was particularly associated with Ganeéa,* may it therefore be inferred
that the god Ganapati was known as early as the fourth century? ‘here is sculp-
tural evidence of his popularity from the fifth century onwarda, although no inscrip-
tion has been found referring either to Ganeda or to Ganapati aa a god until after
the Gupta period.

It was possibly because of his early popularity as ‘Remover of Obstacles’ that
he waa attached to different groups of deities such aa the Navagrahas (the Nine
Planeta) and the Saptamdtrkas (the Seven Divine Mothers), whose origins are as
ancient as they are obecure. The Navagrahaa were believed to direct the destinies
of men, and in order not to offend any of the group by the special worship of one of
the grahas, they were appealed to asa group; but before addressing their eupplica-
tions to the Navagrahas the worshippers considered it propitious to implore the
“Remover of Obstacles’, Vighnantaka, to intervene in their favour. It is probably
for this reason that Ganesa figured in the group; aud that, as he was to be addressed
first before the others, he was represented standing at the extreme right of the
Planets, where he was figured of equal size with them. In all the Navagraha slabs
yet discovered they are imaged standing in a row.®

At this same period Ganeéa, when in attendance on Siva and Parvati, capecially

tv. SLL, Saatei, p. 168, note ili, and Anti. > Gupta Inscriptions, od. by J. F, Fleet, p. 6.
qusties of Mayirabhanja, by Nagendra Natha Vaso, *p3.

> From the Plate given in the Journal of the * ‘Two Saura Images’, R. Datta, The LHQ.,
A sialic Society of Bengal, this roading hardly seems vol. ix, no. i, March 1933, pl. opp. p. 204,
poosible, Part I, 1897, p. 3, pl. I, 6.

--- Page 34 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES 11
in the eculpturea of the rock-cut temples, was always represented much smaller than
his parenta, in fact, like the other accessory minor deities in their suite. It therefore
seems hardly probable that in this case prayera were addressed to him distinct
from those intended for Siva and Parvati. On the other hand, his presence in the
group of Saptamatrkéa, where he is always represented of equal aize with the god-
deases, seems to indicate that his role waa the same as with the Navagrahas, for the
Seven Divine Mothera were also adored as a group.

According to the Suprabheddgama, Ganeéa should be standing when in the com-
pany of the Saptamétrkas; but in reality he is always seated, as are also the demon
goddesses, and is placed at their extreme left. Aaa rule, his right knee is lifted, and
the left is either pendent or bent before him on the dsana. His head may be crowned
with the kavanda-mukuta as at Ellora, or he may wear the head-dress of Siva, the
jota-mukuta, us at Belur. He is four-armed, holding almost always the axe and
bowl; but the other symbols are not often easily identified. Underneath the dsanas
of the goddesses are niches in which are the vdhanas of the gods of whom they are
the éaktis, while in the niche underneath the seat of Ganeda may be a rat or a bowl
of cakes.

The cult of the Saptamatrkas! is one of the most ancient in India. The seven
Devia were believed to be the feminine counterparts of the Seven Great Brahman
Gods, and their origin is explained in puranic myth as follows: Siva, in a great
battle with the chief of the asuras, Andhasura, found that from every drop of blood
falling to earth from the alain asuras sprang another asura; and fearing to be over-
come by them, he created out of the flame that issued from his mouth in battle a
Sakti, Yogedvari by name. The other seven Brahman Gods did likewise, and the
peven guktis thus brought into existence, led by Yogedvarl, caught each drop of
blood as it fell and thus was the chief of the asuras overcome,

The goddeases were given the names corresponding with the epithets of the Seven
Great Brahman Gods of whom they were the counterparts; and they not oaly
carried their symbols, but, as seen above, were given the same mounts. They were
looked upon as the personitications of the seven bad mental qualities: BrahmAni,
pride; Maheévari, anger; Kaum&ri, illusion; Vaignavi, covetousness; Varahi, envy;
Indrani, fault-finding ; Camunda, tale-bearing; and the leader of the Saptamatrkas,
Yogedvarl, Adma or desire.

Ganeda was placed next to the last goddess at the left, Camunda, who was believed
to partake of the nature of Parvati. In certain villages, especially in south India,
she was to be found in the centre instead of at the left end of the group, and by this
change it was indicated that aupplications were to be addressed to the Saptamatrkds
for increasing the population of the village.

In the Hariraméa there are prayers invoking the Saptamatrkéa who are implored
to protect little children as if they were ‘their real mothers’.? It is perhaps for this
reason that the seven daktis were called the ‘Divine Mothers’, and that in moat of

ty. PL 2(c). v. Indian Antiquary, Sept. 1906, symbol which atood for her was called mdipbs.’
Pp. 263. Shamaaastry writes; ‘In ancient India, 2 Kindly tranalated for the author by Dr. J.
the Mother of the World wan called midty, and the Filliorst.

--- Page 35 ---
12 INDLA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES
the Saptamatrka groups they were imaged with a child beside them or else represented
seated on the lap.

In the [éana-Sivagurudevapaddhati,’ Ganeéa, under the name of Vighnanayaka,
is invoked to protect little children from the demon-goddesses by removing all
obstacles to a successful propitiation of the Saptamatrkas. They were, however, not
always looked upon as malignant deities but rather as the ‘ productive or nourishing
powers of nature’. In the MahdbAdrata they are referred to as the mothers of
Skanda (Karttikeya), but he is never figured accompanying them like his brother,
Ganeda.

According to directions in the Mahdnirvdna-tantra,? Ganesan waa the first deity
to be worshipped in ceremonies of initiation and consecration of tanks, wells, and
images of deities; and waa to be meditated upon according to the following dhydna,
as ‘being vermilion of colour, as having three eyes, a large belly, as holding in his
lotus-hands the conch-shell, noose, elephant goad, and as making the sign of bless-
ing. On his forehead shines the young moon.’ He has the head of the King of
Elephants. ...’

After the worshipper has thus invoked Ganeda, he is to offer the pancatativa or the
five elemente,* wine, meat, fish, parched food, and woman, to the Elephant-faced
god who is surrounded by eleven manifestations of himeelf.5 The Divino Mothers
are then to be worshipped, and it is interesting to note here that in the list, in place
of the goddess Indrant, is the goddess Aparajita, whom we shall mect again in
connexion with Ganedéa but under quite different circumstancea.® Before the real
ceremony begins, as we have said above, Ganeéa is invited to depart, by a mantra
of dismissal, after which the Divine Mothers are again worshipped as well as the
Navagrahas and other deities.

The Astasiddhis or the Fight Goddesses believed to preside over Success and
Achievement were looked upon as the Satis of Ganega.’ They are, probably, the
same aa the Saptamatrkda with Yogeévart added; but the author knows of no
Astamatrka slab in India? As will be seen below,® Gancéa had five aspects when
holding his 4aki who may possibly aymbolize this group of Fight Goddesses.

The Saptamatrkas accompanied by Ganeéa were worshipped in Siva shrines ; but
in south India temples were built for the exclusive worship of the group. Those
dedicated to Siva were placed facing the east with Nandi, the bull, at the entrance,
facing west. Images of Ganeéa were always put on the south side of the outer wall
of the linge shrines, and the few temples dedicated to him were built facing south
while the rat was imaged at the entrance looking to the north. Statues of Ganeéa,
however, were more often found in the open,” either at approaches to Siva temples,

> Kindly tranelated for the author by Dr. J. danta, Pakta-tunde, Lambodara, Gejdnana,
Filliczat. Mahodara, Vikata, Dhirrabha, Vighna-nAéans.

? Translated Avalon, p. 250. 3 ¥. p, 10. “¥.p.43.

* Called the five M's’: inadye (wine), miiaea 7 SLL, Sastri, p. 173.
(meat), mataya (fish), mudrd (parched coreal bus * At Kirtipur in Nepal there is « shrine dedi-
the term waa usually employed for a ritual gesture cated to Gaposa where the eight devis aro Tepre-
of the band), maithuna (coition), sented. v. Nipal, Oldfield, vol. i, p. 130.

Gapa-niyaka, Gana-niths, Gansinida, Eka vy, p20, 1 y. Pl. 23 (a).

--- Page 36 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES 13
along the high roads, at the crossing of the waye, or under trees, in which case they
were often accompanied by Naga, slabs.

In the Mudgala-purdna he is given thirty-two different names, while in tho
Saraddtilaka there are fifty-one dhdranis where he is invoked under different aspects ;
but of these many forms there were alwaya two outstanding features: the face of an
elephant and a fat, thick-set, yaksa-shaped body.

The question ia still unsolved as to how this type sprang into existence, affirming
itaelf without sensible change from the fifth century to the present day. According
to Krishna Deb, he owes the lower part of his body to the yakga cult ; but, as we have
seen above, he was apparently never worshipped as a yakga, for none of his names
are to be found on yaksa lista.

In hie ancient form of Ganapati-Vindyaka we do not know whether he waa
possessed of an elephant-head or not. If, instead of the ganas, Ganeda had been
appointed leader of the pdrisadas, a group of animal-headed inferior deities in the
auite of Siva, his creation with the face of an elephant, ‘ King of Beasta’, would have
found its explanation. There waa also a group of inferior deitics in the suite of Siva
who had another characteristic of Ganeda, being ‘pot-bellied’; but they were in
attendance on Skanda, his brother, according to puranic myths. It seeme, there-
fore, more likely that Ganeda is to be looked upon as 4 derivative rather than as an
original deity. In that case, waa he derived from the Bhairava form of Siva? In the
Visnudharmottara,! Siva, in hia aspect of Bhairava, is described as having a ‘flabby
belly’ (other texta give ‘pot-belly’) and round, yellow (or red) eyes, side-tusks, and
wide nostrils.?, He has for garment the skin of an elephant. In the Vatuka-Bhaira-
wikalpa he is described as red in colour and as having a serpent ‘tied around bis
waist’. Most of these details are characteristics of Ganeda, and the elephant skin
with the head and ita trunk hung over the shoulder of Siva aa Bhairava might easily
have suggested the definite form of Ganega. As a matter of fact, some of his images,
especially in bronze, if studied closely, give the impression of a masked head, which
is atill more apparent in paintings where his face is red and his neck and ears are
pink.® It is of interest to note here that one of his names is ‘Dvi-dehaka’ or *two-
bodied’.

When hia imagea or the seayambhi-mirtis' are daubed with paint, the popular
colour is red; but in paintings he may be either red or yellow, according to the sect,
aad is to be worshipped with offerings of red or yellow flowers. He may also have
the face red and the body yellow; and there are esoteric forms such as Lakemi-
Ganapati and Bhuvaneéa-Ganapati, where he is white. In paintings, he sometimes
carries a red banner on which ia figured his mount, the rat, if not represented beside
him or under his feet, in which case he was called Akhu-ratha, or ‘He who rides on
a rat’. He was seldom imaged, however, seated on the rat;> but in his form of
Heramba, he may be seated on a lion.®

In the dhydénas, Ganeda is usually invoked as having one head, which, following

1 &. of HL, Rao, vol. ii, part i, p. 177. 4 Shapeless or almost abapelcas stoacs or rocks.
+ v. p. 26 (Amardvatl railings). * v. Pl. 13{¢).
ty. PLL. * S.1., Sastri, v. Fig. 112.

--- Page 37 ---
ta INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES
the Tantras, should be one-fifth of the total length of the body; but there are forms
with two, three, four, or five heads. In India a two-headed image called Ganesa-
Jayanti was popular locally and is still worshipped in Bombay at his festival once
@ year. Sir William Jones drawe a close comparison between Ganega-Jayanti and
fa a > a
1 ~ Ne. . ee
——~ + YY! 2 )
ef WER) A . oe -
ee il >». G- Cel ee ope a =e
R \y 9" SRR ESS
=a PPPS Ns
b— —caea m7 EW eee
4 sae so
“) oN " 4 Tae ey Ser Saw
Fic 1. Ganesa-Jayanti.
Janus, the two-headed god of the Romans whose characteristics strangely resembled
those of Ganega —in fact, so closely that he refers to the latter ag the ‘ Janus of India’,
Ganega-Jayanti was represented with the head of an elephant at the right and a
Auman head, at the left.) He was possessed of four arma holding the usual symbols
and was figured seated in Indian fashion with the rat in attendance.
Ganesa with three heads was never represented in India, nor was he known to the
Hindus with four heads; but in Japan there existed a form with three heads called
1 y. Fig. 1, and Asiatic Researches, vol. i; J.A.8. of B., 1806, p. 226.

--- Page 38 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES 15
Vinayaka, King of Elephants,’ while in Indo-China, in a private collection, is 6
amall bronze image with four heads.”

In Nepal the four-headed Ganesa was not unknown, for in a descriptive list of the
different Nepalese aspects of Ganeéa* there is reference to a ‘four-headed Ganeéa’;
but without seeing the statue itself, it is dificult to judge whether or not it is a five-
headed Heramba with the top head missing. In the image from Indo-China, how-
ever, there can be no question of ita being a partially decapitated Heramba. The
five-headed form of Ganeéa was most popular in Nepal and had certain followers
in India; but Heramba is practically never found outside of these two countries.
Certain accounts state that Ganega was born with five heads,‘ one pointing to each
of the four cardinal points with the fifth, on top; and this arrangement of the five
heade was usually adopted for the Heramba form of Ganeéa. There are examples,
however, where, as on a stela found in the Munshiganj district, Dacca, the five heads
are on the same tier, that is, with two on either side of the central head which is
much larger than the other four; but this is a most unusual arrangement.®

When invoked, Ganega was to be conceived as posseasing only one tusk which
should be on the right side. There are, however, images of the Ekadanta with the
tusk on the left side® as well as possessing both tusks.’ He may even be represented
having three tusks, which, however, is most unusual.®

The absence of one of the tusks is variously accounted for in puranic myths; but
the most popular legend gives that it was broken off in an encounter with Siva and
runs as follows: When Parvati created Ganeéa without participation of Siva,’ he
waa thus unknown to the Lord of the Trident who found him guarding the door of
the private apartments of the goddess. Siva challenged him and in the terrific fight
that ensued, one of Ganega’a tusks was broken off by Siva with his axe. There is a
legend, however, which has few followers, claiming that the head of the elephant,
cut off by Visnu and placed on the headless body of Ganeda, had primarily only one
tusk. Certain accounts relate that Ganega used his broken tusk as stylus when acting
as amanuensis to the poet Vyasa.

Avouth Indian legend’ gives another version of the absence of one of the tusks and
accounts for the presence of the rat which usually accompanics Ganeda: there waa
once a giant-demon with the face of an elephant who waa unconqucrable either by
god or by man. Ganeéa, being only a demi-god, was thus able to fight with him with
some possibility of success. At the first encounter the giant-demon, Gajamukhasura
by name, broke off Ganega’s right tusk ; but Ganeda caught his broken tusk and hurled
it at the giant-demon, who instantly turned into a rat, whereupon Ganeéa took him
into his service as his vdhana. One of his ancient names is Mugka-vahana or ‘He
whose mount is a rat’. According to Gupte! the sanskrit word mugka also stands for

ly. p. 80. Ty, Pld (4).

3 vy, Pl. 27 fc). * y. Pl. M4 (d).

} Kindness of Hie Holiness Rajgura Hemraj *¥. p.6.

Sarman of Nepal. 10 AS, de UL, Jouveau-Dubreuil, t. I, p. 44.
tvepd. 1 Harvest Festivals of G. and G.", Indian
ov. PL € (6). Antiquary, vol. xxxv, Nov. 1906.

*y. PLL 5 (6),

--- Page 39 ---
16 INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES
‘thief’, and he explains that the epithet ‘Muyka-vahana’ really meana: The Lord
of the Harvest overcoming the pestilence of the field mouse, thief and destroyer of
the crops. The rat has also been variously explained as symbolizing the night or aa
being a priapic animal; but it seems more probable that, like the other Hindu
deities, Ganesa was allotted a wikana which may have been suggested by the above
myth or a similar one. At any rate, the rat is found in company with Ganeda at a
very early period in north India, but was not introduced into south India before the
twelfth century.

As a rule, the trunk was represented hanging straight and only turning to the
left or to the right toward the end; but there are examples where the trunk turns,
almost at once, to the left and then hangs straight? or is raised to the level of the
shoulder? In south India, when it turns to the left, Ganeda is called Idamburi. In
the few examples where it turns to the right, he is called in Tamil Valamburi. When
turned to the left, the trunk, aa a rule, is about to lift cakes (batasa) from a bowl in
Ganega’s left hand, but practically never when turning to the right. The end of the
trunk may be coiled and seemingly balancing a ball-shaped cake called a modaka,*
or is it a jambu (wood-apple) ?

Asa rule, the images of Ganeéa have two eyes, but on Tantric statues and when
invoked in Tantric dhydnas he has a third eye. ‘The two normal eyes, in India, are
represented small, round, staring, and low in relief, while the third eye, set obliquely
in the forehead, is, on the contrary, long and narrow, flame-shaped, and high in
relief. On the forehead may be the tlak of Siva, the crescent moon,* in which case
he ia called Bhilacandra, a form especially worshipped by the esoteric aects. Accord-
ing to legend, the moon, Candra, was cursed by a god and lost ita brightness, where-
upon Ganega picked it up and placed it on his forehead. In place of the moon-tilak,
there may be three horizontal lines* painted white on hia forehead indicating an image

worshipped by a Saiva sect ; but be is popularly adored without tilak or the third eye.

The head, aa a rule, resembles closely that of an elephant; but in Kashmir, and
especially in Nepal, it is represented long, narrow, and flat, while farther east,
especially in Java, the face may take on a more human aspect with the eyes close
together and the trunk seemingly a prolongation of the nose.” ‘The ears are large
and broad as a rule, and each may be ornamented with a conch-shell, as at Ballaur
in the ancient temple of Harihara® as well ag at Deopara, in the Rajshahi District.
We shall also see it on the two attendant deities on either side of Ganesa in the
sculptures in the Tripuri State referred to below.® The presence of the conch-ahells
undoubtedly conveyed to the adept some meaning which we are at a loss to explain ;
but it is safe to eay that although the conch-shell is an attribute of Vignu, in this

case it has no reference to him. It is intereating to note here that in Indo-China,
there is an ancient statue of Ganeéa holding the conch-shell,!°
1 AS. de UL, Jouveau-Dubreuil, t. IT, p. 46. Ty. Pl. 32 (d).
2 y. PL 2a). * Indian Art and Letters, vol. vii, no. ii, Pl. iv;
>. PL 14 (6). Antiquities of Basodli and Rarnagar, by R.
4 v. Ph 4 (6). Chandra Kak.
‘ v. Fig. 2. * vp. 30,
* v. Pl. 20 (a) snd (5). 20 y. Pl. 25 (c).

--- Page 40 ---
Fe INDIA: GANESA me wauiewarén FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES 17

taneda may wear the head-dress of Siva, the jata-mukua, a compli
ment of braided hair and jewels forming a high chignon 3 but i aeal het ess
is a terraced-crown called karanda-mukuta,? which in its earliest conception was

FE ee i ; ~~

eo! (BaP eR ww NS

wt oF (7 , vy) Ay YE

SH hg ks y, yy fe LY So

GOO Fak get, DIV IS ANS

A a lt APS

hy ne 1 a Ni ORS we Ven

Poe een on SES

Fic. 2. Form of Ganapati worshipped by the esoteric sects.
bowl-shaped but in time became extremely ornate, losing its original character. He
is rarely represented without a head-dress except in his most ancient imagea, where
he may, however, wear a simple jewelled band encircling his head, aa on the
Bhumara statue? ‘The head-dress is found on images as early ax the sixth century.
Ganeés, when invoked, should be conceived with two or four arma, but his
1 v. PL 16 (d). 9 y. PL 5 (a) and (6). 3 y, Pt. 3 (a).
baad nh

--- Page 41 ---
22 INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES
the circle by the round belly; the triangle’ by the tusks, mouth, and upper part of
the trunk; the crescent and flame-shaped symbol by the crescent lilaka and flame-
shaped third eye on the forehead of Ganapati as conceived by the CAnapatya.
Symbols representing the gods were worshipped, according to Shamasastry,? long
before the adoration of idols; and circles, triangles, squares, or rectangles were used
in ‘axsigning a pictorial form for victims of sorcery or for deities’, In the Nivdcdra-
candrikd, it is explained that: firat, the rectangle represented the lower part of the
body to the knees ; second, the semicircle, the knees to the navel; third, the triangle,
the navel to the neck; fourth, the ‘black
My figure’, the neck to the brows; fifth, the circle
Me with a ‘flag aymbol’, the brows to the top of
area the head called brahmarandhra. There are
ws wr dhydnas in the Sdraddtilake-tantra? where
AA} x} ES uN Ganega is associated with triangles, rect-
yy a = angles, &c. Possibly the elemental stipa was
c /) 4\ () used in the hidden esoteric tenets of the
ea) * wt Ganapatya to designate Ganapati in his form
> x15) of ‘Lord of the Universe’.
CSS Like Siva, Ganesa was popularly wor-
~— Lf \, — abipped impersonated by a formless (or almost
\ =, formless) stone called srayambhi-marti, that
fs, sprung into existence spontaneously, per-
| vaded by the essence of the deity, and imbued
{ti i‘t‘SCSCSCsS with epecial divine qualities. In the case
Fto. 3. Ganda, ‘Lord of the Univeme’. of Ganega, the srayambhi-mirti was always
painted red. It was never placed on a pedestal
nor found in temples unless where a temple was built over it for protection. Asa
tule, the seayambhi-mirti was set up in the open, under trees, along the high roads,
and in the beds of rivers. The most celebrated evayambhi-mirtis of Ganesa are to
be found in Kashinir, where there are three famous and most powerful formless
stones which from ancient times have drawn pilgrims to their shrines. One, which is
near the village of Ganes-bal, is in the river Lidar near its right bank, and is still an
important place of pilgrimage. The huge rock daubed with red paint is believed to
have occult power because, in the fourteenth century, the king of Kashmir, Sikandar
But-shikast and hia suite, perished, attacked by an army of bees, because of his
intention of destroying the seayambha-mirti of Ganeéga.*
Another rock in Kashmir which has been worshipped from most ancient times as
a symbol of Ganesa under the name of Bhimasvamin is at the foot of the hill Hari-
Parbat near Srinagar. It is said that the rock once resembled the head of Ganeéa;
* The triangk, aymbol of fire, belongs to the Senart, p. 34.
third of the five cansla of the senses, the ‘breathing * 'Theory of the O. of the D. Alphabet’, The
out through the mouth’: Ind. Antiquary, Sept. 1906, p. 253
“Le canal do Vourst ext aprina, c'eut le parole, * Kindly teanslated by Mr. Bhattasali.
c'est le fou.’ Chandogya-U'panishad, trans. by * Kindness of Mr. A. Foucher.

--- Page 42 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES 23
but it is so covered with layers of red paint that there is now no resemblance to the
head of an elephant. According to local legend,’ when the pious king Pravarasena
founded the city of Pravarapuia, the god turned his head from west to east in order
to behold the new city, Legend also recounts that Ganesa tured hia head back
again at the iconoclasm of king Sikandar But-shikast.

The most remarkable of these srayambhi-mirtis in Kashmir is the one on a cliff
along the Kishen-ganiga known as Ganes-Ghati. Sir Aurel Stein writes:? ‘On a face
of grey lime rock, about fifty feet high, nature has formed a long projecting nose
which curiously resembles the head of an elephant with the trunk hanging down.
The rock is covered in this place with the orthodox daub of red paint. This shows
plainly where pious tradition places the head of the elephant-faced god which has
given its name to the hill.’ .

In the mythical land of Jambu-dvipa there was a mountain in the shape of an
elephant called Vinataka, often confused with Vindyaka, The reault was that in
every Buddhist country where there was a hill or mountain which was vaguely in
the form of the head of an elephant, the worship of Ganeda was set up and a place
of pilgrimage established. ‘Thus, from an unimportant déity, Ganega, ‘Remover of
Obstacles’, grew in popularity and waa taken up not only by the Buddhist but by
all the Hindu yects. Up to the tenth century, he waa rarely worshipped alone and
waa combined with practically every important deity in the Hindu pantheon; but
although he occupied a prominent place in Brahman mythology and was worshipped
as one of the five Great Brahman Gods, there ia no mention, even in late purdnas,
of his being invested with special divine power. Under the name of Vinayak,
Ganeéa was adored, however, by all those who embarked upon any enterprise; and
as Vighnesgvara, he was invoked at the beginning of every book to ensure literary
success. His image was placed on the site of a future construction and a puja
performed with offcrings of flowers, to gain his benign guardianship. As popular
legend gave him the reputation of robbing pioua worsbippera of the fruit of their
devotions if not properly propitiated, he was always invoked before beginning the

devotions. There was, however, one mantra according to the Mahdnirvdna-tantra,?
the sacred Hrahmd-gayatri, which might be recited without first appealing to
“Ganega the Thief”.

In south India, expecially, he is a popular household god and is familiarly adored
as Pillaiyar.* He ia invoked the first of all the gods at the morning ablutione and
again at noon and before sleeping at night; aud is often worshipped in company
with four other great deities: Vignu, Siva, Parvati, and Aditya, the Sun, symbol of
Brahma. In high-caste houses, there is usually a sacred receptacle containing a
small altar for the five household gods.’ If Siva was chosen as the chief household
god, he waa placed in the centre, in his liga form, with Nandi the bull facing him.
Ganesa was seated cither on the other eide of the liviga or in one of the comers, while

} Kindness of Mr. A. Foucher. > Trans, by Avalon, p. 40, n. 12.

* Kalhana's Hajatarangini: a Chronicle of the ‘vy. p. 1.
Kings of Kashmir, by Sir Aurvl Stein, vol. ii, © v. Ph 15 (a),
p.3il. .

--- Page 43 ---
20 INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES
Across his body, from under the right arm to across the left shoulder, was either

the Brahmanical thread or a serpent in its place; and around the belly was often
tied a second girdle of a anake,! the presence of which is accounted for in the follow-
ing puranic legend: Ganeda, receiving from his worshippers an offering of innumer-
able ball-shaped cakes (modaka), proceeded to eat them all and thus his helly became
abnormally distended. He then mounted on his wihana, the rat,? and started off to
return to his dwelling place, when the rat, seeing a serpent cross its path, tripped
with fright, sending (tanega rolling to the ground. In falling off, his dilated abdomen
burst, and all the innumerable modakas that he had eaten fell out. He proceeded to
gather them and replace them in his capacious belly ; and after killing the serpent,
he tied it around his waist to keep them from falling out again. The Moon, sur-
rounded by his twenty-seven starry consorts, had watched the above proceeding
with much mirth and finally burst into uprosrious laughter, which so infuriated
Ganeda that he pulled out one of his tusks and threw it at the Moon. Darknegs then

covered the earth, and the gods in great distress begged the ‘Remover of Obstacles’

to withdraw his tusk from the repentant Moon. This he consented to do, but in

order to punish the Moon, he willed that for ever after ita brilliance, in every month,
should wax and wane.

With the growing influence of the Tantras and the popularity of Saktism, Ganeda
was imaged, as were the other gods, in company with hia female counterpart whom
be was represented holding with his left arm, either beside him or on his left hip.
The devi, as a rule, had her right arm around his neck, while the left, as we have aaid
above, often held the bow! of batasas.

Saktiem was particularly practised by a powerful sect who adopted Ganeda as
their special deity and established his worship to the exclusion of practically every
other Hindu god, even of his parente, Siva and Parvati. Ganeda under the name of
Ganapati thus became an important deity toward the teuth century when the
Génapatya sect set up the cult of five Sakti-Ganapatia called: Ucchigta-Ganapati,
four-armed, red in colour; Mahd-Ganapati, ten-armed, red; Urddhva-Ganapati,
aix-armed, yellow; Piigala-Ganapati, six-armed ;3 Lakam!-Gana pati, four- or eight-
armed, white, while the éakti is yellow and carries a lotus.*

In time, the Ganapatya divided into six separate sects, and while they were all
six of accord in looking upon Ganeéa as the Firat Great Cause ‘through whose mdyd
Siva and the other gods were created’, he waa nevertheless worshipped by each sect
under a different name, in a somewhat different form, and differently worded
mariras were used for their respective mystic rites of initiation. They set up two
ways of worshipping Ganapati which varied only in detail, according to the sect:

1. By mystical contemplation.

Those of the Ganapatya who worshipped Ganeéa under the aspect of Maha-

Ganapati were to meditate upon his image, red of colour with ten arms, holding

|v. p. 13. Bhairava form of Siva. * Another text givoe. Maha-G i, Heridrd-

; z 11. Bao, vel. i, parti, p. 51. Gonapati, Uschi Gaoapat, Navanita Gapeped,
‘yellow’. Svarpa-Ganepati, Sentans-Ganapati.

--- Page 44 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES 21
among other symbols a pomegranate! and embracing his éakti or female energy. He
was to be conceived as Creator of all the gods, the Supreme Spirit (paramatma).

The eect which adored the Elephant-faced One under the form of Haridra-
Ganapati meditated upon him aa having four arma, as being yellow of colour, and
possessed of a third eye. He was to be conceived as Leader of all the gods, and each
devotee was branded on both arma with hia elephant face having only one tusk.

Another meditative sect of the Ganapatya adored him aa Ucchista-Ganapati, but
unlike the above exclusive sects, all castes were admitted to his worship. The
devotecs meditated on his form with four arms, holding a pomegranate in one of his
hands while embracing his sakti. He was to be conceived while practising most
licentious rites and ceremonies.

2. By devotional practices without meditation.

The devotee, after crowning Ganeda with flowers, was to make offerings of fruit
and of red or yellow flowers, according to the sect.

The Ganapatya were linga worshippers and the Ganapati liriga? was considered
second only to the Svayambhn, which was enshrined in the innermoat sanctuary of
8 temple and never gazed upon by its worshippers. The Ganapati liriga, being leas
sacred, was shown to the members of the Ganapatya sect. It was in form somewhat
in the shape of a citron,’ a cucumber, or a wood apple‘ and its worship was believed
to have been set up by the ganas at a very early date

At the annual féte of the Ganapatya, Ganeéa waa sometimes represented with his
father, Siva, in attendance on him ; but outside of the six esoteric secta, the exclusive
worship of Ganeda was not practised.

In the Samaydcdra-tantra® are mentioned the six dmndyas or faces of Siva: four
facing the cardinal points, one on top and the sixth, underneath and hidden, and
from whose mouth were spoken the sddhanas and siddhimantras. From the face
looking toward the west, called Kama or love, were revealed the goda Krigna,
Ganeda, Yama and Sorya, Candra and other planets. The Tantra-éastra refers to
the six minds of the six heads of Siva; but in the Vardha-purdna there ia only ques-
tion of one face, from the forehead of which issued, as we have said above, a great
brilliance in which Ganoéa was ‘revealed’, that is, ‘mind-born’.

Thus certain esoteric sects came to look upon Ganeda as a material manifestation
of the manas of Siva, manifestation which, as seen above in the Ganapatya Hymn
was conceived to be made up of earth, water, fire, air, and ether. In India, the five
elements were symbolized by the elemental stipa which was composed of a rect-
angle (earth), circle (water), triangle (fire), crescent (air), anda flame-shaped symbol
rising from the centre of the crescent (ether).’ It ia a curious fact that the seated
esoteric form of Ganeda vaguely suggests an clemental stipa if we conceive of the
rectangle as being formed hy the thick, elephant-shaped legs bent beneath the god;

d¥.p. 18. * E. of H.1., Rao, vol. ji, part i, p. 88.

? Phallic form, ‘ v.Shalti ond Shalta, by Sir.J. Woodroffe, p. 75.

2 y. PL 14 (8). 1 v. p.5, v. Fig. 3, p. 22.
* jambu.

--- Page 45 ---
18 INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES
complicated Tantric representationa may have ten or more. The symbols that he may
carry and which are held by no other deity are: the broken tusk, a citron, wood-
apple (jambu), a radish, a stylus, a bow! of cakes, and a modaka; but he may have
other attributes such as the axe, a lasso, a book, a sword, a kalada, a snake, &c.)
In his Tantric forms with many arms, he holds the usual Tantric symbols, The
broken tusk and the axe have been accounted for above, in puranic myths, The
citron or the jambu stands for the Ganapati-liiga. The radish, almoat unknown in
Jodie, is a favourite attribute in Nepal and in Tibet as well as in Japan. As it ia
never carried by Ganega at the same time as the broken tusk, which is practically
unknown in those three countries, it seems possible that the radish waa primarily
a misinterpretation of a badly executed broken tusk. There is a saying in Bengal
that Ganega is the god with ‘cars like a fan and teeth like a radish’ ;? but outside
of Japan, the author knows of no legend explaining ite presence in his hand.

He may also carry the water-vessel (kalasa) either in one of his hands or it
may be held in his trunk, in which latter case it is more likely a wine jar, for in a
dhyana in the Mahdnirwina-tantra it is said: ‘His great trunk is adorned with the
jar of wine which it holds’. The stylus and the book, ax we have seen above, may be
found in paintings in India, while in Indo-China there are several ancient statuca
depicting him as a scribe. The bowl of cakes may be said to be not only his most
ancient but his most characteristic attribute. It ia almost always held in his left
hand, and the trunk is often represented lifting one of the small cakes called batasa
from the bowl. If figured with his éadti, ahe may hold the bowl. The modaka is aleo
a cake, ball-shaped but larger than the batasa, and iz usually represented by itself.
It may cither be held in the coil of the trunk or be placed before him on the dsana ;*
but with the exception of Bala-Ganapati’ and Taruna-Ganapati, none of his forms
carry it in the hands, It is sometimes held in the mouth of the rat.® Certain secta
looked upon the modaka as aymbolizing Maha-Buddhi or Supreme Wisdom; but in
the esoteric doctrine practised by the Ganapatyas, it was conceived ag representing
the germ of life.” Rao makes reference to this mystic interpretation when he explains
that in the esoteric doctrine the round belly of Ganega, Lord of the Universe, was
imbued with mystic significance, that is, that it was to be conceived ag symbolizing
4 vast expanse of space, capacious enough to hold the thousands of modakaa which

stood for all the human germs in the universe.'®
In India, three of the esoteric forms of GanedaY carry the pomegranate, which has
at all times, according to Goblet @ Alviella, been considered an emblem of fertility, of
abundance of life ;*and it is of interest to note here that in the Nepalese and Tibetan
} When in dancing attitude, he may hold the 7 y. PL 15 (c).
cobra near the head, the tail trailing on the  * v. Pl. 20 (a).
ground. This form is found in central and south * The modaka may in reality represent the
India. wood-apple (jambx), much venerated, capecially
> Letter of Mr. Prabodh Candra Bagchi. in northern India,
2 vy. PL 7 (6). 1° E. of H.1., Rao, vol. i, parti, p. 61.
‘y. PL 26. ) Lakeri-Gapapsti, Mahi-Gapapati, Ucchigta-
>. PL 14 (0). Ganapati.
“vy. Ph 14 (6). La Atigration des Symboles, p. 184.

--- Page 46 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES 19
paintings of Ganesa,’ the modaka is replaced by the cintémani, which in Mahayana
Buddhism is the magic jewel interpreted, in the esoteric doctrine, as symbolizing
the germ of life. In India, however, Ganesa practically never holds the magic jewel ;
but in the India Museum in London there is a small bronze image where, in his right
hand, he balances a modaka distinctly in the form of a cintamant, while his left arm is
around the waist of the dakti, Ganeda, nevertheless, is addressed in the Arya-Ganapati-
stotra? as ‘Lord of Jewels, with a body of Jewels, Jewelled Source of Jewels, who
protects the Jewels of the Doctrine. O, Lord, with the trunk of an elephant, ho-
mage’; and in the Ganesa-purdna there is a legend which describes Ganesa as being
symbolized by a cintamani A great Asura, Tripurasura by name, worshipped
Gancda with the two mantras, ‘Sri Ganesa namah* and ‘Ont’, while standing on his
great toe thousands of years in mystic contemplation of the Elephant-faced god.
Ganesa, deeply impressed by such austerity, appeared to him, whereupon Tripur-
asura asked aa reward for his victory over his senses and passions that he be able to
conquer the Three Worlds. As soon as Ganeéa had granted hia request, he,proceeded
to conquer Brahma and to reduce Vignn to submission; but Siva, when asked to
descend from Mount Kailasa, demurred. The three great gods then appealed to
Ganesa to save them from utter destruction. Ganeda, promising to do so, disguised
himself as a Brahman ascetic and, appearing to Tripurdsura, proposed building for
him a great city on Mount Kailasa, but insisted that, at the entrance to Kailasa, be
erected a cintdmani dedicated to Ganeéa. Tbia being done, Siva refused to abandon
Kailisa and a great battle ensued; but aa the Lord of the Trident put his faith in
Ganega and worshipped him, Tripurdsura lost the Three Worlds and disappeared
into the Divine Essence, as had been promised him by the Supreme Ganeéa.

Ganeéa was usually represented seated, but in his most ancient images he was
more often figured standing. If sitting, he may have the pose called mahérdajalila
or ‘royal ease’, that is, with one of the knees lifted while the other ia bent before
him on the dsana; or he may be seated with crossed legs or with one leg pendant.
In Java, both of the legs are bent before him with the soles of the feet touching;
but the feet are neither human nor do they resemble absolutely those of an elephant.*
If he is standing, he is either straight (sama-bhanga) or may have two bends (dvi-
bhanga), three bends (tri-bhatiga), or be in dancing attitude.® He was represented
either without ornaments or as wearing many jewels, which in certain forms were
replaced by snakes or, as in Java, by skulls, Except when figured as a child, he was
usually imaged ‘pot-bellied’ (Lambodara) and bare to the waist, with a girdle
below the abdomen holding the garment that covered his hips and that varied
according to the country in which the image was conceived. In Nepal, it was often
a stiff-pleated skirt hanging to below the knees; in Chinese Turkestan, tight-fitting
trousers called paijdmas; at Tun-huang, full, many-folded trousers; in Indo-China,
the sampot ; but in India, he was either nude or wearing a dhoti, with sometimes a
tiger skin covering his hips.

1 vy, Pl. 20 (a). 3 ‘Analysis of the Ganoda-purins’, the Rev.

* Tandjur, 83, 94. Kindly translated by Dr. Stevenson, J.R.A.S,, vol. viii, 1845, p. 319.
Mr. Sylvain Lévi. - +y. Pi. 30. 5 y, Pl. 22 (a).

--- Page 47 ---
24 INDIA: GANESA IN ICONOGRAPHY FROM HINDU TEXTS AND IMAGES
before him was a pile of modakas, generally five in number, called patica-pinda.
Sometimes, instead of being imaged, the Five Brahman gods are represented by five
consecrated pebbles: Visnu, a black pebbie ; Siva, white quartz; Parvati, metallic
stone; Aditya, crystal; and Ganeéa, a red stone.’

If Ganesa was chosen as the principal household god, he was placed in the centre
of the altar with Visnu in the right-hand corner of the prescribed square, but at the
back, while Siva was in the corresponding left-hand corner. At the right-hand
corner, in front, was Parvati, while in the corresponding left-hand comer was
Aditya.

When invoking Ganega, the worshipper was to conceive of an island made of nine
precious stones, ... In that island are wish-fulfilling trees and creepers like manddra
and parijata... the horizon is illuminated by the rising sun and the moon. ‘Conceive
a parijata tree (one of the five trees of paradise) made of nine jewels... . Under the
tree, inside the primordial lotus, is an dsana seated upon which Maba-Ganapati
should be invoked inside a triangle, within a hexagon. . . .’?

‘The prayer used in the worship of Ganapati as principal household deity is the
following: ‘I adore the Elephant-faced Ganeéa, the Incomprehensible with sharp
tusks, three eyes and a capacious belly. . . . King of all Beings, the Eternal . . . blood
ted of huc, whose forehead is illuminated by the new moon,’ son of Siva, Remover
of all Difficulties.’

1 SIL, Saatri, p. 36. 2 "That god upon whow glorious forebaad the

+ Séraddtdaka-tantra. Kashmirian work of the new moon ig painted with the froth of the Geaga-
eleventh century, chap. xiii.

--- Page 48 ---
PLATE 12
, Gr EE Pad eo ak . Dae ! 1
Ly Mm, “- At afn »
st, Le i]
a 2 Rp
al . fet aes
¢ fae be
oe ri eel od aos ieee:
rar ” 5 4 re
yet RS ‘ts epee aN
rr a vf F 5
: § ~ ORES
. . of “ aa raied
“Ve NoA TS < The abhiseka of Gaja-Lakemi
Car
“( Deptt of Arta }
ae 3 ey
OUT SR NO 4

--- Page 49 ---
CHAPTER IIL

INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS

Ga is not to be found in sculpture before the Gupta period, when his

image appeared not only suddenly but in the classic form by which he may be
identified froin the fifth century up to the present day. It seems incredible that the
remarkable Bhumara sculptures of Ganeéa! should have been created independently,
without the inspiration of transitional forms; and yet no images of an ciephant-faced
deity have been discovered which could be placed unquestionably earlier than the
fifth century. ‘The explanation may possibly be found if we apply the same theory
to the ancient images of Ganeéa, as to certain archacological ruins in India that are
believed to have been reproduced from more ancient monuments which were con-
structed in impermanent material. In that case, the question would arise as to
whether the original form of the elephant-faced deity was conceived in north or in
south India.

Coomaraswamy as well aa Jouveau-Dubreuil are inclined to look upon an image
on one of the Amaravati railings,? aaid to be not later than the beginning of our era,
az a tranaitional form of Ganeda. The personage is crouching under the weight of
a long, serpent-shaped garland,’ upheld at intervals by other ganas. Only a part
of the body is left, but enough remains to show that the gana is short and of the
usual yaksa corpulence. The head is unquestionably that of an elephant: that is,
the eyes, ears, and the lower lip; but as the image has neither trunk nor tusk, it is
questionable whether it is really a prototype of Ganega. On the other hand, in Ceylon,
near Mihintale, a ettipa has been recently excavated on which there is a frieze of ganas
in the style of those of Amarivatt, and one of the ganas has the face of an elephant,
complete with trunk and tusk.* Paranavitane describes them as seemingly supporting
the superstructures of the vahalkadas or ‘frontispieces’ which usually decorate the
Sinhalese stipas. The elephant-faced gana is seated with attendant ganas on either
side facing him ; and from the fact that he has only one tusk, Paranavitane is of the
opinion that the image may be a prototype of the classical Ganeda. In that case it
would be the most ancient representation of Ganeda vet found, for this stdpa, called
Kantaka Cetinga, ia referred to in inscriptions of the first and second centuries.
Even if, as he believes, the sculptures are of a eomewhat later period, the image may
be unquestionably ascribed to the firat centuries of our era; but as it is the only one
of its kind and is in a group of other ganas, it could hardly have struck the popular
imagination deeply enough to inspire the forins of Ganega which appeared in India
in the Gupta period. Thus, seemingly without transitional stage, the most ancient
representations of Ganeda are the completed type: two or four-armed, holding the
axe, the broken tusk, a modaka (or is it a jambu?), or a bowl of cakes. ;

There were other elephant-headed euper-beings of lesser rank but possibly of still

1 y. p, 26 and v. PI. 3. of rupees’.

2 Amarivali, Burgess, pl. 30, no. 1. 6s, Pi. 22 (c). Kindoesr of Mr. S. Parane-

2 According to M. Jouvesu-Dubreuil, « ‘eack = vitane.

am 5g

--- Page 50 ---
30 INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS

waist, and like the Hindu goddesses, she has full breasts. The torso is nude except
for an ornate dhofi and is omamented with many jewels and bandeleties. One leg is
pendant, while the left is bent before her on the dsana, with the knee supported by
the left hand of a kneeling deity with the face of an elephant. She has four arms,
but they are all broken at the elbows, and it is therefore impossible to know what
attributes she held or even to conceive the position of her hands. ‘The upper part
of the head is remarkably modelled, especially where the skin is drawn over the
right tusk, a detail which shows that the sculptor had considerable skill. Unfor-
tunately the trunk is broken on a line with the tusk, but it is long enough to trace
ita turning to the left. The head-dress is a jewelled band above the forehead, behind
which is a mukuéa, and the ears are very large and flapping. This is the only feminine
form of Ganeéa known to the author in India.

As we have seen above, Ganeda is not only to be found at the extreme left of the
group of the Saptamatrkas, but was alao sometimes imaged in company with the
Navagrahas (the Nine Planets), where he was always placed at the extreme right,
next to the sun, Ravi. A carved Navagraha slab was found near the ancient mins
of Kankandighi,’ where the images of the Nine Planets are represented standing in
a row with Ganesa, at the right, wearing the high jata-mukuta of Siva and carrying
a roeary and battle-axe. These slabs have also been found in other districts, auch
as in the Orissan temples, where the Navagraha slabs were placed on the doorways
as architraves; while in south India they were found in the enclosed verandahs
around the main shrine. Only two Navagraha slabs have been found in Bengal with
the image of Ganeéa accompanying the Nine Planets; but it is not known where
these slabs were originally placed since there is no ancient temple in Bengal atill
standing. They were assuredly put in the temples as a protection from evil and
possibly to ensure prosperity to the temple’s founders.

At Ghatiydla, near Jodhpur, there is an ancient column which is of special
interest in that its inscription, dated a.p. 862, is the earliest dated inscription in
India in praise of the Elephant-faced god. On the top of the column are four images
of Ganeda seated back to back, facing the four cardinal points and possibly repre-
senting the dig-gajas or the four elephants supposed to support the heavens in the
four directions of the compass.

An unusual image of Ganeda waa found in the Tripura state in Bengal. The
colossal sculptures, which are said to date between the eleventh and twelfth cen-
turies, were carved in the perpendicular rock of the Unakoti hill, where a celebrated
Saiva sanctuary drew followers of Siva in the eighth and ninth centuries. At the
extreme left of the group is a seated, four-armed figure of Ganesa 30 feet high,?
while beside him are two standing elephant-headed attendants, having four tusks
and four and six arms. They carry none of the attributes of Ganeéa, but hold a
wheel, drum, hell, &c., and have conch-shells in their cars? and while Ganega, nude
to the waist, with a serpent belt holding in place a dhoti draped over his hips, is
represented with the usual corpulence, the two standing figures have most attenu-

ty. The Ind. Hist. Quarterly, vol. ix, no. i. Ive p. 16.

1 Arch. Surv. of 1., 1921-2, Pl. XXX, fig. a. :

--- Page 51 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS 31
ated waista, They are possibly local deities in some way associated with the Ganeda
cult. Unfortunately the colossal image of Ganeéa is too defaced to identify the
attributes in his four hands. ‘There are two statues at Hampi, one 20 and the other
30 feet high, while another colossal image of Ganapati is in the cave of Elephanta,

- where he is represented standing surrounded by a troup of ganas.

Ganesa was sometimes figured in attendance on other important deities besides
Siva, as for example on an ancient sculptured slab discovered at Sonarang, where
the Sun-god, Sarya,! is represented accompanied by Ganeda on the right and the
Saptamatrkas on the left. Above the Sun-god are the Navagrahas, who also figure
abovo Siva in the sculpture representing the Vaivéhika-marti.?

At Trichinopoly, as well as at Vallam, there are bas-reliefa of Ganeéa believed to
be of the seventh century. At Trichinopoly, placed near the Siva shrine, he is
figured standing; while at Vallam, he is seated wearing a karanda-mukuta and
balancing a modaka at the end of his trunk that is turned to the right, which is
most unusual.* None of the attributes in the four hands may he identified with the
exception of the lower right, which is possibly the broken tusk. He is seated in the
mahdrdjalila pose, that is, with the right knee lifted and the left leg bent and repos-
ing on the throne parallel with his body. It is an attitude seldom used for Ganeéa,
probably on account of the difficulty that it presented to the sculptor because of his
obesity. At any rate, this seventh-century bas-relief is probably the earliest repre-
sentation of Ganesa in the mahdrdjalild attitude.

Over the doorways of the Dakhan temples dedicated to Siva and above the
dedicatory block, was always placed an image of Ganeda, just as, in the Chalukyan
temples, Gaja-Laksmt* was the presiding goddess. In the fine temple of Balsane
in Khandesh, the east shrine contained the liaga, while over the doorwaye of the
south and north shrines were images,of Ganesa. At Patna, above the dedicatory
block and again above the image of Ganesa, is the groap of Saptamatrkas accom-
panied by Ganeéa, always at the left, and Siva at the right.

A sculpture of great intereat was discovered in Bengal, at Dhanuka, which is of
importance because it seems to indicate a transition stage from the classic Hindu
form of Ganeéa to that showing Mahayana Buddhist influence.* He is seated on a
lotus rising from the water which is vaguely indicated, while at the left is a lotus-
bud and at the right a small lotus-flower on which reposes hia right foot. His left
leg ia bent before him on the padmdsana, which is represented as in Mahayana
Buddhist images with the last row of lotus-petals tumed downward. The Ggure of
Ganeéa, however, is Hindu in style. He wears the high jaté-mukuta of Siva and many
jewels: necklace, bracelets, anklets, aa well as the Brahmanical thread. He has four
arms. In his upper right he holda a symbol which is unknown, as a rule, in India:
a large radish, attribute which is frequently met with on the Buddhist images of
Ganeda in Nepal and Tibet. As the pointed, broken tusk is sekiom found in the
hands of a Nepalese or Tibetan figure of Ganeda, and as he is never Tepresented in

2 2 of B.and B.S., Bbattasali, PI. LX ‘ Med. Temples of the Dakhaa, Cousens.
dv. p33. *y, PL 12.
¥ AS. de TL, J-Dubceuil, 1, Pi. XVI (6). © y. Pt. 16 (d)

--- Page 52 ---
28 INDIA: GANESA LN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS

At Badami, the ancient capital of the Chalukyan kings, there are three series of
Brahmanical rock-cut temples dating from the time of Pulikesi I. In the first of
these is the celebrated sculpture of Siva and Parvati as ardhandrisa, that is, figured
aa one deity, the right half Siva and the left side Parvatt.' Burgess explains that it
is ‘a single body personifying the principle of life and production in ita double aspect:
the male or active principle under the name of purusha and the female or passive,
under the name of prakrti’. It will be scen below that Ganeda was given this double
aspect in China and Japan but differently presented.’

Outside of the Saiva grotto-temple at Badami and to the left of the pillared
gallery is a spirited bas-relief of Siva dancing the ta@rdava, while at hia feet is a small
image of Ganeda, the only representation at Badami.* He is standing in a alightly
dancing pose. Behind his head is a halo, and he has four arms of which two are
broken. ‘Che normal left hand holds an attribute which may be a bowl of cakes,
while the upper right seems to follow the movement of the dance.

In the third of these cave-temples is an inscription dated a.p. 579. Fergusson is
of the opinion that if not contemporary, the other two were certainly executed
before a.p. 700; but although this image of Ganeda is thus the most ancient of all
those found in grotto-temples in India, it is later than the sculpture of Ganesa in
the Chinese rock-cut temple of Kung-hsien, which is dated a.v. 531.4

At Aihole, where the rock-cut temples are believed to be among the most ancient
in India, aa well as at Badami, Ganesa is often found in attendance on Siva when
dancing the taedava.* In thia case also he is figured standing in a slightly dancing
pose. At Aihole he is lifting a cake with his trunk from a bow! in his left hand.
This is possibly the earliest example of the attitude which later was adopted in
practically every country where he waa worshipped.

Jn the Dakhan the group of the Saptamatrks was in favour as early as the fifth
century; and the popularity of Ganeda associated with them is evident in all the
temples and rock-cut sanctuaries.

In the cave-temples of Ellora, which are believed to be slightly later than those
at Badamt, there are four important sculptures of the group of Ganesa and the
Seven Divine Mothers which were executed between the fifth and the tenth cen-
turies, The most remarkable of the groups is in the celebrated Ravana-ka khai,* where
each Divine Mother, four-armed, holds a child (with the exception of Maheévart) ;
and ina niche under each throne is the mount of the deity, but Ganega has a bowl
of cakes in the niche instead of the usual rat.

The image of Ganeda in the Ravana-ka khai’ is as powerful in conception as the
two Bhumara sculptures. The ears, trunk, and legs resemble those of the Ganesa
with the bells so closely that it seems possible, if they were of about the same period,
that they were executed by the same person. They may be compared as to dignity

> v. Pl 6 {a). * Cave Temples, Fergusson and Burgess,

2 y. PL 38. PI LXXI1, and E. of H.f., Rao, vol. i, part i,

Jy. PLB (8). . PLCXVIL.

“ y. p. 68 and PI. 36 (6). 7 y, Pl 8(a). Kindness of Mr. Codrington.

Sy. PLS ().

--- Page 53 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTLNGS 29
and strength of conception with the most remarkable statues of the deity, such as
the standing Cham image at Tourane’ and the Javanese seated figure of the Dieng
plateau.?

The other groupe of the Saptamatrkas are in the Ramedvara,’ in cave XXII,‘ and
in the Kailasa grotto-temple; but they are all three much damaged at the left of
the group, especially the images of the goddess Camunda and of Ganeéa, who is
next to her. In all the other representations of Ganeda in the various caves of the
rock-cut temples of Ellora he is imaged in attendance on Siva and is figured small
and unimportant.

In the Lankeavara of the Kailasa grotto-temple there is a curious statue which
seems to be unique of its kind. The goddess Uma (Parvati) stands between two
fires,” which indicates, according to Burgess, that she is doing ascetic penance.® She
is four-armed, and on her upper left hand she balances a small statue of Ganeéa,
while on her upper right is a linga- symbol of Siva. On the base of the atatue,
carved in relief, is a crocodile which is usually associated with the river goddess
Ganga,” who was mysteriously identified with Umd (Parvati) in ancient myths as
the mother of Ganesa.* The crocodile at the feet of Ganeda is of apecial interest, aa
will be seen below when we come to study a stela of Ganeéa found in Burma.®

The sane arrangement of deities was in favour in the Gujarat; and the Elephant-
faced god was held in such favour that he was even to be found in Jain grotto-
temples such as that at Chandor, where he was represented four-armed and seated
with one leg pendant.

In central India at Bhera-ghat near Jubbulpur, there is a circular temple dedi-
cated to the sixty-four Yoginfs (now called Gauri-Satikara) which is ascribed to
the tenth century and is believed to have been built by the powerful reigning family
of the Haihayas of Tripurt.

Tnside the temple is a most interesting bas-relief of Ganega,'? who is imaged four-
armed and standing in a slightly dancing pose. He ia nude and haa a serpent girdle.
On hia head is an ornate mukufa, and above his forehead that is high and flat like
the Nepalese images, he holds with his two upper arms a serpent, which is frequently
seen on images of Ganeda in Nepal but little known in India."! Kis trunk turns to
the left in an unusual curve and then tums to the right, holding a modaka in the
curled end.

The temple of the Gaurt-Sankara is surrounded by a circular arcade in which are
seated the sixty-four yoginis, unfortunately much mutilated. Among these images
is a Ganesani, a female form of Ganega."? Unlike Ganega, she has an attenuated

1 e, PL 25 (a). gaigiputra namo namah’. Kindly translated

1 y, Pt. 30(d). for the author by Mr. Louis Finot,

2 Klura Temples, Burgess, Pl. XXXIV, fig. 1. * PL. 24 (a).

* Idem, PL XXXIV, fig. ue. ® y. ‘The Havhayas of Tripuri and their Monu-

5 Possibly symbolizing the legend ; p. 60. menta’, Banerji, Mem. of the Arch. Surrey of India,

* Elura Temples, PI. XXX, fig. 2. No. 23, Pt. XXXIV.

7 Also the makara, M Idem. .There is another similar atatue at

* Klura Temples, p. 32, and v. stotra in Sanskrit’ Amarhaten Roed, Dakhan; Pi XLVII (4).

Texts of Bali, p. 36, line 17; ‘ Umdswam namayims =v. PL. 40.

--- Page 54 ---
26 INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS

greater antiquity which were known to both north and south India as well as to
Indo-China and to Chinese Turkestan,’ but they were as a rule never figured holding
attributes, at least, never those indicated above.

Probably one of the earliest images of Ganesa is a small terra-cotta bas-relief
which was found at the ancient site of Akra, N.W.F.P., where pre-Gupta objects aa
early as the second century have been discovered.” The figure of Ganesa, however,
is certainly not earlier than the fifth century, and those found at Parkarhar are
possibly still Ister. In both casea, the sinall burnt-clay images, which were probably
ex-votos, represent Ganeéa in a slightly dancing attitude, holding a round object
that may be a modaka.

An image of Ganesa which was found in the Fatehgarh district and ia believed to
have come originally from Sankisa Mound may be the most ancient representation
of the god in tone as yet discovered.? The slab, on which is carved the figure of
Ganega in high relief, is of the spotted atone peculiar to Mathura, and is not more
than twenty inches in height. Tt is summarily carved and strangely proportioned.
The bare head with huge ears ia abnormally large, while the nude torso ia too short
for the length of the arms. The legs seem to end at the knees, giving the impression
of a seated figure which, however, is not the case. The right arm is bent and grasps
8 pointed object which is probably the tusk. The left, also bent, holds the bow! of
cakes, The trunk, unlike the Indian representations, where it hangs straight and
only coils to the left to reach the bowl, turns almost at once to the left, and then
hangs straight to the bowl. The author knows of only one other example of this
unusual curve of the trunk in the image discovered at ‘Taol Phak Kin in Indo-China.*

A curious statue, which seems to be unique, was found at Bhumara and is attri-
buted to the fifth century.5 In spite of the fact that the symbols are missing, it is
undoubtedly an image of Ganesa, for although the trunk ia broken off at the end, it
turns to the left and can easily be conceived as lifting a cake from a bowl that should
be in the left hand, which ia also missing. The unusual feature of the figure is a
chain of round-shaped bells* which hangs across the breast, and there are bell
ornaments on the karanda head-dresa, bracelets, and anklets.

Coomaraswamy is of the opinion that it represents a yaksa-form of Ganeéa ;? and
he refers to an ancient Tibetan legend as possibly explaining the presence of the
bells: A doorkeeper or dudrapala of Vaisall, having died, waa reborn as a demon.
He begged the inhabitants of Vaidall to put up a statue to him in the form of a yakga
and to hang a bell around his neck 30 that whenever they were in danger from their
enemies he might sound the alarm by ringing the bell. This was done with great
pomp and ceremony, and the inhabitants of Vaisall were ever after protected from
their enemies by the foresight of the yaksa divirapala.®

It is not impossible that the above statue of Ganeda was destined to serve as

dye p.4l. + v. Pl. 25 (a).

*¥v, p. 19. A photograph of thin image was  * v. Pl. 3(b).
kindly ebown to the suthor by Mr. Codrington,of —* grelots.
the India Museum, London. 7 Yakes, Part J, pp. 7 and 14.

+. Pl 2 (a). * Tibetan Tales, trans. by Schiefner, p. 81.

--- Page 55 ---
INDLA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS 27
‘door-keeper’ of a temple at Bhumara. It will be seen below that in the Dakhan
he was entrusted with the guardianship of the entrances to temples at a very early
date; and it was also the custom, but somewhat later, in Nepal and weat Tibet, to
place his image over the main entrances to the vihdras as well aa to the temples.

Curiously enough, on certain images of Ganeéa as late as the tenth or twelfth
centuries,' hung around the trunk on a level with the tuska, is to he found a small
bell of the size and shape of those on the necklace of the Bhumara statue. From this,
it seems apparent that the above legend, or a similar one, was known aad was fairly
popular much later than the Gupta period; but there is, however, little evidence of
his having been looked upon as a yakga. Hia name does not appear on any of the
lists of yadsas, nor is he associated with them in puranic myths, It must be admitted,
however, that his short, thick-set, and corpulent body resembles the yaksa type.

Another Bhumara statue which Coomaraswamy believes to be of the sixth cen-

tury? ia the earliest known representation of Gancsa associated with his alti whom
he holds on the left hip.? He is nude and weara few jewels. On his forehead is a
simple jewelled band, while the devi, on the contrary, ix crowned with an ornate
head-dress. He is four-armed, holding in the upper right, an axe, and grasping a
broken tusk in his normal right hand. The upper left holds a sceptre and the normal
Jeft arin is around the saiti, His trunk turns to the left, lifting a cake from a bowl of
cakes held by the deri. It is not surprising to find an image of (ianega of the eixth
century holding the éakti for, as will be seen below, Saktism was in great favour in
India at that time; but the conception of this image, although of great simplicity,
is so complete in every detail, and so masterly in execution, that it ie difficult to
believe that it was created tout Pune fois.

Tn these two Bhumira sculptures, he seems to have been conceived aa independent
of any other deity or group of deities ; while in the Dakhan, as well as in the Chalukya
country between the fifth and eighth centuries, he was practically always represented
either in attendance on important gods or accompanying @ group of minor deities.

» — In the Chalukyan temples, Ganega was represented at the extreme left of the
Saptamatrkis, a group of Seven Divine Mothers‘ much in favour with the royal
families of the Chalukyas, who were said to be under their special guardianship.*

Few eculptures, nevertheless, of the Seven Divine Mothers are to be found in the
Chalukyan temples, while in the Kanarese temples, especially in that of Chenna
Kesava at Belur, there are three fine slaba representing the group. The beat pre-
served Chdlukyan representation of the Saptamatrkas is at Lakkandi in the temple
of Kiéivisvesvara, where they are all imaged with four arms holding their respective
attributes, and under each dsana iy the mount of the deity. Under the throne of
Ganega ia the rat.é

In the Chalukyan rock-cut temples, on the contrary, there are no examples of the
Seven Divine Mothers. Ganeéa is figured in attendance on Siva and never indepen-
dently of a Siva shrine.

1 y. Pl 5 (a) and (6). 8 y. The Chalukyan Arch. in the Kan. Dial,
2 Bof the B.M of PA, vol. xxvi, no. 154, p.30. Cousens.
* y. Pl 4 (a). tv. p. 20. ® Idem, Pl. LXXIL.

--- Page 56 ---
32 INDIA: GANESA IN HLNDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS

India or elsewhere carrying both the radish and the broken tusk, it seems probable,

as suggested above, that the radish is a misinterpretation of the Hindu symbol of

the tusk, often badly executed.

In the Munshiganj district, Dacca, a stela of the eleventh or twelfth century was

found where Ganega is represented in a form seldom met with outside of Nepal.

He has five heads, but the arrangement of the heads in a circle differs again from the

Nepalese Heramba? in that while the central head is normal in size, the two heads
on either side are much smaller, their trunks, which hang over the shoulders, barely
reaching to the breasts. Another difference is that the fifth head of the Nepalese
Heramba is always on top. Above the image of Heramba is a group of four one-
headed, two-armed Gancéaa, with (slightly lower down, ) another Ganega on either side
which completes the group of seven, counting the Heramba. Like the Nepalese
form, he is seated on a lion and haa ten arms holding the usual symbols; but unlike
the Heramba in Nepal, his forehead ia broad and the eves on the central head,
placed far apart, are set obliquely with a protuberance between them euch as will
be met with in Indo-China.‘ At Negapatam, there is a remarkable bronze statue in
one of the temples® which more closely followa the Nepalese form, the fifth head
being on top; but the heads, instead of being long and narrow aa in Nepal, follow the
usual south Indian type. He is seated on a stylized lion. At Gol, Dacca, a stela was
discovered where Ganesa in dancing pose’ ix figured, on the contrary, as in Nepal,
with the head long and narrow, but with this difference—that the bridge of the nose
is well defined and the trunk seems to be the prolongation of the nose. The author
knows of no other example of this aspect of the trunk outside of Borneo,’ nor is she
able to explain the presence of this strange and unique figure of Ganega in India.

Another interesting and ancient sculpture of Ganeéa was found in the Chamba

state near the Balenl pass, representing him under an aspect which is perhaps unique.
A sanctuary was discovered, dedicated to the serpent god Satahr, popularly wor-
shipped as ‘Lord of the Cattle’, where offerings are still placed before his shrine.
Beside the slab of the Naga was found a defaced image of Ganeéa, who was called
by the worshippers ‘gedlu’ or ‘Cowherd’ of the Naga,® and many ex-votos testified
to his popularity. This humble aspect was possibly based on an ancient legend
where Brahma, believing the ten-necked Ravana to be a negligible deity, once
promised him, on account of hia austerities, that he should never be conquered by
ged or super-man, Ravana, now practically invulnerable, set out to subjugate the
gods and the Three Worlds. According to one of the versions, when Ravana sub-
jugated Ganeda, he forced him to work for him as a cowherd. From a simple cowherd,
Ganeéa became * Protector of Cowherds’ when certain sects, aa we have seen above,
set up his worship as a human manifestation of Krisna, ‘Protector of the Gopas and
Gopis’ (cowherds). As a matter of fact, it should not be surprising to find Ganega

. Pl. 4 (6). v. FE. I. School of M. Scuipt., by * SIL, Sastri, fig. 112.
Banerji, Pl. LX (a). © EL. School of M. Sculptwre, Banerji, Pl. LX

2 Five-headed form of Gapeds. ().

? Form describal in the Mudgala-purdna. 7 y, PL 22d).

«y. PI, 28 (6). * Indian Serpent Lore, Vogel, p. 253.

--- Page 57 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS 3
associated with the cowherds, since one of the many epithets of Siva was ‘Protector
of Cowherds’; and Rudra, the Vedic form of his father, Siva, was appealed to both
as ‘Protector’ and ‘Destroyer of Cowherds’.

Ganeéa is seldom to be found in @ triad with other deities of more or leas equal
rank, but a stone sculpture of the eighth century,' now in the University Museum of
Philadelphia, shows Ganeda to the right of a goddeas with Kuvera at her left.
According to Coomaraswamy, the goddeas is S-Lakemt receiving the abhtseka,
possibly because of the round-shaped symbols which ehe holds high above her head
with her upper arms. The image is 20 defaced that they might easily be taken for
vases out of which water should be pouring; but is it usual for Sri-Lakgmi to per-
form, herself, the abhiseka? The author has been unable to find a representation
of the ‘baptism’ other than that of the Gaja-Laksmi group, that is, with the two
elephants pouring the lustring waters over the goddess from vases held in their
trunks.” A triad found in Java with Ganeéa in the group* may show that the goddess
is no other than Guhyeévari; but as the Javanese triad ia also badly broken, both
of the two goddesses are difficult to identify.

In north-cast India, especially in Bengal, stone sculptures have been found repre-
senting, according to Bhattaéali, the VaitdAtka-mirti or marriage of Siva and
Parvati, and the Sadyojdia called the ‘Mother and Child’, which is believed by bim
to represent the birth of Ganesa.

In the group of the Vaindsika-marti,* Siva and Parvati are represented in the
centre, Siva wears the high jatd-mukufa and has four arms. He carries the trident
in his upper right, while witb his normal right he holds the right hand of Parvatt,
which thus indicates the pdnigrahana or marriage observance.> Sometimes, however,
this is only indicated, as in the case where Parvati bolds a casket* in her right hand
and a mirror in her left, objecta which are still carried by Hindu brides at the time
of their marriage. The two gods are represented under the terraced roof of a temple
with the Nine Planets figured above their heads, while below them, to the left
of Parvati, is a small image of Ganeda in a niche. He is four-armed, and his trunk
is lifting cakes from the bowl in his normal left hand. To the right, in a correspond-
ing niche, is his brother, Karttikeya.

The Sadyojata (child just born) is a very common group in north Bengal and was
evidently a favourite one with the inhabitante of the Varendra or ancient Rarh in
Bengal. The aculptures have not been found in temples but in deserted places, often
under banyan treea, and many were discovered in the ruins of ancient Gaur.

The goddess Parvati is represented lying on her left side. The right hand supporta
her head and the left holds a lotus. Beside her is a small child on a lotus-fiower,
which indicates divine birth. Above her is a linga aa well aa two small images of
Ganeéa and Karttikeya. The presence of the child lying beside her seems to be
explained by a puranic myth in the following manner: When Parvats, the divine

1 Yokes, Coomarsowamy, part ii, Pl. 8, p. 73. ¢ ¥. Pl. 8 (c). Tho emall imego of Ganeée at

9 Eastern Art, Jan. 1929; Karly Indian Icono- their foet, in Cave XXI ot Ellors, is mort anusaal.
graphy, Coomareewanny. * 1. of Bond B.S., Bhettesali, Pi, XLVI.

ay. p. 59. “ y, PL. 6 (a).

ma r

--- Page 58 ---
uM INDIA: GANFSA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS

daughter of the Mountain, came to the Asaembly of Gods where she was to choose
a husband, Siva, in order to test her, took on the form of a amall babe and was
discovered asleep on her lap. The goddess, in decp meditation, perceived that the
child was, in reality, the great god Siva and, pressing him to her breast, she left the
Assembly of Gods.!

It is interesting to note here that in the ancient Harveat Festival ceremonics to
Ganeéa and Gauri (Parvati), the goddeas was believed to be secretly followed by
Siva, who hid under the outer folds of her sdri. In the ceremonies, he was repre-
sented by a cocoa-nut filled with Tice.”

Jn the Sadyojita group the * Mother and Child’ may represent Parvati and Siva,
and this seems possible since the presence of the liga indicates a Saiva cult; and
how, otherwise, explain the almost invariable presence of Ganeda and Karttikeya
beside the Mother and Child? Unfortunately, no inscriptions have been found to
support Bhattadali’s theory that it represents the birth of Ganesa, since in the group
he is represented as a child while Karttikeya is imaged fully grown?

The above myth, however, does not correspond with any of the puranic accounts
of the creation of the Flephant-faced god; and if it really represents the birth of
Ganedga, it is probably a purely local conception. As a matter of fact, the Sadyojata
group seema only to have been found in Bengal.

Parvat! holding the child Ganeda on her tap is practically never found either in
stone sculptures or in Kangra miniatures, for although Ganeda and Karttikeya were
often represented with Parvati, it is invariably Kairttikeya who is seated on her lap
while Ganeda is playing beside her. A very unusual bronze from north India,
belonging to the Prince zur Lippe, represents Cuneda, however, as being held on
her uplifted right knee. He wears simple jaté-mukuta, and on his forehead is the
crescent moon. The right tusk is broken and he has a serpent necklace. He is four-
armed; but the only aymbol that can be identified is o bowl in the normal right
hand. A late porcelain group, which, as far aa the author knows, is unique, repre-
sents Ganega in the arms of Parvati, who ia seated on the left knee of Siva.

The Rajput artists were fond of depicting scenes of the early childhood of Ganoda.
A miniature of the Kangra school, belonging to the Indian Museum, represents Siva
aa Destroyer, seated in a grotto on a tiger-skin.* Behind him ia the child Ganedéa
peering over his shoulder. To his right, Parvati is seated holding Karttikeya.
Nandi the bull and Ganeda’s mount, the rat, are in attendance. Below are groups of
adoring gods, rishis, and fakirs.

Another Kangr& miniature, also belonging to the Indian Museum, represents
Siva in hia form of Bhateévara (Lord of Ghosts) seated on a tiger-skin on a place of
cremation (for in this form he is believed to frequent cemeteries). Around his neck
is a serpent necklace. His hair is matted, and above his forehead with its third eye,
ia a crescent moon. He is naked to the waist, and his body ia smeared with ashes
gathered from funeral pyres. Beside him is Parvati holding Karttikeya while

 Lof B.and BS., Bhattatali, p. 138, Pl. LIM 3 J. of B. and B.S., Bhattasali, p. 138, and v.
and LV. Brokmé-pwrina, chap. xxxviii, p. 127.

1 Harvest Festivals of 0. and G., Gupte. + y, PL 9 (d).

--- Page 59 ---
INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS 3s
standing to the right, is the child Ganeda, four armed, who is grasping with his two
normal hands the end of a garland of human skulla which Siva, in this form, usually
wears. Siva is atringing the heads while Karttikeya is handing him a head from a *
pile of human skulls which are yet to be strung.

A Rajput drawing owned by the Boston Muscum of Fine Arte representa Siva as
Gangd-dhara, *Upholder of the Gangea’.? He is in his form of Maha-yogi: naked to
the waist, smeared with ashes, a serpent around his neck, and his matted hair drawn
up in a high chignon. He is seated on a tiger-skin on the border of a cliff with
Parvati to the left. Out of his head-dress flowa the river Gangea; and Ganega and
Karttikeya, at his right, are holding out vessels to collect the sacred water. Underneath
the cliff is the Saint Bhagiratha. According to puranic myth, the heavenly goddess
Gangé-Bhattérika was drawn down againat her will from the heavens by the prayers
of the Saint Bhagiratha, who had remained for a whole year with upraised arms,
refusing all nourishment and standing continually on one toe. In great wrath at
being drawn down to earth, she warmed the gods of the great disaster that would
result from the shock of her fall; but Siva ‘caught the river on his brow and checked
ita course with his matted hair’, hence his name: Upholder of the Ganges.

It is interesting to note here that the water-veasel (kalasa) which is sometimes
carried by Gayesa’ is believed to contain, according to the Mahdnirvana-tantra, the
sacred water collected from the river Ganga. Ganeéa is represented in paintings rather
than in sculptures when carrying the alaéa; but there is a mall bronze image in the
British Museum where he holds the water-veasel in his trunk.

In the Kangra paintings Ganeda was, aaa rule, represented in attendance on Siva ;
but there is a Rajput miniature in the British Muacum where Siva is only indicated
by his mount, the bull, beside which is Ganeéa, while Parvatt is seated under a tree
with Karttikeya beaide her.‘ Gancda was rarely represented in the Kangré miniatures
as an independent deity, but in the Bibliothéque Nationale there is a Rajput minia-
ture of the eighteenth century in a scroll manuscript of the Bhagavata-purdna® where
he is represented without other deities. He is seated on a throne and is four-armed.
He wears a crown, and his head is painted red, but his ears and neck are pink, giving
the impression that the elephant-face is a mask. Behind his head is a 4tradcabra.
To the right, seated on a lotus, is a female playing on a vind ; and to the left, another
female attendant is atanding, holding a fly-whisk. There is a Kangri miniature,
also in the British Museum, representing Ganeéa seated with a female attendant on
either side of his throne, while in the India Museum of London there is a plaster
cast from a eeventeenth-century mould where he is flanked on both sides by female
attendanta. Are these two attendants to he looked upon as his consorts, Buddhi and
Siddhi ?

According to ancient tradition, Ganeéa was a Brabmacarin, that is, an unmarried
deity ; but legend gave him two consorta, pereonifications of Wisdom (Buddhi) and
Success (Siddhi). In ancient representations he was never figured with his two

1 y. FL. 9 (a). 4 y. Pi. 10 (6).
4 y. PL 20 (a). $y. Pi.
9 v. Pl. 1 (a).

--- Page 60 ---
36 INDIA: GANESA IN HINDU SCULPTURES AND PAINTINGS
consorts; but at an early epoch, as will be seen below, he was imaged with a devi
seated beside him sometimes called Laksml.' In this form, he was worshipped by
thoee followers of the Vamdcdra* doctrine who admitted ‘wine and women’ in their
ceremonies? The Ganapatys sect conceived five esoteric forms of Ganesa, called
Sakti-Ganapati; and Saktism evolved a complicated doctrine in which eight per-
sonifications of Success or the Asta-Siddhis* were to be worshipped as being one devi,
the dakts of Ganeda.

1 vy, PL 3(a). 4 Shakti and Shadta, Sir J. Woodroffe, p. 89.

1 That ia: ‘left-handed’. ‘yp. 12.

--- Page 61 ---
CHAPTER IV
INDIA, NEPAL, CHINESE TURKESTAN, TIBET: GANESA IN
BUDDHISM
Te. popularity of Gageds as Siddhidata, Beatower of Success, was not confined
to the Brahman cult, for his adoration was taken over by the Buddhists, who
claimed that a mystic mantra in praise of Ganega, called the Ganapati-hrdaya,' was
disclosed to Ananda by the Buddha himeelf at Rajagrha. They personified the
mantra in the form of a goddess named Ganapatibrdaya, who, according to Bhatta-
charyya,? was probably looked upon aa the dakti of Ganeéa. The mantra, however,
refers only to Ganega and contains a addhana to be used in hig invocation, when he
is to be conceived aa being red of hue, standing in a dancing attitude, as having
twelve arms holding Tantric symbols, and as possessed of a third eye as well as of
both his tusks.

In a Nepalese leaf-book of the fifteenth century there is a miniature of Ganeda
as described above, with the sddhana to be used in his invocation.” The priest, after
contemplating this image (having previously prepared himself for the ceremony
by fasting &c.), should recite the Ganapati-Ardaya-manira which begins: Namo
Bhagavate Aryaganapatihrdaydya ; and after invoking (?aneéa, he should put before
him the desiderata of hia client. The mantra was believed to be most powerful, and
when recited by the pricat or worn aa an amulet waa said to be infallible in obtaining
all that was desired.

There ia, however, no mention of Ganeéa in the Nepalese Buddhist leaf-book of
the beginning of the eleventh century which ia in the Cambridge University Library,
nor is he represented in the miniatures of the celcbrated Buddhist leaf-book of about
this period which is in the library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. We know, never-
theless, that he was taken over by the Buddhists before this time.

His image may be found on Buddhist sculptures of the late Gupta period such as
at Sémnath, where, on a small fragment representing the death of the Buddha, he ia
figured on his rat among the deities assisting at the parinirudna of the Master.‘ Hoe
may not be considered, however, as a Buddhist deity in this instance, since bo is
figured in # group with his brother, Karttikeya, the Navagrahas, end other Brahman
deities ; but it is of special intereat to find him in this Buddhist sculpture because it
furnishes a transition stage between hie Hindu and Buddhist representations.

We find him in later Buddhist art in India, not only in the form of the Buddhist
god Vinayaka, but in a Hindu demon form also called Vindyaka. In the later role
he was not represented in India aa in Nepal and Tibet, under the feet of an important
deity, but as crouching on all four, under the lotus throne of a fighting Buddhist
divinity. Stone images have been found in Bengal where Ganeda, the Hindu demon,
is thus figured under the padmésana of the Buddhist goddess Bhykut!-Tara’ aa well ag

1 Nepalese Buddhist Literature, Mitre, p. 89. * Leonographie Buddhique del Inde, A. Foucher,

2° LBL, p. 157. vol. i, fig. 30.
5 y, PLL (8). 5 1. of B. ond B.S., Bhatasali, Pl. XIX.

--- Page 62 ---
38 INDIA, NEPAL, CHINESE TURKFESTAN, TIBET:
under the lotus throne of Parpaéavari.! In this latter case he is prostrate, holding both
the sword and shield, and is evidently to be conceived as vanquished by the goddess.

As the Buddhist god, Vinayaka, he was represented in a dancing attitude and is
rarely met with except in paintings. This form is called Nytta-Ganapati and was
not only popular in north India but was adopted in Nepal and found its way
into Tibet.

In India, the Nrtta-Ganapati if painted is to be conceived as yellow in colour. Ho
is figured with the right leg bent with the foot on the lotus throne; while the left,
somewhat more bent, holds the foot in the air in a dancing attitude. The Hindu
form haa usually four arms but may have as many as eight, carrying the usual
aymbols—tusk, bowl of cakes, lasso, elephant goad, &c.—but having one arm free
to follow the movement of the dance.

In Nepal, on the contrary, the Nytta-Ganapati is to be conceived as red of hue.?
He docs not stand directly on the lotua throne but on his tdhana, the rat, green in
colour and holding in its mouth a cinéémani. The right leg is represented as in the
Indian form, while the left, on the contrary, is bent almost double, the foot touching
the serpent girdle. He has a third eye and wears a crown omamented with cin-
tamanis. His usual form haa twelve arms and carries Tantric symbols as weil as the
eymbols that are held by the Hindu form, with the two following exceptions. The
Nepalese form seldom carries the tusk but in its place is usually figured a radish,
possibly, as suggested above, through a misinterpretation of the Hindu symbol.
The second exception is the modaka, which, as we have also said above, is replaced
by a cinéémani in Nepal; and instead of wearing a garland of skulls, in this Tantric
form like the dharmapalas he has a garland of cintémanis falling to the knees.

The Nytta-Ganapati is represented in a Nepalese painting surrounded by four
Vinayakas,> making an assembly of five deities, which fact seems to indicate a
Buddhist rather than a Brahman group for two reasons: first, because five was 6
favourite number with the Mahdyanists for grouping their gods; secondly, because
each deity is of a different colour which was invariably the case in a group of five
deities of Mab’yana Buddhism. There is 2 Buddhist temple in Nepal dedicated to
the Five Ganapatis, where possibly the fifth and central figure is Sarya-Vindyaka,
If, however, the miniature referred to above ia Brahmanic, the central figure may be
Ganapati-Vinayaka, surrounded by four manifestations of himeelf.

It is not known at what date the worship of Ganeéa was first introduced into
Nepal, Lut as referred to above, there is a legend to the effect that the daughter of
the Buddhist king Agoka founded a temple in Nepal which waa dedicated to him.‘
Near Zimpi-Taudu there is an ancient Nepalese temple dedicated to Ganeda® in
which there are stelas with inscriptions dating from the eighth to the tenth centuries;
but the actual date of the foundation of the temple is unfortunately unknown. It
is safe to say, nevertheless, that already by the tenth century the popularity of
Ganega was gaining ground in Nepal as in India; and that Vindyaka, ‘Remover of

' 1. of B. and B.S., Pl. XXIII (a) and (6). Siddhi-Vindyaka, Aéoka-Viniyaks.
+ ¥. PL. 20 (a). * S11, Sestri, p. 168.
* Called: Rekta-Vinkyaka, Candra-Viniyaka, — * Le Népal, Bylvain Lévi, vol. II, p. 345.

--- Page 63 ---
GANESA IN BUDDHISM 39
Obstacles’, had been incorporated into the Nepaleac pantheon at an early date,
drawing worshippers from among Brahmans and Buddhists alike, and finding favour
with the humble as well as with the Great Ones of Nepal.

The Nepalese Buddhists had their own legends with regard to the FElephant-faced
god and claimed that he manifested himself to a mythical king, Vikramajit by
name, to whom he brought untold blessings, mostly in the form of riches.

None of the Hindu legends in regard to the creation of Ganeda was accepted by
the Nepalese. Neither Siva nor Parvati waa believed to have participated in his
advent, for, of his own free will, he became visible in @ ray of sunshine; hence his
name Strya-Vindyeka. The Brahmans claimed that he appeared in this form in
order to bring to life the son of a Brahman.!

Little is known, however, in regard to the representation of Sarya-Vindyaka, who
was always worshipped unaccompanied by other gods like the esoteric images of
Ganeda in India. It is possible that thia form was Tantric, for the ceremonica in
connexion with his worship, that is, offerings of coagulated blood and bloody
sacrifices, would indicate Tantric ritea; but in the principal sanctuary of a temple
dedicated to Strya-Vinayaka there is an image of Ganapati where nothing indicates
a Tantric form, should this be his actual manifestation as Surya-Vinayaka. He ia
represented in the classic fashion, with one head and four arms, holding an are, bowl
of cakes, broken tusk, and rosary, and is standing on the rat.

The Nepalese imagea of Ganapati, with the exception of his Heramba form, are
one-headed, and the elephant face has this particularity in Nepal that it is long and
narrow and rather flat with the eyes aet obliquely. There is often the third eye or
else, especially if the image belongs to the Hindu cult, a Saiva (ilaka of three hori-
zontal lines. In fact, Ganega may have both the third eye and thefilaka. He Poasesscs
many aris, ranging from four to eixteen, and may be represented seated, but is
more often standing, and aaa rule, on the rat. He may wear a curious pleated skirt
with ornate hangings.”

At Katmandu there are two unusual stone statues of Ganeéa with a rat under
each foot.* Both images are one-headed but one has four, whereas the other bas
sixteen, hands, and both embrace the 4akti with the nomnai left arm.

Ganeda wearing the serpent girdle and serpent Brahmanical thread is common to
all countries where he is worshipped ; but Ganesa holding the serpent-god Sega over
his head like Siva in one of his dancing forms as Nataraja,‘ with few exceptions is
known only to Nepal.® In both cases the head of the serpent is grasped in the upper
right hanct and the tail in the upper left.

Doubtlesa the Nepalese were acquainted with the north India dancing form of
Siva holding the ndga as a canopy over his head; and it is therefore not surprising
to find the serpent Sega adopted in Nepal for certain representations of Ganega in
dancing attitude. As Siva’s son, he was sometimes given the jewelled head-dress
of Siva, the kiritasnukula as well aa the crescent-moon-tilaka, while in Tibet and

1 Le Népal, Sylvain Lévi, vol. i, p. 384. ‘11 of B.and B.S., Bhattasali, Pl. XLV.
2 ¥. PL 34 (e). * There is one auch statue in the Gauri-Saakare
2 y. PL IT (eh. temple near Jubbulpur, v. p. 29, n. 10,

--- Page 64 ---
40 INDIA, NEPAL, CHINESE TURKESTAN, TIBET:

Mongolia he sometimes carried Siva’s symbol, the trident. In Java, as will be seen
below, Ganesa was imaged with the skull ormaments of Siva as Destroyer. In fact,
in all countries where he has been worshipped, images of Ganeéa have been found
in which he is identified with his father Siva.

Herambza, on his lion mount, was perhaps the most popular form of Ganesa in
Nepal, where he was represented with ten arms, and as a rule, embracing his éakti.!
The Heramba form always has five heads, which are either arranged as in India in
two tiers —-one head above the central head which has a head on either side and one
at the back—or an arrangement of heads in three tiers, which form is only found in
Nepal—a head on either side of the central head which has a head above it and still
another above the head on the second tier. The wihana of Heramba is the lion; but
an unusual image of Heramba was found at Bhatgaon, dated a.p. 1695,? which has
a rat instead of a lion for vikana, while a bronze image now in the Museum fur
Vélkerkunde in Munich has a rat under one foot and a lion under the other.*

A Heramba form of Ganega found in Nepalese paintings conforms with various
Mahayana- Buddhist representations of deities, and was popular with the Brahmans
as well as with the Buddhists in Nepal. Ganapati is figured as usual with five heada,
of which the central head, as well as the body, arms, and legs, like the Buddhist
deity Avalokiteévara, is white.* The head to the right is blue; to the left, yellow;
above the central head, green; and the top head is red. On the forehead of each
head is a third eye, on both sides of which is the Saiva tilaka, that is, three horizontal
lines; and one head wears the five-leafed crown. He has twelve arms. The normal
left hand balances a bowl of cakes under the trunk, while the normal right grasps a
tuak-shaped radish, holding it as if about to put it in the place of the missing tusk.
All the other aymbols are Tantric. He steps to the right like the dharmapala of
Mahayana Buddhism, and under each foot is a rat.

Ganeéa has a more tranquil aspect in Nepal when represented as a drarapdla
guarding the entrance to Buddhist monasteries. He always has for vis-d-vis, to the
right, the Tibetan god Mahakala whose worship was brought into Nepal by the
leamed Bandhudatta, contemporary of Hsiian-tsang.® Although the ‘Great Black
One’ waa the most popular deity in Tibet, he never drew worshippers to any extent
in Nepal where his image is rarely met with except in this role of guardian of the
monasteries. ®

In north India, aa well as in Chinese Turkestan, Ganeda was never adopted as
dvarapala. ‘The entrance to the Buddhist monasteries was guarded by Mahakdla
to the right and the Yaksi Hariti to the left. Although Gancéa was thus replaced
by Hariti as guardian of vihdras in Chinese Turkestan, he waa, nevertheless, moat
popular in Khotaa.’ In fact, he drew worshippers in all the Buddhist templea in
northern Asia that had fallen under the influence of Mahiyana Buddhism.

Vv. SLL, Sastei, fig. 112. © In the Nepalese Harvest Festivala, Parvati

® Mentioned in the list of forma of Ganeéa in (Kamiri) in represented by « young girl accom-
Nepal. Kindnem: of His Holiness Gururéj K. panied by two boys, representing Gapeés and
Barman. Mahakils. Nipal, by Okifieid.

sy. PL 19, * v. Pl. 21 (a). 7 Ancient Khotan, Sir Aurel Stein, pp. 251 and

* Le Népol, Sylvain Lévi, vol. 1, p. 384. 431.

--- Page 65 ---
GANESA IN BUDDHISM om

Bronze tablets and painted wooden panels were discovered in the sand near the
stipa of Endere, representing Ganeéa either in the classic Indian form, or, as on one
of the painted panels, with certain characteristics peculiar to Chinese Turkestan.!
In the latter case he is represented four-armed and wears a tiger-skin dhoti over
tight-fitting trousers (paijdma) which are dark brown in colour. According to Sir
Aurel Stein” he is seated on a cushion ; but an interesting feature of this painting is
that the cushion seems to be, in reality, another pair of legs.? In Japan, as will be
acen below, there is a four-armed, four-legged form of Ganeéa worshipped in secret
by the esoteric sects, which is looked upon as a fusion of the ‘double form’ called
Kangi-ten.‘ Possibly there is some such idea in this painted panel.

His face is yellow in colour but his body, bare to the waist, is pink outlined in red.
This is contrary to the Indian Dvi-debaka, who, as seen above, haa the face red and
the body yellow. On some of the painted panela in Chinese Turkestan, however, he
has both the face and body yellow. He usually wears a crown but practically never
a mukuta, and may have a nimbus. The head is always elightly turned to the right,
but-the trunk turns to the left aa in the painted panel found in the ruins of the Endere
stipe.’ The trunk, however, in the painting at Endere, does not hang straight aa in
the usual representation of Ganeda but turns to the left almost at once and then
hangs downward and turna outward. His normal right hand holds a bowl of cakes
in front of him, but the trunk is not lifting a cake from the how! as in the classic
Indian forms. The upper right arm carries a kind of spear-shaped chedikd ;* the
upper left grasps what was probably the axe, while the normal left balances a
radish (white) at his breast. He wears many jewels: necklace, bracelets, and ankleta.

In the cave temples of Bazaklik there are several freecos in which Ganeda ia figured
seated, with six arms, holding the sun and moon, « banner, and a round-shaped
object against his breast which may be the modaka. He wears many jewels, and
behind his head is a nimbus.”

The interesting feature of these frescos of Ganesa is that the elephant-face doea
not follow the usual representations of the god, for the trunk is a short prolongation
of the nose and the end of the trunk somewhat resemblea the snout of a wild boar.
The image, however, seems to be Ganega rather than Vardha for two reasons: firat,
because, in this same form, he is found again in cave No. 32 in company with his
brother, Karttikeya; and in cave No. 7 in a group with Siva, Karttikeya, and
Mabakila. Second, because in these same freacos of Bazaklik, a deity is represented
with the head of a wild boar which in no way resemblea the head of the above six-
armed deity. The boar-headed deity is found in cave No. 9," where two drurapdalas
guarding the entrance to the temple are figured about to tread on animal-headed
demons. On one side, the parisada has the head of a wild boar; on the opposite side,
the demon has the head of an elephant. If one compares the heads of the two

1 vy. Pl 35. * Which Prof. A. Foucher believes to have (like

> Ancient Khotaw, p. 442. Matijusri’a aword) a eymbolic meaning.

* vp. 85. yy. Fig. $ and Allbuddh. Kultat. Chin. Turk.
“vp. gl. estan, Grunwedel, p. 234, fig. 510.

Sv, Ancient Khoton, Pl. LXXVIL, vol. ii. * Chotacho, von Le Coq, p. 32.

me Q

--- Page 66 ---
42 INDIA, NEPAL, CHINESE TURKESTAN, TIBET:
parigadas with that of the six-armed deity, it will be found that the elephant-head
of the demon resembles more closely that of the deity in the group with Karttikeya
than does the boar-head of the other pdrisada. At any rate, if the deity is Varaha
and not Ganeéa, the presence of the boar-headed god in company with Siva and

Karttikeya would be most unusual.

The popularity of Ganega in Nepal and Chinese Turkestan did not follow him to
Tibet. His worship as an important deity was never yet up by the Tibetans; and
although he may have had a certain
a following, he was never enrolled in
AANA @ Xa! the Tibetan pantheon of Mahayana
Ik @ b OED, Buddhism. Even in west Tibet,
AS (ZA = where images of the Elephant-faced

IN X “Ay (eg god are often met with, he was not

| \ rN aS looked upon as an ubject of worship

i £? ae Ss > x but rather as a powerful guardian

be od IN against demons and other evil spirits.

% SEX Ni ES a In spite of this reputation, he was not

rit ed ¥ ("2 entrusted, as in Nepal, with the guard-
a . oF Wa ing of the monasteries; but his image
Ke wo, N was placed, however,as guardian above
Y/ 44 fi ene the main entrance to Tibetan temples,
fi an ee (>) Dy both Buddhist and Brabmanic.
W an 74 a>; At Nirmand, an image of Ganeda
AY here i 5 over the door guards the entrance to
b pew a Hindu temple dedicated to Siva in
COO bed A linga form, while near the famous
Fig. 4. Ganega or Variha? Gelugpa monastery at Tabo, in a
Buddhist temple dedicated to the
Dhyani-Buddha Vairocana, there is a statue of Ganesga beside the main sanctuary
which Francke believes to bave been originally placed above the entrance door.
Ganeda is here represented two-armed, holding the bowl of cakes in the left band.
The trunk turns to the right, but the right hand is broken.?

In another Mahayana Buddhist temple at Tabo* he is imaged above the wooden
doors which are elaborately carved with Buddhist deities; and at a temple of Lha-
khang there is a painting of Ganega on the wall above the doors of the principal
entrance.*

But if Ganega was accorded the role of drarapala in Indian Tibet, in Tibet proper
he was degraded to the point of being trodden under foot by his former vis-d-vis
when guarding the Nepalese temples, that is, Mahakala, the most popular dharmapala
in Tibet. In thig prostrate form, Ganega was known to the Tibetans as the Hindu
demon Vinayaka, enemy of the Faith and hence to be crushed by the ‘Defender of
the Law’, the Great Black One.

1 Antig. 1.7, Francke, vol. i, p. 6 * Idem, p. 42.
* Idem, Pl. XVII aad p. 38. * Idem, p. 91.

--- Page 67 ---
GANESA IN BUDDHISM 43

When lying under the foet of Mahakala he was usually represented without a
crown but wearing a complicated and ormate costume and many jewels. He had
rarely more than two arms and might hold a bowl in his right hand while his left
in in tarjani-mudra.

The Tibetans conceived a female aa well asa male form of Ganeéa. In the Pantheon
of the Techangicha Hutuktu there is reference not only to a single form of Ganapati
under the feet of Mahakdla but to a group where Wahdédla crushes an image of
Ganapati under each foot, one male and the other female.’ This is consistent with
the Tibetan conception of their deities, for as a dharmapdla was believed to be more
powerful when manifesting with his feminine counterpart or éakti, 90 would the
triumph of Mahakala over the Hindu demon be more complete with one foot
crushing the female and the other the male form of Ganapati. Tibet was not the
only country to conceive a female form of Ganeda, aa will be seen below.

Ganeéa, however, is not always represented completely prostrate when under the
feet of fighting deities. Buddhist statues from both Nepal and Tibet figure him in
two poses, one lying on hia left side with the body partially raised and leaning on the
left arm. In this position he is under the feet of a peaceful deity, while in the other
attitude where he ia half raised, half kneeling, there is a fierce deity towering
over him,

When in the former pose he is to be conceived as vanquished by the goddess
Aparajita, who, according to dhdranis, in one of her peaceful forms euch as Pita-
aparajitd should be represented two-armed and seated with one foot on Ganeda.?

According to certain sddhanas, however, she should be conceived standing with
her left foot on the left leg of Gayeda, in which pose she is called Ganapatisamakranta
or ‘she who tramples on Ganapati'.> Or she may have one foot posed on his left
hip and the other on his head ; but he is, however, never to he considered absolutely
vanquished even if represented completely prostrate, in which case he carries a
dagger (phurbu) in his right hand.‘

When in the half-kneeling pose he is under the feet of Vighnanteka, ‘Destroyer
of Obstacles’, and a powerful Nepalese Buddhist deity. The word tighna (obstacle)
when found in the Sddhanamala usually referred to Ganega, but it was used for
another deity in a Nepalese legend which explains how the Nepalese Buddbist
‘Destroyer of Obstacles’ was created, and runs as follows: A pandit from Odiyana
waa performing special rites on the bank of the river Bagmati near Katmandu, in
order to attain a certain stage of perfection or siddhi. Ganeda, wishing to prevent the
pious Buddhist from attaining siddii, put insurmountable obstacles in his way.
The pandit, unable to perform the required rites, invoked, in great distress, the .
Buddhist ‘ Destroyer of Obstacles’, who appeared in the fierce form of Vighndntaka,
and Ganeéa was overcome.

The Nepalese ‘Destroyer of Obstacles’ is imaged with aix or eight arms.5 Asa
rule, he holds in his upper right arm a sword and in hia upper left the buckler.

1 y, PL 17 (a) and Pantheon, Pander, Pl. 230 3 1.BI., Bhattacharyya, Pl. XL (a).
and p. 92. * Idem, Pl. XL (a)

2 Dadrapi Cwls, Waddoll, p. 193. * y. Ph. 18 (a) and (d).

--- Page 68 ---
44 INDIA, NEPAL, CHINESE TURKESTAN, TIBET:

The normal hands are before his breast grasping Tantric symbols, the chopper and
a kapala, or else he holds the bow! of cakes; while with his left hand he makes the
abhaya mudrd. He wears a high five-leafed crown and has the third eye as well aa
yeksa fangs. He towers over Ganeéa, who ia kneeling with the legs stretched, from
the knees to left and right. Vighndntaka stands on the fect of Ganega, who wears
@ crown with many jewels and in his normal right hand holds the bow], while the
normal Jeft makes, like that of Vighnantaka, a gesture of protection. The symbols in
the other two hands may vary.

Thus the Nepalese Buddhist ‘Destroyer of Obstacles’ is figured bringing the
Hindu ‘Lord of Obstacles’ to his kneea; but Ganeda, in making the abhaya mudrd,
proclaims his unvanquished power.

Bhattacharyya refers to the intoresting fact that whereas the Trimarti, that is,
Brahma, Vignu, and Siva accompanied by Indra, are to be found grouped under the
feet of Marici or of Trailokyavijaya, Ganeda is always alone when under the feet
of a fighting Buddhist deity; doubtless because as ‘Creator of Obstacles’ he was
believed to be the greater danger to the successful propagation of Buddhism.

Although he is also to be found in a Tibetan group in the same position as in the
above Nepalese images, Ganeéa was conceived in Tibet as overcome and conquered
by the Tibetan god Mahakala. He is represented kneeling on the lotus throne, his
lega stretched to the right and the left on an angle with hia body.’ Mahakala steps
to the right with his fect posed on the feet of Ganeéa, who is two-armed, holding
with his left hand the usual bowl and grasping in his uplifted right his broken tusk.
He is one-headed and without a crown.

Ganeda, is found in Tibet under the feet of another deity who is none other than
the great Dhyani-Bodhisattva, Majijusri, in his Tantric form designated as ‘ Black’
Mafijuéri.? The Tibetan god of Wisdom in this manifestation is represented fierce
in expression and should have the third eye. Above his forehead is a simple crown,
and behind it, his upstanding hair is drawn into a high chignon in which is seated
his Dhyani-Buddha, Akshobhya. His right hand holds the sword above his head
in the same attitude as in his mild forms, while his left grasps what seems to be a
coiled serpent.? Griinwedel, describing his illustration of the ‘Black’ Maiijuéri,
calls the object in his left hand a ‘lotus with coiled stem’. What seems, in the bronze
image, to be the head of a serpent may, therefore, be a lotus-bud; or is he carry-
ing the celestial creeper, the stem of which is also represented as coiled? At
any rate, he has serpents for bracelets and ankleta, and a serpent is tied across his
breast. He steps to the right with his foot on the head of Ganeda, but unlike
the other groups described above his left foot is posed directly on the lotus
dsana.

Under the feet of Mafjugri, Ganeéa lies on his back with his head turned to the
right. There are no symbols in his hands; but a detail of interest is that, unlike the
above groups, Ganega is represented unmistakably as a Hindu deity and not as a
demon, for be wears the jatd-mukula of Siva. Since Mafjuéri is looked upon as
‘Lord of Wisdom’ by the Mahayana Buddhists, and Gancéa aa ‘God of Wisdom’

ty. PL 1T(@). 2 Myth, Buddh., Grinwedel, p. 139, fig. 111. 9 y, Pl. 18 (8).

--- Page 69 ---
GAXNESA LN BUDDHISM 45
by the Hindus, may not this group symbolize the triumph of Buddhism over
Brahmanism ?

The Tibetan saint P’age-pa carried Mah4yana Buddhism into Mongolia in the
thirteenth century and converted the emperor Khubilai Mahakala was represented
to the Mongols as being none other than a manifestation of Siva. It waa therefore
only natural that Ganesa, as Siva’s con, uhould acquire a certain popularity among
them; and he figures in a Mongolian legend that runs as follows: Before the birth
of the saint P’ags-pa, hia father invoked Ganega, who, appearing to him, took him
up with his trunk and carried him to the top of Mount Meru, and showing him the
country of Mongolia, said: ‘Thy eon eball subjugate this whole country’, which
proved to be true,

Ganeéa also figures among the Fie Hundred Gods of sNar-t’an, in the form of the
Nytta-Ganapati, that is, in dancing attitude. His left foot is posed on the rat with
a jewel (cintamani) in ita mouth. The right leg is bent, the foot touching the serpent
girdle. He has only one head, upon which is a five-leafed crown, and in his four
army he carries the axe, radish, and bow! of cakes, while in his normal right he holds
the trident which is a symbol of Siva but seldom carried by the Elephant-faced god.?

) Myth. Buddh., Grinwedel, p. 66. * Idem, fig. 43.

--- Page 70 ---
CHAPTER V
GANESA IN BURMA, SIAM, INDO-CHINA
TS gradual occupation of Indo-China by Hindu emigrants began at a very
early date, poasibly in the early centuries preceding our era.1 The peaceful
invaders came by sea or overland via Burma; and the slow process of Indianization
brought with it the adoption of Brahmanism as well as Buddhism, and the worship
of Indian gods.

As innumerable small images of Ganega have been found in Burma, Siam, and
west Indo-China which are Hindu in type, it is thought that they were probably
brought to these countries by Indian tradera who carried them along with their
merchandise in order to propitiate the ‘Remover of Obstacles’ and thus secure
success in their commercial enterprises. Strangely enough, no small Hindu images
of this type have been found in east Indo-China although Saiviem was flourishing
there as early as in Cambodia. From this it seems probable that the worship of
Ganeda was introduced into Champa by Hindu devotees or Brahman priests rather
than by Indian traders.

Burma was the firat éape in the eastward exodus of the Hindus from north-east
India. Crossing the Bay of Bengal, they found the population of the deltaic region
of lower Burma, which was inhabited by the Mén, given over to a form of Hinayanist
Buddhism hostile to the cult of gods and goddesses. The trader-colonists succeeded,
however, in setting up their deities at an carly date, if we judge from the images of
Vignu, Brahma, Ganeda, and other Hindu gods, dating from the sixth and seventh
centuries, that have been found in lower Burma.? Upper Burma, on the contrary,
was Mahayanist, and Tantric Mahaydnism, with its pantheon of gods and goddesses,
was in favour as late aa the eleventh century. When Brahmanism spread to north
Burma, a more fertile field was thus found for the introduction of the Hindu gods;
and while in lower Burma no Brahman deity was allowed in a Buddhist temple, in
upper Burma, as seen in the Shwesandaw pagoda at Pagan, for example, Ganega in
company with other Hindu gods waa placed in guard of the ancient Buddhist shrine.

Although statues of Ganega have been found in upper and lower Burma, his popu-
larity was greatest with the commercial population in the deltaic region, where
great numbers of small images of the type referred to above have been discovered,
and where he was known and worshipped as Mahdpienne.? None of the representa-
tions of Ganeéa in Burma, however, are of interest either from the point of view of
art or of iconography, being crude in execution and of the well-known Hindu types;
but a most remarkable sfela was discovered in the ruins of a Brahmanic temple at
Pagan‘ which will be described below when comparing it with a Khmer and with
a Cham statue, all three of which have the eame unusual features.

Pushing farther eastward, the indian travellers found the Mén also established
" According to Sir Charles Eliot, probably in » Idem, p. 60.
the beginning of our era, B. and B., vol. iii, p. 103. * Idem, Pi. XXI.
* B.G. in B., Ray, p. 9.

--- Page 71 ---
GANFSA IN BURMA, SIAM, INDO-CHINA 47
in south Siam on the banks of the Menam. It is not known what forra of Buddhism
they practised ; but as the Hindu emigrante were of superior culture, the process of
Indianization was more rapid than in Burma, From the sixth to the eighth centuries
they exerted a strong influence on the statuary art of the Mon; and Grousset looks
upon this period as 4 transition stage between the Gupta art of India and the pre-
Angkor art of Cambodia.’

In Siam, Ganega waa aa popular with the Buddhists as with the Brahmans. His
image, however, waa never allowed within the precincta of the Buddhist temples,
but wus tolerated within the temple grounds. Unfortunately no statue of any
interest has been found in south Siam. We only know of his popularity from the many
small images referred to above, which were probably copied and recopied by native
artisans. Not until the Ayuthian period in central Siam is a Siamese representation
of Ganeda to be found which is worthy of study.

Toward the ninth century, the Mon moved farther north and founded, in central
Siam, a second state, the kingdom of Haripufjaya. Unlike the kingdom of south
Siam, they resisted the Khmer; but in the thirteenth century the Mon were over-
powered by warriors from the north, the Thal, and became a part of the new state
with ita capital at Ayuthia. The early art of Ayuthia, although influenced by the
Indian culture of the conquered Mon, developed characteristics of ita own, as will
be seen by a very fine example of Ayuthian statuary art which was formerly in the
private collection of H.R.H. Prince Damrong.?

Ganeéga ia represented seated in the Mahdrajalila pose with the right knee uplifted,
while the left is bent before him on the deana. The head, well placed on the shoulders,
ia modelled with considerable skill, and the trunk is of unusual suppleness. The
eyes, as in India, are round and staring. The head is covered by a karanda-muluta,
tiara-shaped in front, behind which rises a spiral-shaped usnisa ending in a point
and somewhat resembling the spiral head-dress of a four-headed Ganeéa described
below.3 ‘The body is erect and, like the Khmer statues in general, ia not obese but is
normally modelled. He is bare to the waist and has a serpent over his shoulder in
place of the Brahmanical thread.

One of the specially interesting features of this Ayuthian bronze is the arrange-
ment of the arma, which, aa far as the author knows, is unique. From the shoulders
to the elbow, there is only one arm; but at the elbow, the arm branches into two,
somewhat like the images of Hindu gods in the Orissa districts of India. Two of the
hands are lifted on a level with the shoulders, holding a lasso and an attribute
difficult to determine. The wrist of the normal hand is posed on the knee; but the
hand is raised in what may possibly be a mudrd. The normal right, which resta on
the upraised knee, holds the broken tusk. The Ayuthian sculptor, however, was
apparently not versed in Hindu iconography, for the image is possessed of both
tusks; and the broken-tusk attribute is thus without raison d’¢tre.

Crouching under his uplifted right leg is his réhana, the rat, which we shall not
come across cither in Cham or in Khmer images of Ganesa; and shall rarely meet

1H. deVE.O., p. 588. author by H.R.H. Prince Damrong.

2 y. Pl. 27 (a) and (6). Kindly presented totbe —? v. Pl. 27 (¢).

--- Page 72 ---
48 GANESA LN BURMA, SIAM, INDO-CHINA

with in Javanese statues.! Even in Indian representations where the rat, especially
in the north, is seldom missing, his wéhana is never figured as in this Ayuthian bronze
figure.

In the Brahmanic temple at Bangkok there is a remarkable bronze statue of
Ganeéa where he is seated in the transitional Khmer attitude with the lega euper-
posed. Like practically all of the Khmer images, he is bare to the waist with the
pleats of the sampof falling over the belt in front. Across the breast is the serpent
Brahmanical thread. The hands do not rest on the knees aa in the usual Cambodian
figures of Ganesa but are both slightly raised, the right holding the broken tusk
aa if it were a stylus; and in the left there is a leaf-book. Apparently this statue
represents Ganega as a scribe; but ia he to be looked upon as scribe to Vydsa or to
his father, Siva? Either, or both, legends might have penetrated into Cambodia.

The Mahabadrata waa known in Cambodia ax early as the sixth century; but the
north India recension of the epic poem with the introduction containing the legend
of Ganega as amanuensis to Vydsa could not have penetrated into Cambodia until
a later date. It is interesting to note that none of the images of Ganedga as acribe,
known to us, are prior to the eleventh century; and that it was in the eleventh cen-
tury that the kingdom of Dvaravatt, founded by the Indianized Mon, was united
to the Khmer empire. May it be inferred from this that the Mon, who, with their
Indian culture, were probably acquainted with the north recension of the #fahd-
bharata, introduced the legend into Cambodia ?

If, on the other hand, the representations of Ganesa holding the etylus were
inspired by the sacred Gayatri-tantra,? wherein Ganesa is referred to as writing down
the Tantras to the dictation of his father Siva, the legend would have penetrated
into Cambodia at an earlier date. This important Saiva tantra was perhaps known
in Cambodia in the ninth century, when Saivism was not only at ita height but in
great favour with the Khmer dynasty. During the reign of Jayavarman II, who
came to the throne in 4.p. 802, Tantric texta were introduced into Cambodia by
Hiranyadama, a Hindu Brahman priest well versed in the cult of the Siva-linga.
Unfortunately there is no document to prove the one or the other theory, or even
that the legend was known in Cambodia; but as neither the Buddhist nor the
Brahmanic statuary art was based on pure fantasy, it is safe to say that this unusual
representation of Ganeéa as ecribe was inspired by one of these two legends.

An old Siamese manuscript, now in the library of the Ecole Francaise d’Extréme
Orient at Hanoi, contains six images in outline of Ganeéa, of which three® are of
special interest. They are extremely ornate and stand with the knees bent and far
apart, whereas the heels almost touch each other. Two of the figures are called
Vighneévara and are of intereat because one of them is standing on a rat and the other
on a tortoise. The third Vindyaka is a curious and unique representation of which
the author has been unable to find an explanation. He is called Koficananeévara
and has three crowned heads, and wears an ornate sampot and many jewels. He
has six arms. The hands carry: at the right, a small image of an elephant with

2 y, Pl. 32 (0). p.6.

+ vy, Mahdnirvdnc-tanirs, trans. Avalon, note 4 y. Pl. 39 (a) and (6).

--- Page 73 ---
GANESA IN BURMA, SLAM, INDO-CHLNA 48
infinite heade; at the left, an elephant with three heada The intermediary arms
hold: right, an elepbant with three heads; left, three clephante each with one head.
The normal right arm balances a conch-shell, the hand posed on the knee; while the
left arm points to the left with a conch-shell in the hand. The text in Siamese etates
that it represents Ganega engendering a male elephant with the right hand and a
female elephant with the left. It undoubtedly has a symbolic meaning which unfor-
tunately escapes us.

The cult of Siva penetrated into Cambodia from the Funan, where Brahmanism
waa practised at a very carly date. Siva alone of the Trimarti seems to have been
eet up for upecial worship, while Brahma was apparently forgotten and Vignu
looked upon as an accessory deity. By the sixth century, Saivism bad found fervent
royal farour which lasted until the tenth century; but in spite of the fact that sanc-
tuaries were not only dedicated to Siva but to his eon, Ganeda, no evidence of 6
Ganesa cult has been found. On the other hand, the many amall images discovered
in Cambodia testify to a certain popularity.

Some of these images are Hindu in type or show Indian influence; but the Khmer
representations of the Elephant-faced god have characteristics which are not found
outside of Indo-China. Generally speaking, prah Kenés, as he is called in Cambodia,
is never obese. ‘The legs are neither locked nor are they, with rare exceptions, crossed
in the Hindu fashion, but lie one superposed above the other (the right above the
left), which attitude, according to Groslier, indicates the evolution of pre-Khmer art.

Asa tule, the seated figure hag only two arms with the hands posed on the knees
and holding objects that may vary. The body is neither extremely erect nor
‘ramasné’ aa in Java, but gives the impression of bending alightly forward. The
trunk hangs straight and is coiled at the end; but there are examples, as will be
seen below, where the end of the trunk tums outward and upward. This latter
form we have already met with in Chinese Turkestan’ and shall come across again
in Bali? and in China.*

The pre-Khmer (or pre-Ankorian) images aa rule, have no head-dress, but
towards the eighth century, the representations of Ganeéa may have an omate
karanda-mukufa behind which is a spiral-shaped ugnisa eomewhat resembling that
of the Ayuthian bronze described above. Like the Cham, the Khmer images are
bare to the waist and also wear an ornate necklace and serpent Brahmanical thread ;
but unlike the Cham representation of Ganeéa, he has only ove belt, over which,
in front, hang the pleata of the sampot. In the beautiful little Khmer bronze
belonging to Dr. de Frey‘ the pleate almost entirely hide the legs, leaving only the
knees visible.

One of the most remarkable atone images of Ganeda, which was found at
Tarol Phak Kin, in Kandal, is believed to be pre-Khmer, that is, before the eighth
century.® The figure is seated with the legs crossed at the ankles, the left over the
right, which is unusual The body is nude with slightly indicated ornaments. The

Vy, PL 3s. 4 y. Pl. 28 {a}.
* y, PL 32 (c). 8 y. Ph 25 (a).
3 vy. Pl. 36 (a).

baad a

--- Page 74 ---
50 GANESA LN BURMA, SIAM, ENDO-CHINA

right hand grasps an object which rests on the knee, while the left is raised in Hindu
fashion, holding the bowl. The head is sunken between tbe shoulders like the
Singasari image from Java and the trunk, in order to reach the bowl in the uplifted
hand, wakes an unusual curve which gives a strange aspect to the figure. The ears
are abnormally large, the eyes are round and staring, and on the forehead is the
third eye.

Although the statue is crude in all its details, it gives an extraordinary impression
of life and force. If we compare it with a standing stone figure of Ganega,’ also of
the aame pre-Ankorian period, we realize that the sculptor far surpassed his con-
temporary and in this case produced a masterpiece. ‘The standing figure referred
to is only of interest in that he holds in his upper hands, not the emblems of Siva,
but of Vignu, the conch-shell and the disk,? while the normal hands hold the usual
objects. A crude but later stone atatue with Khmer characteristics has the third
eye, and another stone image now in the Musée Guimet in Paris, believed to be of
the tenth or twelfth century, has an ornate tiara and many jewels. The author is
of the opinion that a second pair of arms branched, originally, from the upper
normal arms, somewhat us in the Ayuthian bronze figure referred to above.

A very curious representation of Ganega with four heads is in a private collection
at Spean Thmar, Kendal.* The small bronze figure which is seated, has, as ia usual
in Indo-China, two arms with the hands posed on the knees, holding objects which
are difficult to identify. The legs are crossed, but not in the Indian nor the Khmer
fashion, since they cross at the ankles with the feet drawn up almost to the waist-
line. This position of the legs may be found in Siamese bronze images; and as it is
practically never met with elsewhere, the author is inclined to believe that it is
Siamese rather than Khmer. The heads are disposed to face the four quarters: one
head behind the normal head and one looking over each shoulder. The four heads
are covered by a spiral-shaped head-dresa which resembles that of the Ayuthian
bronze deacribed above. The author knows of no other image of Ganeéa with four
heads; but in India we have met with four figures of Ganeéa placed back to back
facing the four quartera,> and the above statue has undoubtedly the same symbolic
meaning.

In Champa, as in Cambodia, the principal Brahmanic cult was that of Siva, especi-
ally in his livigs form. In fact, Saivism was held in auch high eateem by the Cham
dynasty that it claimed descent direct from Siva himself.* The seat of the cult
was in the province of Quang-nam, where, between the fourth and the seventh
centuries, sixty-seven sanctuaries were erected at Mi-eo’n, alone.

The most ancient of these tower-shaped shrines was dedicated to Siva in his
phallic form. The huge liriga mounted on a high pedestal was called ‘ Bhadreévara’
after the king Bhadravarman who erected it toward the fourth century 4.D. In
one of the Mi-so’n sanctuaries near the Siva-liaga shrine was discovered the well-

1 y. PL. 25 (0). 4 v. Pi 25 (6).

2 In the Mahdnirodpa-ontra, p. 313, there ina “vy. PL 27 (ce).
dhydna in which be ia described as holding the —* ¥. p. 30.
conch-abell and discus. ° H. de VE.-O., Grousest, tome ii, p. 561.

--- Page 75 ---
GANESA IN BURMA, SIAM, INDO.CHINA Fs]
known standing image of (Janeda' which is unsurpassed in dignity and impressive-
neas. It is believed to be of the seventh or eighth century; but unfortunately no
inscription has been found to prove this or to indicate whether Ganeéa was wor-
shipped in this sanctuary as an attendent on Siva or whether a special cult had been
set up for his adoration as an independent deity. According to inscriptions such
as at Po Nagar, sanctuaries were dedicated to him ; but if a Ganega cult was flourish-
ing between the seventh and cighth centuries, his popularity was nevertheless
limited, if we may judge from the few statues of the Elephant-faced god that have
been found in Champa.

The standing figure of Ganeda from Mi-so’n was originally four-armed, but unfor-
tunately two of the hands have been lost. In the normal left he holds the usual bow);
and in the normal nght, when discovered, he held a leafed twig which, it seems,
was missing when the image was transported to the Tourane Museum. As this
attribute is found on other Cham images of Ganeda, it had without doubt a symbolic
meaning which is now unknown. He is represented bare to the waist, but around
his neck is an ornate necklace, while acroes his breast is the serpent Brahmanical
thread.

He wears a sampot with the pleated end falling in front almost to the ground, over
which is a tiger-akin held in place by a triple belt of twisted cords. Above this belt
is a snake girdle, and above this again is a jewelled helt.

Like all of the early images of Ganeéa with but few exceptions, his head is bare.
His ears are large and fan-shaped while hia eyes are small and true to life. Aa in
Java, his trunk hangs straight, but turns to the left at the end in the usual gesture
of taking a cake from the bowl in the left hand.

A seated figure of Ganega was also found at Mi-so’n that is of interest because of
the uplifted hand which, according to Parmentier,’ is holding a *pinceau’. If the
object is a stylus or writing-brush it would indicate that the legend of Ganeda acting
aa scribe to Vyasa or Siva was known at an early date in Champa.

Like the above standing figure, he is bare to the waist, wearing the necklace,
Brahmanical thread, sampot, tiger-skin and triple belta; but unlike the above, he
has the third eye and his head is covered by a net head-dress, while on the top of
his head is a flattened lotus-flower forming a rosace. We shall meet with thia orna-
ment in the Malay Archipelago® and shall aleo find it on another sented figure of
Ganeda in the Museum of Tourane, which is of unusual interest because, while its
conception is Hindu, it has characteristica that seem to be Buddhist or at least to
show Buddhist influence.

The ‘borrowing’, as it were, of Buddhist features for the representations of a
Hindu deity is not inconceivable. Buddhism was introduced into Indo-China
practically at the same time as Brahmanism and, by the fifth century, was also
drawing many followers in Champa.

The above statue of Ganeéa, believed to be of the eighth century, was found in
the province of Quang-nam, where Buddhism had eatabhshed itself in the centre

1 y. Pi. 25 (d). BLEP.B_-O., tome iv, p. 875.

2 "Lew Monuments du Cirque de Mi-so’n’, 3 Pl. 30 (c).

--- Page 76 ---
52 GANFSA IN BURMA, SIAM, INDO-CHINA
of the Saiva cult and with auch success that an important Buddhist monastery was
founded there in the ninth century.

As the two religions were practised side by side, it is not surprising to find a Hindu
image of Ganega reflecting Buddhist iconography, as, for instance, in the position
of the legs, where we find the deity in the characteristic pose of the Buddha or
padmdsana, that is, legs locked with the aoles of both feet apparent.! Another
interesting feature of thia Cham statue is a protuberance in the middle of the forehead.*

Certain esoteric Buddhist sects in India attempted to explain the wsnisa or pro-
tuberance on the head of the Buddha as being the seat of his divine mind. We have
seen above? in the legend from the Vardha-purdya that Ganesa was ‘mind-born’,
having been produced from a brilliant flame emanating from the forehead of Siva.
From this, certain esoteric Hindu sects were led to believe that Ganesa was the
personification of Siva’s divine manas or mind, It therefore does not seem improb-
able that this protuberance on the forehead of Ganega was meant to symbolize the
seat of the divine mind of Siva. At any rate, this hypothesis may be accepted
until a better one be found to explain the presence of this unusual feature on the
Cham statue of Ganega.

The curiously shaped head of the above figure gives the impression of an elephant-
face mask behind which is the normal head, especially as the ears seem to be attached
to the normal head and not to the elephant face. In Indian miniatures and paintings
of Ganeéa‘ this same idea, referred to above, is shown, since the elephant-face ia
painted red while the ears and neck are white or pink.

In the case of thia image, the impression of a mask behind which is the normal
head is even greater, for there are two foreheads, one above the other. On the lower
forehead, that is, on that of the elephant-face mask, is the protuberance, while on
the upper forehead, slightly farther back (which belongs to the normal head), is the
third eye. The round staring eyes are on the elephant-face. The normal head is
covered by a closely braided head-dress held in place by a flat tiara-shaped band
and, on the top of the head, is the lotus rosace referred to above. Like most of the
cated images of Ganesa in Indo-China, the hands rest on the knees holding the bowl
and the tusk. :

There are two other representations of Ganega which also seem to indicate atrong
Buddhist influence. One ia a small Khmer image now in the Museum fir Vélker-
kunde in Munich. The other is the Burmese stela referred to above.

On the small bronze statue believed to be of the fourteenth century,® the same
protuberance is represented on the forehead as we have secn above on the Cham
image at Tourane. There is also the same impression, still more accentuated, of
an elephant-face mask, behind which is the normal head. In this case he wears an
orate karanda-mukufa, The trunk hangs straight and cvils to the right at the end,
which is very unusual.

The right band holds the broken tusk with the point downward as if it were a

* Aloo called Vajrissna, *v. PLA.
> v. Pl 24 (6). * v. PI. 28 (c} and (d).
av. p6.

--- Page 77 ---
GANESA IN BURMA, SIAM, INDO-CHINA 83
stylus. The object in the left hand may be a book. ‘The legs are in the Buddhiat
pose called paryarika: that is, with the right leg placed above the left. Aso rule,
in this pose, the soles of the fect should not be apparent except in the case (like
the present one) when a Buddhist mark is to be shown on the sole of the foot. The
circle or ‘Wheel of the Law' is indicated on the aole of the right foot of this small
Khmer image of the Elephant-faced god.

The figure of Ganesa on the Burmese stela indicates still greater Buddhist influence
than either the Khmer or the Cham images. Ganesa, represented in high relief, is
seated, with four arms. The upper hands seem to hold a conch-shell and an elephant
goad. ‘The head, with large ears, is flat and broad. The round, staring, and protrud-
ing eyes are far apart, and between them is a protuberance which cannot be taken
fora third eye. The trunk is short and coils to the left. The right arm hangs straight
and the hand makea the Buddhist ‘earth-touching’ mudrd called bhumisparsa,
which is ono of the well-known attitudes ot the Buddha.’ With this mudra, the
lega, following the Buddhist canon, are correctly posed in the vajrasana? attitude,
that is, they are closely locked with soles of the feet apparent. The left hand is
posed under the abdomen in dhydna-mudrd, the palm upward, which is also a
characteristic feature of this form of the Buddha. According to Ray,* he holds a
matulinga (citron) in the left hand; but the author believes that the incised circlo
indicates the navel rather than a symbol, for the figure so closely follows the
Buddhist canon that, with the hand in dhydna-mudrd, the deity would not be repre-
sented holding an attribute.‘

One is at a loss to explain these three unusual representations of Gancéa that have
been found, each in a different country, and which, nevertheless, seem to have been
evolved from the same conception, that is, giving to Ganesa the qualities or rank of
a Buddha. Possibly the esoteric sect in Burma which gave expression to ita belief
in the stela found at Pagan had Buddhist affiliations in Champa and Cambodia,
where the other two images were conceived ; but, if so, aa no other figure of this

type has been found, the sect was apparently unimportant and had few followers.

Ganefa is figured in two bas-reliefs in Indo-China, where in both casea he is
attendant deity in an assembly of gods. The firat, which is in the Tourane Museum,
is a crude carving without special interest. The second bas-relief, on the contrary,
is a very fine representation of Siva receiving the homage of Krisna on Mount
Kailaéa, and ia in the north gallery of Angkor Wat.>

On a somewhat lower level, Ganesda is seated at the left of Siva, with the legs
crossed at the ankles and lying before him on the dsana. Hie right hand, which ia
held at the breast. seems to grasp a broken tusk; while the left, on bis knee, is
without an attribute. The trunk, unusually short, turns to the left, and there seems
to be a protuberance between the eyes. He is accompanied by two acolytes. The

one slightly behind Ganeéa to the right holda his axe, while to the left an acolyte
carries a parasol, sign of rank, by which he is apparently designated as a deity
1 y. glossary. 2 y. glossary. bowl.
> BO. of B., p. 81. © ¥. Angkor Vat, torce ii, pert ii, 'Baa-reliefs’
* Unless, in rare exceptions, it be the begging Pl. 423.

--- Page 78 ---
54 GANESA IN BURMA, SIAM, INDO-CHINA
of importance. Unfortunately there is no inscription to enlighten us in regard to
this unusual group.

Stelas have been found both in Cambodia and Champa which date as far back as
the sixth century; but, aga rule, they have only inscriptions surmounted by decora-
tive motifs. In Cambodia, however, six of the stelas have the figure of a deity on one
of the sides; and at Prasat Keéo, e stela dated the ninth century has a representa-
tion of Ganeéga in high relief.' He is figured with two arma and is seated with the legs
superposed. Both hands, which were undoubtedly posed on his knees in the usual
Khmer attitude, are unfortunately missing. He has large flapping ears; but the
head has been badly mutilated and little remaina to indicate the forehead, evea, and
trunk. He wears the karanda-mukula and has a jewelled girdle under the breasts,
while on his arms are several bracelets. Below his abdomen a double belt holds the
sampot. Over his head is an ornate canopy which is arched, outlining the head and
shoulders, where it ends in a cornucopia-shaped motif supported by two animal-
headed demons,

Inscriptions have been found in Indo-China in which Ganeéa is either included in a
list of deities or ia mentioned as accompanying Siva. It is interesting to note that
in the inscriptions both in Champa and in Cambodia, when Ganeda is referred to in
a group of gods auch as at Hod-que,” and at Mi-so’n,? he is called Ganeda, whereas,
when mentioned as attendant on Siva, especially in his liaga form, such as at Po
Nagar* or on the stela at Pras&t Trapan Run,’ he is referred to aa Siri Viniyaka, It
would seem from this that under the epithet of ‘Sri Vindyaka” he was looked upon
as the more important deity, especially so, since in an inscription at Mi-so’n there
is mention of a Sri-Vindyaka-Vijaya.*

In the region of Kompong Thom an inscription of the ninth century was dis-
covered where there is reference to a donation accorded to ‘Ganeéa of Candanagiri’,
that is, ‘Ganeéa of the Sandal Mountain’. Barth identifies this mountain as the
Chocung Prey’ near which, on a hill in the vicinity of Prah Pada, are ruins of a
temple that is believed to have been dedicated to Ganeéa. This inscription is of
interest because it refera to Ganeda as an independent deity and locally important,
and accentuates the tradition which followed him from India to Japan, of being
worshipped in connexion with Mountains.

) Etudes d'orientalisme : atélea historiées du Cam. p. 269.
bodge, by Louis Finot, pl. XVIII. * BEP.E.-O,, xxiii, ‘Nouvelles Inscriptions du

2 Notes d'épigraphie, by Louia Finot, pp. 240-1. Cambodge’, by Louis Finot, p. 73.

3 Idem, p. 124 * Notes d'épigraphie, Louia Finot, p. 125.

‘ Inscriptions du Cambodge, H. Bergaigne, 7 Inscriptions du Campa, A. Rergaigno, p. 362.

--- Page 79 ---
CHAPTER VI
GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO
Te are no ancient records either in India or Java which throw light on the
early exodus of the Hindus across the seas to the Malay Archipelago, carrying
with them their culture and religion and imposing the worship of their gods.

Java may have been known to the Hindus, nevertheless, at a very early date, for
the Sanskrit name ' Yara-defpa’, found in the ancient texts of the Ramayana, refers,
it is believed, to the ‘island of Java’! The word occurs in the text of the epic poem,
after the account of the abduction of Sita by the ten-headed god Ravana, when
Hanuman, chief of the monkeys, ordera them to seek for the wife of Rama; and
among other places he suggeats that they look for her in ‘ Yava-dvipa’.

It is not known at what time the Hindus actually established themselvea in Java,
but the Buddhist traveller Fa-hsien on hia way back to China from India in the year
A.D. 414 stopped at *Yava-dvipa’ and describes the island as peopled by ‘heretics
and Brahmana’.? From this, it is evident that Brahmanism was flourishing there
as early as the fifth century; but no inscription teatifies to Brahmanic rites until the
eighth century, when a stone inscription dated «.p. 732? found at Chantal gives an
account of the consecration of a lige, with invocationa to ‘Siva, Brahma, and
Vignu’. The fact that Siva is mentioned first in the Trimarti shows that he took
precedence over Brahma and testifies to his popularity in Java, even were it not
plainly evident from the many sanctuaries dedicated to the Lord of the Trident
which were found on the island.

It is thus not surprising that statucs of Ganega, son of Siva, should be met with
in great numbers throughout the Malay Archipelago. There is, however, no evidence
of an ancient Ganedéa cult, no temples ecem to have been dedicated to him alone;
but his images are sometimes to be found, as in the rock-cut temples of India, in a
niche beside the Siva sanctuaries.

In Java as in India, no trausitional form of Gancda has as yet been met with
unless the roughly carved elephant-headed deity discovered in west Java‘ and a
amali bronze image now in the British Museum® be accepted as primitive concep-
tions of the Elephant-faced god.

According to Krom,* the crude stone sculpture may be only an unfinished attempt
to produce an image of Ganedga; but the representation is so primitive even in its
unfinished state that one is tempted to give it a very carly date.

The figure is two-armed; the legs are missing, and there is no head-dress; but
above the forehead ia incised an uneven line evidently to indicate the hair. The one
eye is not round and staring as in the early Indian forms but elongated, and, although
traced by a simple incision, resemblea a human eye. The ears are large, human in

1 B, and B., Sir Charkes Etiot, vol. iii, p. 152, 3 A. of I and J., Vogel, p. 20, and B. and B,
and Buddhist Records, Legge, p. 133. Sir Charles Eliot, vol. ili, p. 154

* Idem, p. 133, and ¥. Pour I’ Histoire du Ramd- 4 y. PL 29 (4). sv. PL 29 (a)
yana, by Sylvain Lévi. © Inlesdung, vol. ii, pp. 391-4.

--- Page 80 ---
58 GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO

form, and lic flat against the head. The trunk is long and hangs straight, being only

coiled to the left at the end. The hands, which are posed on the breast touching the

trunk, are not human hands, for the fingers are all of the same length and unfor-
tunately hold no symbole.

The small bronze image in the British Museum although crude in ite conception,
has more detail than the stone statue. Above the forehead is a tiara-shaped crown,
behind which the hair hangs straight at the back; and he wears a necklace and
bracelets. The eyes are round and staring as in the Indian images, and the ears
are small and human in shape. The trunk is short and curved with the end coiled
underneath,! which is most unusual. The hands, which are more human in aspect
than those of the stone image, are also posed on the breast but lower down; and the
left hand may have supported the bowl. A small but later bronze figure belong-
ing to M. Coedés? shows these same characteristics, that is, the trunk hanging
straight while the two hands at the breast are against the trunk as if they were
supporting it.

An interesting point about these two bronze images ia that they have the three
characteristics of practically all of the Javanese representations of Ganeéa: first,
that, unlike the Indian conception when, if seated, the legs are wide apart, the
obese torso thus touching the ground, the early Javanese Ganeéa sits erect with
the legs bent beneath him, thus supporting the torso. Second, that the soles
of the feet are touching, which is a position never found outside of the Malay
Archipelago. The third characteristic of the early Javanese statues is that, with few
exceptions, the trunk hangs straight and may be coiled to the left. towards the end.
This characteristic may also be found in Indo-China,’ but in India it is only met
with when the trunk is balancing the modaka in its coiled end.*

From these two crude images to the remarkable stone figure found on the Dieng
plateau which is believed to be the most ancient representation of Ganeéa in Java®
there is a wide gap. It is to he hoped that one day the transitional forms will be
found which led up to this representation of Ganeéa which has never been surpassed
in any country. At first glance, it seemus to be the classic, four-armed image known
to us in India; but on closer examination it is found that its conception is not
purely Indian ; besides which, the Indo-Javanese conceived a Ganeéa of great dignity,
for he is seated erect with hia head well placed on his shoulders. The special position
of the feet, with the soles touching, gives the same impression of poise as do the
locked legs of the deities of Mahayana Buddhism.

The image from the Dieng plateau is represented as four-armed, his normal hands
posed on his knees, the right holding his broken tusk, the left the bowl, while the
upper arms carry the axe and rosary. His trunk hangs atraight and turns to the
left on a level with the bow]. The elephant-head is remarkably true to life with no
attempt at giving it a human aspect. like we find in later images. The body is
a normal human body without being exaggerated in detail as are the Hindu images.

1 v. Ph 29(a), 4 v. FL 14 (0).
* v. Pl. 29(c). + v. Pl 30(d).
* v. Pl. 29(0).

--- Page 81 ---
GANKSA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO 87
He wears many jewels but no mukuta, nor has he the third eye often found on
later statues.

In the Colonial Institute of Amsterdam there is a statue which seems to be of the
same period and only differs from the above in wearing a jaté-mukula. Behind
his head is a nimbus. The image is on @ pedestal placed in the centro of a yoni-
ahaped sacriticial stone, thus taking the place of the usual liga.

An image found on the Dieng plateau at Tjandi Pariksit is seated on a lotus
throne supported by two genii. He is figured practically the same aa in the
above statues and his eclephant-face is also extraordinarily true to life; but he
differs in that he has the third eye.’ Curiously enough, instead of a mukuta
he has on the top of his head a flattened lotus flower, the petals of which are
turned backward. The only other example of Ganeéa with a lotus head-ornament
known to the author is the Cham statue in the Tourane Museum referred to above.”
Another unusual feature of this image is that the bracelets and anklets are made
of serpenta.

Ina niche in the ruins of a temple near Deasa Woedjel, a fine statue of Ganega was
found which is now in Leyden. He is represented four-armed carrying the usual
symbols and wearing a high jafd-mukufa on his head. The eyes, although wide apart,
are human eyes; but the most interesting feature of the statue is that the body,
inatead of being erect in pose, as in the earlier images, is heavy and ramassé, a
characteristic of practically all of the later seated representations of Ganega in Java.
Tt is curious to note that the more ornate the statue, the lesa erect is the pose and
the more sunken is the head between the shoulders.

One of the moat remarkable examples of this ramassé type is the celebrated
Tjandi Singasari statue, also now in Leyden.? Unlike the other images of Ganeda
in Java, the solea of the feet do not touch and the right knee is raised in almost the
mahardajalila pose. He has four arms and holds the usual symbols, His eyes are
small, round, and staring, and he wears bracelets and anklets and a snake girdle.
The head falls so low on the breast that the shoulders are alinost on # line with the
mukufa. ‘The striking feature of the Singasari image is the skull omamenta on the
karanda-mukula and the car-rings; while, instead of the usual padmdsana, he is
seated on a throne ornamented with a row of skulls.

The use of the skull ornaments on the representations of Ganega is a purely
Javanese conception and is practically never met with outside of the Malay Archi-
pelago. Siva, as has been seen above, when manifested as Bhairava, wears a garland
of skulla a3 well aa skulls in his jafd-mukufa. In a country where this form of the
Lord of the Trident was popular, it should not be surprising to find the skull orna-
ments used for his son. In fact, one may even find in the Jatd-mukuta worn by
Ganesa, and undemeath a skull ornament, the crescent moon of Siva; and an
interesting Suiva form of Ganesa was found near Ngadirejo, in a temple dedicated
to Siva and Parvati, where he is represented holding a small statue of Nandi,
Siva's vdhana.

1 vy. PL. 30 (c). 3 y. PL 31 {a}.
3 v. PL 24 (6).
Sad T

--- Page 82 ---
58 GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO

A still more exaggerated form of the ramassé type of Ganeéa is found in the statue
at Bara,’ which is both Indo-Javanese and Indonesian? in atyle.

This atone image found near Djembe is best known as the ‘Ganeda of Bara’. Tho
figure is eeated ; and the head which is out of all proportion with the body, almost
covers the torso. The cyes are large and human in shape with heavy eyebrows. The
four arms hold the usual symbols and the legs are bent underneath him with the
roles of the feet touching. He weara an ornate karanda-mukuta and car-rings,
braceleta, and ankleta. Embroidered bands hang over the bent legs partially cover-
ing the dsana, which is decorated with a row of skulls in front, while at the back
there is an inscription dated 1239.°

The unusual! feature of the Bara Ganeda is that while the front is of Indo-Javanese
style, the back is elaborately carved in Indonesian manner, with the head of a
goggle-eyed monster such as are placed in Java on either side of the entrances to the
temples to guard against evil spirita’ These yaksa guardians with tusk-like fangs
are also to be met with in Indo-China.

The Bara Ganeda was not found in a niche near a Siva sanctuary. As a matter of
fact, comparatively few of his representations in Java have been found in niches;
and Stutterheim attributes this fact to the quantity of statues of Ganeéa that have
been discovered which far outnumber those of any other deity, even Siva. He is
of the opinion, judging from their having been met with ea a rule in isolated spots,
that Ganeda was revered by travellers in Java as ‘Remover of Obstacles’ in their
perilous voyages ; and this seems to be proved by the fact that his images have been
found in places of danger such as steep slopes, river crossings, &c.

In India, especially in south India, it has been seen that along the highroads, and
particularly where two roads crossed, there was invariably a crude image of Ganeéa
or a formless stone (svayambhi-mirti) symbolizing him, and the traveller, by
making a humble offering, might thus become immune from all danger. In Kashmir
his svayambhi-mirtis are sometimes placed in river beds.

In Java the rivers were looked upon, according to Stutterheim, as mystic boun-
daries fraught with danger and hazardous to cross without proper magic protection.*
As the Bara Ganeéa waa found at the dangerous passage of the river Brantas, it i
more than probable that it was placed in this isolated spot for a special purpose.
This, however, does not explain the presence of the Indonesian guardian-monster
head carved at the back of the statue.

We have seen above that Ganesa, both in Nepal and Tibet, was entrusted with
guarding the entrance to temples and mhdras against evil spirits by putting obstacles
in their way. May not this tradition have reached Java? The patron goddess of
Nepal, Guhycévari, as will be seen below, was probably known to the Javancse.

If the sculptor of the Bara Ganega conceived the idea of creating an image which,
when placed at the passage of a river, could not only protect the traveller, if properly
propitiated, by removing obstacles on a dangerous crossing, but guard the passage

1 y. PL 30 (0). * v. Pl. 30 (6) and A. of J. and J., Vogel, p. 46.
* Art of I. and J., Vogel, p. 48. oy. p. 22.
* Inleidung, Krom, vol. i, p. 93. * Letter to the anthor.

--- Page 83 ---
GANFSA LN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO 89
as well from evil spirite, would he not naturally ecek to unite in one statue the two
deities known to him that were powerful enough to fulfil the purpose? In that case,
he would be likely to combine the goggle-eyed guardian of temples (who in Java
held the same post as Ganeda in Nepal and Tibet) with the form known to the
Javanese ag a propitious deity to be worshipped by travellers. It should not seem
inconsistent for a Javanese sculptor to create an image which would unite the
Indonesian ‘Guardian againat Evil Spirits’ with the Indo-Javanese ‘Remover of
Obstacles’, since the ardhandari or coalesced form of Siva and Parvati was well known
to the Javanese. Unfortunately, no explanation which is entirely satiafactory has
as yet been found for thia puzzling double form.

Another image of Ganega found at the passage of a river in west Java, near
Karang Kates,' is one of the few standing Javanese forma known tous. The statue ia
badly proportioned, being too short for ita width. He has four arms and carries the
axe and rosary in his upper hands, while in each of his normal hands bo holds a bowl.
This detail is characteristic of his Javanese standing forms and is practically never
met with elsewhere. Around the pedestal is a row of skulls.

Quite different. from the above is the remarkable statue of a standing Ganeéa,
now in Leyden,? which gives the same impreasion of dignity aa does the celebrated
standing figure of Ganeda in the Museum at Tourane in Indo-China The head is
truer to nature than the usual ramassé type, and he wears an ornate mukuta which
is decorated, ag well as his ear-rings and braceleta, with skulls. A serpent across his
breast replaces the Brahmanical thread. He has four arma and also carries two
bowls; but the trunk is lifting a cake from the one in the left hand, following tradi-
tion. There is a nimbus as well as an aureole, and flowing scarves fall from hia
jewelled belt. In fact, it is the most ornate image of Ganesa found in Java.

At Ardimoeljo, near Singasari, a most interesting triad was discovered,‘ which,
when found, was in fragments; but it has now been restored as nearly as possible
to its original form. In the centre, according to Bosch and Stein-Callenfels,’ is the
patron goddess of Nepal, Guhyedvart. On either side of the goddess is a amall
image ; to the right that of Ganeda in a slightly dancing pose, and to the left that
of Cakracakra.® The inscription at the back of the triad, however, does not mention
Guhyedvart nor the two attendants, but refers to ‘ Bhattart’, which, however, is only
an epithet meaning ‘the divine’ and may therefore be applied to any great goddess
such as Devt, Laksmi, or Sarasvati. The goddess Devi is the female energy of Siva
and has both a mild and a fierce form. In her ferocious form she is called Durga and
may carry a sword, which attribute is never held by Lakgmi nor Sarasvati and ts

found in the hand of the goddess in the triad. Jt seems probable, therefore, that
‘Bhattart’ refers to the Durga-form of Devi, who is the same as Uma, and thus
Parvati; hence, as will be seen from the legend below, the goddess in the triad might
be Guhyeavari. Stein-Callenfels quotes Perquin, who claime that in the triad we are in
the presence of a‘ Buddhist’ Durg3. One is at 8 loss to understand how this ferocious
ty, PL 3I(c). 4 Oudheidkundig Verslag (2ad ed.), Pl. 12.
2 y, Pl 31 (6). * Idem, p. 31.
4 y. Pi. 25 (d). ¢ Idem, PI. 12 (6).

--- Page 84 ---
60 GANESA LN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO

Saiva form of Parvati might become ‘Buddhist’; and still more so, when, after

claiming that Durga in this instance is a form of the Buddhist goddess Prajhapdra-

mita, he quotes the following from Wilson in explanation: ‘May that mysterious
portion of Praja, as Guhyeévari . . . who, in Durga, is manifested, &e... 2 It
seems clear, however, that ‘Prajiia’ does not refer here to the goddess Prajitapara-

mit& but is simply the term used in sddhanas to indicate the mystic companion of a

great god, in fact, what might be called the spiritual form of the material éekti.

Finot is of the opinion that ‘Bhattari’ refers to Durga as the consort of Bhattari-

Guru, one of the titles of Siva.

It nevertheless seems surprising to mect with this Nepalese goddess in Java, who
although worshipped both by Brahmans and by Buddhists in Nepal was practically
unknown in India. The presence of Ganega beside Guhyedvari also appears inexplic- _
able without remembering the Saiva legend, which runs aa follows: Devi, wife of
Siva, was inconsolable. Her father had shown lack of respect to the Lord of the
Trident, and she therefore decided to sacrifice her life to make amends. Accordingly,
she ordered a funeral pyre to be prepared and when lighted she cast herself upon it.
In the meantime, Siva, hearing of his consort’s wilful suicide, repaired to the place
of sacrifice and seeing her on the burning pyre, gathered her up in his arms in a
fit of madnesa and began dancing the tdndava, threatening universal destruction ;
hence his name of Bhairava.?

According to the most popular form of this legend,? Siva carried her body three
times around the world, and at each place where a part of her body fell a shrine was
erected. In Nepal fell the guéya, and the goddess GubyeSvari is looked upon as a
personification of this ‘hidden’ part.

She is imaged with eight arms, and among her various symbols she carries a
sword, trident, patra, and bow and arrow, which are apparent in spite of the
damaged state of the triad. In her upper left hand she holds a lasao, hoop-shaped.
The corresponding right hand is broken and the symbol is missing. If compared
with the triad in the Philadelphia University Museum,? their left arms and symbols
seem to correspond. May not the central deity here also be Guhyesvari instead of
‘Sri-Lakgmi’*?

The presence of Ganesa hy the side of the goddess finds its explanation in the
fact that Guhyegvari is a manifestation of Pirvat! and thus the mother of the
Elephant-headed god; and it is of interest to note that the Indian tradition has
been followed, for in the Presence of one or both of his parents Ganega was always
represented as much smaller than Siva and Parvati.

Originally, he may have had four arms, but only two are left holding a bow! and
his broken tusk. He is in a slightly dancing attitude which, it will be remembered,
was usually the case when accompanying Siva; and his jatd-mukufa and dsana
omamented with skulls seem also to refer to Siva, who, in his dancing form of
Bhairava, as we have said above, wear skull ornamenta.

It may be only a coincidence that Ganeda as represented in the triad appears to

" Le Me iH, Sylvain Lévi, vol. i, p. 376. a y ii, PA. 8, fig. 1.
: Pankow’ Soon pie p. 376. : Tabaee, (oomarcawaray, part ii, Pl. 8, fig.

--- Page 85 ---
GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO a
reflect the above myth. On the other band, it is not inconceivable, since the
Javanese were well versed in north-east Indian legends which have been preserved
in Nepal.

Unlike Siam and Indo-China, Java produced comparatively few bronze images of
Ganega, but they surpass the stone sculptures both in conception and presentation.

In the Museum fiir Volkerkunde in Munich there ia a very fine Javanese bronze
statue of a seated, four-armed Ganega.' The head, especially the ears and trunk,
is admirably modelled. His karanda-mukufa is omamented with skulls and his
dsana is decorated with two rows of skulls, which is unusual. In his upper right
band he holds a serpent, the body of which crosses his breast like a Brahmanical
thread, while in his upper left hand he grasps a hoop-shaped garland. In each of his
normal hands, posed on the knees, he holds a bowl, a feature which is rarely met
with, except in standing images. The soles of his feet touch, but they are not normal
feet as all the toes are of the same length. From his belt hang bands which fall over
his legs, but like all the early images in Java, he is represented nude and sitting
very erect.

The most beautiful of the bronze statues of Ganeéa is now in Leyden.” He is
figured seated on a throne which, at the back, forms a nimbus; and above him is the
royal parasol. The throne is supported by elephants, and between them is the rat,
his mount, which we meet with for the first time in Java. As far as the author knows,
this bronze image is the only Javanese representation of Ganeés accompanied by
his wihana.

The Elephant-faced god is seated on a round cushion in the mahdrdjalila pose,
but with this difference from the usual attitude, in that the knee is held uplifted by
a searf tied around the body from the left hip, an ancient custom of Indian ascetics
and of high-caste Hindus.

The attitude with the ecarf is met with in the ancient Indian school such as at
Sanchi and in other Buddhist aculptures in India; and it is not unknown in Java,
where, in the Buddhist bae-reliefe at Boro-Budur, there are two fine examples. One
is that of the father of the prince Sudhana in indolent repose in his palace ;> and
the other is that of the Bodhisattva Siddbartha reclining in his chariot under the
royal parasol, after having met with an aged person for the first time.‘

Although the mahdrdjalila pose with the searf may be found not infrequently in
stone sculptures, it is seldom met with in bronze statues, Besides this Javanese
image of Ganesa, there is only one other example known to the author, that ofa
Tibetan bronze statue of Avalokitedvara, who is seated with the right knee uplifted
and held in place by a scarf tied around the body from the left bip and knotted at
the knee.®

It seems incongruous to find this attitude adopted for a Brahmanic god, which, in
Buddhist iconography, as depicted in the Javanese Buddhist sculptures, is used for
a deity of importance such as a Bodbisattva. We have scen above many examples

1 vy. Pl. 34 (a). 4 Idem, PI. XXXVI.
2 v. Pl 32 (a). * Gof N. B., Pl. XXXL, fig. a.
2 B. of B. A., A. Foucher, Pi. XXXV.

--- Page 86 ---
62 GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO

of Ganeda reflecting the glory of the Lord of the Trident; but we have not yet seen
Ganeéa represented with Buddhist insignia of high rank such as the royal parasol,
the throne supported by elephants and in princely attitude of repose.

Jn the Museum of Mathura there is a sculpture in stone representing Pajicika-
Mahakéla in mahdrdjalila-pose where the scarf is drawn tight across his obese torso,
which, were the god elephant-faced, might be taken for Ganeda.) There are those
who believe Mahakala, Ganega, and Kuvera to be manifestations of the same God
of Riches, and who look upon the rat of Ganeda and the mongoose of Kuvera as
having the same aymbolic meaning. There is much to be said in favour of the theory,
but to prove it would require infinite research which does not come within tho scope
of the present work.

Ganeéa in the above bronze image at Leyden ia represented, as is usual in Java,
with four arms, the upper hands holding a rosary and a trident-topped axe. In the
normal left he has the traditional bowl of cakes; while in the normal right, between
the thumb and first finger, he holds a aymbol which is either a three-leafed radish or,
as Juynboll believes,? one of his tusks ‘with its roots’. If it ia the tusk, it is not held
in the traditional way* but more as if it were a stylus; which, as seen above, is a pose
of the hand met with in Khmer images of Ganesa‘ but unusual in a Javanese statue.

If it be accepted that the symbol is a tusk held as a stylus, how does Juyaboll
explain the presence of ‘its roots’? According to all the puranic myths, the tusk was
broken off. There is only one puranic account which might serve as a raisun d étre
for his theory of the ‘tusk with its roots’, where Ganega pulled out his tusk and
hurled it at the Moon.® Is it a radish ‘with its roots’? Kern tells us that there is
a reference to Ganeéa holding a radish ‘ with its roots’ in a verse of the Brhat-SamAtta,
written by Varaha-Mihira about the end of the fifth century ;* but aa the verse has
only been found in one of the texts of the Brhat-Samhitd, he is of the opinion that
it is possibly spurious. ‘The author is inclined to believe that the attribute carried
by the Javanese bronze Ganeda is a radish with three leaves such as ia met with in
Bengal,” where he holds it in identically the same manner, between the thumb and
the index finger. .

The elephant-face of the Javanese bronze image resembles none that we have aa
yet met with, either Hindu or Javanese. The eyes and forehead are human in
aspect and the bridge of the nose is weil defined, while the trunk ecems to be a
prolongation of the nose. This characteristic is to be found in another bronze figure
an well us in a stone-carved image of Ganeéa discovered in Borneo. He wears a
tiara-shaped crown, behind which is a complicated mukula with tassels hanging
over cach car. The trunk turns to the left and lifta a cake from the bowl in the
left hand.

The emall bronze figure referred to above, and of which the author has been unable
to learn the provenance, is lew ornate but nevertheless of great iconographical

1 AnG. B.G., A. Foucher, tome ii, p. 825, fig. * ¥. PL. 26,

491. © vp. 2.
1 Catalogue, p. 71. * Chap. 58, verse 58.
2 ¥, Pl. 3 (a). 7 ¥. Pl. 16 (d).

--- Page 87 ---
GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO 63
intercat.' The deity is ecated in the Javanese pose with the goles of the feet touching
and has the usual four arms; but the symbols in the upper hands are difficult to
make out. It may be that the upper left holds a fly-whisk. The normal left hand
holds the bowl of cakes almost directly under the trunk so that it hangs nearly
straight. The normal right hand lies on the right knee palm upward, holding the
broken tusk. The ears are abnormally large and resemble amall wings. As in the
above bronze, he weare a tiara-shaped crown with an ornament in front a3 well as
at the sides. The mukufa resembles that of the above bronze but is narrower.

Again, the interesting feature of this image is the head that strangely enough has
an tirnd between the eyes.? This would indicate a Buddhist cult, and, as far as the
author knows, is the only example of Ganeéa represented with, unquestionably, an
tirna on the forehead. The eyes are human in aspect, with well-defined eyebrows.
The bridge of the nose ia more apparent than in the above bronze; and the trunk,
which is only formed at the end of the nose, gives the elephant face a more human
aspect than we have ecen on any other image of Ganeda. The serpent, which is
ugually used as a girdle, or, hanging from the left shoulder, passes under the right
arm like a Brahmanical thread, falls from each ehoulder to the waist with the
serpent head at the left shoulder.

If this bronze image be compared with a carved stone etatue of Ganeda discovered
in Borneo, the similarity will be found very striking; and as they both differ in
type from the usual figures of Ganeéa in Java, it may be inferred, until proved to the
contrary, that this small bronze image of Gageda is aleo from Borneo.

The stone statue of Ganeda® is seated like the above, with the soles of the feet
touching, and is likewise four-armed, the upper hands holding both the rosary and
axe (or elephant-goad). The normal right is broken off. The left hand is posed
directly above the feet, holding the bowl underneath the trunk, which thus hangs
perfectly straight, a feature which has not previously been met with in the Malay
Archipelago.

The ears are abnormally large and wing-shaped, and above the forehead is a
narrow crown behind which the hair is drawn into a high chignon held by a round
band at the base and ommamented with a moon-creacent out of which rises o
flaming triangle.

The eyes are human and the eyebrows are well defined. From the bridge of the
nose, the face becomes the trunk, whereas in the bronze described above the cheeks
are defined, thus giving the elephant face a more human appearance.

This atone-carved statue of Ganeée was discovered in a cave at Kombeng,
Borneo, which, however, was not a rock-cut temple, nor was there any evidence
found of ita having been used for religious rites. It is presumed that the images of
Ganeda, as well aa those of Mahakala, Karttikeya, Lokesvara, Vajrapani, and others,
were hidden there when their temples were destroyed by hostile invaders.

That Brahmanism existed at a very early date in Borneo is proved by a sanskrit
inscription found at Kotei which is believed to be of the fifth century, where
Ly. PLI2@@). * y, Pl. 32 (6).

2 ¥, Gloosary.

--- Page 88 ---
64 GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO

Brahmanic rites are recorded as being officiated by Brahmanic priests. Thus it is not
impossible that the statue of Ganesa found in the grotto at Kombeng is one of the
oldest in the Malay Archipelago.'

In Bali, on the contrary, no record has been found to throw light on the early
adoption of Brahmanism in the island; but according to Chinese records,” Bali waa
already a religious centre in the Middle Ages resisting Moslem influence and, in fact,
offering a refuge from all religious persecutions. ,

Before the eighth century the Balinese worshipped Brahma and Visnu and the
group of five deities known to us in sonth India: Siva, Durga (Parvati), Visnu,
Surya, and Ganesa, During the eighth and ninth centuries the Saiva cult was
especially flourishing in Bali ;3 and Siva, accompanied by Durga and Ganeéa, as well
as by his mount, Nandi, the bull, was in great favour, if one judges from the number
of temples dedicated to him alone. When represented in this group, he was often
in Wage form.

It is probable that Ganeda, aa one of the group of five deities, was not without his
share of worshippers; and he may also have drawn a certain number of adorers
when accompanying Siva; but no evidence of an actual Ganedga cult has been found
which would justify the great number of his images found in Bali.

Asa rule, Ganesa is represented standing, and although his statues have not been
found in Bali, as in Java, at river crossings or other places of danger, he may never-
theless have been looked upon as Protector against Evil Spirits, His images are
often met with in niches in the Gandis, where his sapect is singularly more Chinese
than Indian or Javanese. This is not surprising, since the Chinese were settled on
the island possibly as carly as the Hindus,‘ at any rate, quite early enough to stamp
their influence on the art of Bali.

When standing, especially in tjandi niches, the Balinese Ganesa in represented
short and thick-set, with the head often disproportionately large and wearing a
huge and complicated crown, in graduated tiers of leaf-motives with an ornament
in the centre. He usually has the third eye and his normal eyes are large, often
goggled, and sometimes round and staring.

He is bare to the waist, but below the jewelled girdle hang scarves draped around
the hips with an omate end falling in front to the ground. Across his breast, like a
Brahmanical thread, is a serpent with the head at the left shoulder, A feature of the
trunk which is only found in Bali is that toward the end it is sometimes snake-like,
being carved with the same scale motifs as the aerpent hanging from the left shoulder.®

Another feature of this standing form which has not as yet been met with ia that
Ganeéa has a anake and sometimes two, coiled around his ankles. We have scen that
in Nepal, Ganeda may hold above his head, with his upper arms, the eerpent Sega,
while in Java he may have serpents for ommaments; but the symbolic meaning of
the serpents coiled around his feet, which is evidently based on tradition since eo
often repeated, escapes, thus far, all explanation.

1 A. of Land J., Vogel, p. 17. « Idem, p. 178,
? B. and #., Sir Charles Eliot, vol. iii, p. 183. 5» y. Pl. 33 (4).
* Idem, p. 178.

--- Page 89 ---
GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO 65

The ecated images of the Balinese Ganega are repreecnted as a rule with the aoles
of the feet touching aa in Java. The stone-carved statue in a niche at the Hermitage
of Yeh Pocloe is two-armed with the hands posed on the knees as in Indo-China.
The body is erect, the elephant face ia true to nature with normal cars. The trunk
hangs straight, slightly coiled at the end.

Tn the village of Bretit a small stone figure of Ganeda was found which is of
interest because of the head-dress, for on the top of the head, behind the tiara-
sbaped crown, is a large flattened lotus-flower such aa we have already met with in
Java! and have found in Indo-China.?

In the Malay Archipelago as well as in Indo-China, it was an ancient custom to
make posthumous statues of kings and queens, imaging them as gods and goddesses
and usually representing them standing in groupe. Stutterheim has observed the
almost invariable presence of Ganesa to the extreme right of the Balinese groups of
deified personages, who were represented standing on lotus-Howers and wearing the
same elaborate mukutas as Ganeéa when he is figured in tjandi nichea or seated on &
lotus throne.

Stutterheim believes that his worship was in eome way drawn into the ceremonies
of deifying the statues of kings and queens. As these images were made in com-
memoration after the death of the royal personages, it is not impossible that
Ganeéa, who was undoubtedly worshipped during their lifetime as ‘Remover of
Obstaclea’, was placed at the right of cach group in order, if properly propitiated, to
remove all ohstaclea from their patha after death.

A statue found in Djembaran seems to show that Ganeéa had eome euch tradition
in south Bali? He is seated in the Javanese attitude, the right hand holding a torch,
the left a bowl. The trunk is short and coiled underneath as in the ancient Javancee
bronze now in the British Museum.* The head-dress is Indonesian, but the detail of
apecial interest is that the throne is surrounded by flames. Bencath the feet is an
inscription which is tranaliterated prds (7).

Although the statue is somewhat later than thoee described above, it is none the
leas possible that the use of the flame-motive was based on an ancient tradition
executed, as far aa is now known, for the first time in atone. The sculptor of gods
and goddeasea never added either symbols or other elements of pure fantasy until
towards the seventeenth or eighteenth century; and if the aymbolic meaning of
eome of the details is lost to ua, it is none the less certain that their presence was
authorized by religious canon or local legend.

Such being the case, may not the form of Ganeéa holding a torch and seated on
a throne ewrounded by flames be considered as throwing light on his role when
accompanying the group of deified kings and queens? Was he looked upon ss
taking charge of the royal personages after death like the Shingon Fudo, who is
also represented surrounded by flames? At any rate, we have come upon & con-
ception of Ganeéa which has been met with in no other country.

Very few images of Ganeéa in bronze have been found in Bali, but one of epecial

1 y. Pl, 30 (c). ay, PL 33 (6).
9 y. Pl. 24 (6). 4 y. Pl, 29 (a).
oad xr

--- Page 90 ---
66 GANESA IN JAVA, BALI, BORNEO
interest, now in the Kern Institute at Leyden,’ was discovered in a village called
Davoek Tocket and is believed to be of the eighth century.”

Originally he was four-armed, but only one arm remaina, the hand of which rests
on the right knee and probably held the broken tusk. He is obese and nude and
wears a triangular collar, the point falling between the breasts and held in place by
bands passing under the arms.

As in most of the images of Ganega found in the Malay Archipelago, the head is
the chief interest, and in thia bronze it is especially so, since it is unlike any that we
have yet met with. The trunk, which is short, turns directly upward and rises to a
level with the mukuta.

Another feature which is rarely met with in the Malay Archipelago is the pose of
the feet. He is not seated with the soles of the feet touching but is in the Indian
attitude of locked lege.

Since neither the raised trunk nor the pose of locked legs, nor even the mukuta,
indicate either Javanese or Balinese origin, it seems probable that this small
bronze image of Ganesa, although found in Bali, came originally from China or
Indo-China.

2 v. Pl. 32 (¢). Presented ta the Kern Institute * Letter from Mr. Vogel to the author.
by Dr. Ker, sssistant nwident at Bali.

--- Page 91 ---
CHAPTER VII
GANESA IN CHINA
I: is not known at what epoch or by which route or routes the cult of Ganesa was
first introduced into China, and a still greater problem presents itself when
attempting to account for the double form of Ganeéa worshipped by the Chinese
which, outside of China and Japan, waa totally unknown,

‘There were two channels by which his cult might have reached China. The first,
and probably the earliest, was by the overland route either via Chinese Turkestan
or passing through Nepal and Tibet. His worship waa certainly brought to China
either by Indian pandits! or by Chinese Buddhist monks returning from their pil-
grimages to the Buddhist shrines of India, carrying back with them the tencts of the
Yogacara or Tantric echool favourable to the mystic cult of Ganeéa as conceived
by the Chinese.

No difficulty presente itself in tracing the second route, for precise records attest
to the voyages of Buddhist monks who crossed the seas from India to China, where
they introduced the Tantric texte and practices as well as the Mahayana doctrine
of the mandalas of the Two Parts: the Vajra-dhatu and the Garbha-dhatu, mystic
diagrame wherein Vindyaka had his allotted place.

Ganega was known to the Chinese as well aa to the Japanese under two
aspecta: Vinayaka, the single form, and Kuan-shi-t'ien (Kangi-ten), the double
form. The single form was similar to that found in practically all Buddhist
countries, that is, clephant-faced with two arms, and was usually cross-legged.
The double form, which, as we have said above, was totally unknown outside
of China and Japan, was represented by two elephant-faced deities standing vis
4 via, interlaced.

Unfortunately there are only two ancient representations of Ganeéa known to us
in China. One is a fresco on the wall of a grotto-temple at Tun-huang, while the
other is a stone bas-relief in the rock-cut temple at Kung-hsien. According to Paul
Pelliot, the frescos date from the first half of the sixth century, which would make
them contemporary with the stone sculptures of Kung-hsien. René Grousset traces
in the frescos at Tun-huang the progressive adaptation by the Chinese of Gan-
dharian, Gupta, and Iranian models ;? but were these purely Hindu frescos executed
by Buddhist Chinese, by Indian artists, or by both?

At this period, the finest frescos at Ajanta were being painted, and among the
ateady stream of Buddhist pilgrims from China to India were assuredly Chinese
artista who, like the illustrious Buddhist traveller Hetian-tsang, visited Ajanta and
returned to China via Tun-huang. While at Ajanta the gradual development of
mural painting may be traced which culminated in the masterpieces in Cave I, at
Tun-huang, although various influences are apparent, the frescos seem to have
been executed by sure and experienced hands. They were, however, apparently not

dy. p. 73. 2 H. de TE.-0., tome i. p. 316.

--- Page 92 ---
68 GANESA IN CHINA
creations like at Ajanta, but give the impression of having been copied from memory
from Hindu paintings which unfortunately are lost to us.

Above and on both sides of the Buddhist statues, which are of the Wei dynasty,
are the freacos which, eapecially in Cave N, No. 120, portray only Hindu deities:
Strya on his horse-drawn chariot, Candra on a chariot drawn by swans, the
Navagrahas in a frieze; while below is the god of Love, Kama, beside whom, on a
slightly lower level, is Ganega ecated in Maharajalila pose.

If we carefully study this representation of Ganesa, it is surprising to find details
of iconography, which apparently indicate a later period than Wei; and it seems
essential that we should note these points when describing the remarkable repre-
sentation of Vindyaka at Tun-huang.

We have referred above to a painting of Ganeda on a panel found in Chinese
Turkestan at Endere, which is said to be of the eighth century. If we compare this
representation of Vinayaka with that of Tun-huang, it will be found that there is a
resemblance between the two which scems inexplicable. For instance, let us study
the upper part of the head of the Tun-huang Ganega and compare it with that of his
representation at Endere. The head is presented three-quarters aa was usual in
Chinese Turkestan. The outline of the left eye, the contour of the bridge of the nose
from which the trunk develops, the difficult drawing of the right cye, are so similar
that one has the impression that if they were not drawn by the same hand, they
were executed by artists of the same school. The left arm of Ganeéa at Tun-huang
holds the long narrow white tusk at the breast exactly as does the Ganesa at Endere
the long narrow white radish. The turban head-dress seems to proclaim an Iranian
influence. The turban is drawn towards the front with the knots above the forehead
not only as on the Endere Ganeda but also aa on the painting of the well-known
Iranian Vajrapani, found in Chineae Turkestan, at Dandan-Uilig. The Ganeda at
Tun-huang does not wear the Persian tight-fitting trousers of the Vindyaka at
Endere but has on the Central Asian trousera of many folds. His trunk, although
turning to the right while that of the Ganeéa of Endere turns to the left, has the

same presentation, that is, it hangs straight for half ita length and then turns eide-
ways and upwards parallel with itself to a level with the shoulder. In the Tun-
huang Ganesa, it seems about to take a cake from the uplifted right hand on a line
with the shoulder. This pose of the trunk as well as that of the left hand at the breast
is unusual and up to the present time has not been found elsewhere.

Although the fresco of Ganeda at Tun-huang and the stone sculpture at Kung-
haien were apparently executed at the same epoch, they were assuredly not inspired
from the same source.

Undoubtedly the earlicat dated sculpture of an elephant-faced deity known to us
either in China or in India is the bas-relief in the Buddhist grotto-temple of Kung-
hsien! which, according to the inscription, was executed in a.p. 531. This Vinayaka
form of Ganeda is represented seated cross-legged with a lotus in his uplifted right
hand and a cinédmans in his left which is posed on his lap. According to the Chinese
characters % MP =E he is the ‘Spirit King of Elephants’; and is figured in

1 y, Are Asiatica, vol. ii, p. 15.

--- Page 93 ---
GANESA IN CHINA 69
company with nine other inferior deities or ‘Spirit Kings’. This same group is
also represented on the base of a Buddhist monument dated a.p. 543! which was
formerly in the possession of M. Victor Goloubew and is now in Boaton.

We have seen above that in India, Ganeda often figures in groupe such aa the
Navagrahas and the Saptamatrkas; but in this Chinese group he is represented in
the company of nine deities unknown in India as @ group: the Spirit Kings of the
Nagas, of the Wind, of Pearls, of Fire, of Trees, of Mountains, of Fishes; and at one
end of the group are the ‘Spirit Kings’ of Lions, of Birds, and of Elephanta. It ia
perhaps only a coincidence that these last three—the lion, the bird, and the elephant
—should have become important symbols in Chinese Buddhiam, especially the lion
as mount of Samantabhadra and the elephant as rahana of the God of Wisdom,
Mafjuéri.

Tt seems incredible that we should find an image of the Elephant-faced god in
China dated as early as a.v. 531, when in India there is no representation of Ganeda
which can be attributed without question to the sixth century,’ although, aa we
have seen above, there is evidence of his having drawn worshippers in India at a
much earlier period.

The Chinese representation of Ganesa at Kung-hsien waa undoubtedly made from
a model brought to China either at the end of the fifth or the beginning of the sixth
century, for the elephant was little known in China at that epoch and it would thus
have been practically impossible for a Chinese sculptor to conceive a figure of
Ganeéa so closely resembling the Hinda conception.

Ae it was not the Chinese custom to adore the images of their deities, the pilgrims
coming to India from China muet have been struck with the Hindu practice of
worshipping the statues of their gods; and especially a0, with the adoration of
Hindu god having the face of an elephant, since in China the form of the elephant
was looked upon az a symbol of the conception of the Buddha.

It is not impossible, therefore, that Fa-haien, who retuned to Chins from India
in the beginning of the fifth century, brought back an imago of the elephant-faced
deity as an example of the strange Indian custom. We may equally suppose that
Yasogupta, Buddhanandi, and three other Buddhist prieste, who left Ceylon in
A.p, 460, passing through India and, aa stated in certain accounts, Tibet,” brought,
among the images they are said to have carried with them, one of the Elephant-faced
god, possibly to remove obetacles on their long and adventurous voyage.

His image might also have been carried to China by the Chinese travellers, Sung
Yin and Hui-sheng, who were sent to India at the beginning of the sixth century
by the empress Hou, a fervent Buddhist, with mission to bring back Buddhist texte.
They returned to China with an important collection of Mahayana texte, nine years
before the sculptures of Kung-hsien were executed, that is, in a.p. 522,

It is hardly probable at this epoch that his image should have been brought to
China with the idea of establishing a Ganeda cult; nor that his worship was set up
in China as early as Haitan-teang, in the last half of the seventh century, for in the

1 Ars Asiaticn, vol.ii,v. Pls. XXVTland XXXVI. * Chinese Buddhiem, Edkins, p. lll, aad
2 That is, dated. y. p. 10 and p. 25. Wei show on Buddhiem, James Ware, p. 146.

--- Page 94 ---
70 GANESA IN CHLNA

account of his travels in India, Hsiian-tsang makes no mention of Ganesa, although
he returned to China via Tun-huang,' nor did his Japanese disciple, Doshd, establish
a Gancéa cult in Japan, although he introduced the doctrine of Yoga or Mystic
Union.

Toward the end of the seventh century another Chinese Buddhist monk, I-ching,
returned to China after a long pilgrimage through India, but like Hatian-tsang, he
made no reference to Ganega or a Ganeéa cult in the records of his travels? although
in India as weil as in the Malay Archipelago, where he remained several years on his
return voyage, he must have become familiar with the image of the Elephant-faced
god and witnessed his popularity. It may therefore be safely inferred that the
Ganega cult was not introduced into China by I-ching.

Many other Chinese monks followed the example of Haiian-tsang by making
pilgrimages to India, and returned to China for the most part ardent adherents of
the Yogacara school. Of these, however, there seems to be only one, Heiian-chao,
whose personality was atrong enough to warrant even a surmise as to whether the
introduction of the double form of Gancéa into China, and possibly its esoteric cult,
were duc to him.

Heiian-chao started from China on a pilgrimage to India about a.p. 641. Under
the protection of the Chinese princess Wen-ch’eng who had become regent of Tibet
after the death of the Tibetan king Srong-tsan-gam-po, he was able to pass through
Tibet on his way to India where he remained for several yeara in the vthdra of
Nalanda.

The form of Buddhism taught at Nalanda in the time of Hsiian-chao, outwardly
Buddhist, was, in reality, saturated with Tantric thought and practices which up
to the seventh century had been handed down eecretly by the Buddhist priests and
revealed to the public only after complicated rites of initiation.

Even before the Buddha, Tantriam or the use of mystic formulae, sorcery, and
magic had been practised by the primitive peoples of north India; and according to
the Guhyasaméja-tanira, the Buddha himeelf was believed to have revealed the
mystic mantra, the Ganapati-hrdaya,? to his followers.

It was, however, not until the fourth century a.p. that the doctrine of the Tan-
trayana with ita mantras, dharanis, and mandalas was incorporated into Buddhism
and that one of the earliest Buddhist Tantras, the Guhyasamdja, was compiled.‘

In the same century another mystic school was founded, the Yogécara which con-
sisted in the practice of profound meditation (samadhi) whereby was obtained a state
of yoga or the ecatatic Union of the Individual with the Universal Spirit (Vairocana).

A pantheon of gods and goddeases was set up where the deities, for the most part,
were personifications of abstract ideas or of philosophical conceptions deitied—-such
as the five Dhyani-Buddhas. Strangely enough, several Hindu gods were taken over
and admitted to the Buddhist pantheon, and among these was Ganesa.

1 The Life of Hiuen-Toiang, by the Shaman —* vy. p. 37.

Hwin Li. * According to Przyluski, the last redaction (if
2 A Record of the Buddhsss Religion, by I-teing, not the compilation) of the Gusyseamdja was
trans. by I. Takakusu. between the eighth and tenth centuries.

--- Page 95 ---
GANESA IN CHINA cal

Up to the sixth century, the Yogacara echool, with its Hidden Doctrine, had
remained on a fairly spiritual plane, that ia to aay that yoga or communion with
Vairocana through meditation was practised principally by the intellectual. Gradu-
ally, however, the Hindu Tantras were incorporated into Buddhist literature and
the distorted interpretation of yoga led to Sakti-worship. The éakti waa looked upon
as the female energy of the god and was usually worshipped accompanied by the
male deity. It was, in fact, a form of ‘mother’ cult.

‘Tbe germ of Sakti-cultus waa held in the GuAyasamdja where, in a magic circle or
mandala the five Dhydni-Buddhas were deacribed as being accompanied by their
Saktis; but up to the sixth century the yoga aapect of a deity had rarely been
represented either in etatues or in paintings. The form adopted to represent the
Mystic Union was that of the deity seated with the Sakti beside him who was
usually imaged much amaller than the god. This yoga aspect was used not only for
the important deities but also for those not included in the Mahayana system, such
as Ganeda, for, as early aa the sixth century according to Coomaraawamy, he was
represented seated with the éaidi on hia left knee.?

About eleven years before the arrival of Hsiian-chao in Tibet, the Tibetan king
Srong-tsan-gam-po, who had been converted to Buddhism by his two consorts, a
Nepalese princess and the Chinese princess Wen-ch'eng, sent an emissary, by name
T’on-mi Sambhota,? to India to procure Buddhist texta. It is not known what
religious works he carried back with him to Tibet; but it ia safe to say that beside
Mahayana siitras and Yogacira texts he brought Tantras dealing with the Sakti-
cultus. On the other hand, it is also probable that strong Tantric influence was
tranamitted to Tibet through the Himalayan passes‘ from Nepal.

Hsiian-chao, arriving at the vihdra of Nalanda in the middle of the seventh cen-
tury with the intention of perfecting himself in Yoga, would have found a Sakti-cult
firmly established in India; and on returning through Nepal and Tibet, he would
inevitably have been struck by the difference between the Indian and the Tibetan
conceptions of the doctrine of Yoga.

Little is known of the Bon-po religion which, up to the advent of the princess
Wen-ch’eng, had been practised in Tibet; but it is probable, since the Tibetans were
a primitive people, that the Bon-po religion waa not only animist but Tantric, and
that Sakti-worship would thus have appealed to them more directly than would the
doctrines of the Yogacara schooi. It is undoubtedly also for this reason that the
yab-yum® form, or the gross conception of the Mystic Union, found favour in Tibet,
where the deities and their éaktis were represented interlaced.

Since Ganesa had been adopted by the Yogacarina as a Buddhist deity, his worship
was introduced by them into Tibet, where his yab-yum form would have been the most
popular. But how was the yab-yum form represented? As the Tibetans did not

ty. p. 2, By the recent divcoveries in? v, PL 3 (a) and p, 27.

Mohenjo Daro and Harappa, :t is proved, accord- 3 About a.b. 629.

ing to Sir John Marthall, that this cult of the * Buddhist Esoteriom, Bhattacharyys, p. 50.
‘mother’ goddess was already known in India in > Lit. ‘father-mother™

prehistoric times.

--- Page 96 ---
72 GANESA IN CHINA

adopt tbe Hindu representations of the gode with their saktis, it seems improbable
that they would have made an exception of Ganeda. It may therefore be admitted
as possible that he was represented in Tibet interlaced with the sakti.

Unfortunately, we know of no representation of Ganeda in the yab-yum attitude,
which is unquestionably Tibetan; but may not the double form known in China
and Japan be, in reality, the Tibetan yab-yum form? There are instances in Tibet
where the yum is figured almost the size of the yab and is imaged facing him.’ The
difficulty of presenting an elephant-headed god in yab-yum with his dakti who had
also the bead of an elephant, would necessitate a somewhat different arrangement of
the deities from the usual Tibetan yab-yum form. At any rate as the Tantric aspect
of Mystic Union was unknown in China and Japan either in sculpture or paintings,
the double form of Ganeéa was evidently due to outside influence. On the other
hand, since the interlaced forms as conceived in Tibet were not adopted outside
of Nepal, Mongolia, and ‘Tibet, may we not infer that the esoteric form of Kuan-
shi-t’ien found in China and Japan either came originally from these countries or
was due to their influence ?

Haiian-chao, one of the moet mysterious as well as one of the moet learned of the
Chinese pilgrims, waa well qualified to have been the introducer of the mystic cult of
Kuan-shi-t'ien.? Disciple of the monk Fa-shun, of whose esoteric eystem called
Fa-haing-tsung? he was the leading exponent, Haiian-chao was well known in China
as a mystic before his pilgrimage to India. At Nalanda, where he spent several
years, he was initiated into the Secret Doctrine by the venerable guru Ratnasimha,
and he is said to have attained the seventeen degrees of Yoga.

His reputation as a profound Tantric acholar reaching China, the emperor Kao-
teung sent an ambassador, Wang Haiian-te’é, to India with mission to bring him
back. Heiian-chao, thus recalled by imperial command, returned via Nepal, where
he was received in state and escorted to the Tibetan frontier.

On hin passage through ‘Tibet, he was made much of by the queen regent, who
ahowered honours upon him and, according to I-ching, gave him many presente to
take back to Chins. It is not improbable that, among these gifts, there should have
been an image of Ganeéa in his yab-yum form with possibly the Tantric texts of ritual
for his worship, since the princess Wen-ch’eng is said to have dedicated a temple to
Ganeda in Tibet. At any rate, it would seem impossible for a Chincae pilgrim to have
introduced the yab-yum form of Ganeéa without having passed through Nepal and
Tiba.

On his return to China,* Haiian-chao proceeded to Lo-yang, where he found
that the emperor Kao-teung, under the commanding influence of his favourite
concubine Wu Teét'ien, had practically given over to her the reins of govern-
ment and was, in reality, only emperor in name.’ Although a weakling, Kao-
taung was none the leas a fervent, as well as a learned Buddhist scholar. It is
said of him that he composed a preface for one of the Buddhist translations of

1 Gods of Northern Buddhiom, Pi. XLIV, fig. d. 4 ap. 664,
» Japaneee: Kangi-ten. + v. H. de VE.-O., Groussst, tome i, p. 276, 0.4;
4 *Bchool of the Troe Natare.’ reigned 650-683.

--- Page 97 ---
GANESA IN CHINA 13
Heiian-teang;’ but like all of the Tang emperors, ho waa attracted by the occult
and the supernatural and was willing to worship at any altar where there was
promise of attaining his desires.?
Haiian-chao was received in audience by the emperor for the firat time when
Kao-tsung was on his way to T’ai-shan to perform the solemn sacrifices called fong
and shan.> Undoubtedly he waa questioned by the emperor as to the mystic cults
and Tantric practices which he had met with during his travels, and if it was Haiian-
chao who introduced the double form of Ganega into China, he would certainly have
revealed to the emperor at this first audience, the principal elements of the mystic
cult of Kuan-ahi-tien.
Unfortunately there are no records indicating that the secret worship of the
double form of Ganesa was adopted at the court of Kao-taung; but if so, the worship
of Ganeda as Remover of Obstacles and Bestower of Success would have appealed
particularly to the empress Wu Tyé-t’ien,‘ an intriguing woman who ruthlessly swept
aside all obstacles to her ambition, even her own son, Chung-teung. And later, in
705, the cult would have found favour with the empress Wei, who, in order to
usurp the imperial throne, poisoned her husband the emperor hung-tsung.®
Such being the Tang court at the end of the seventh century and the beginning of
the eighth, it might well have proved a fertile field for the propagation of the Tantric
worship of Ganega. Hatian-chao, however, would have had barely a year to establish
the cult, for in 685 he was commanded by the emperor to proceed to Kashmir with
mission to bring back to Lo-yang a Brahman alchemist, called Lokayata, said to
possess the Elixir of Life. He was obliged to interrupt his revelation of the doctrine
of yoga to the venerable monks of the Ching-ai-ssit and thus was unable to translate
the sanskrit Buddhist texts which they had begged him to render into Chinese for
their use. He, however, Jeft his sanskrit books in the temple and departed for
Kashmir accompanied by Shih-pien, a Buddhist monk well versed in the use of
magic prayers or vidyd-mantras. Hsiian-chao was never to return to China, for he
died in India on his way to Kashmir.
Tf there is no proof that the yoga form of Ganesa and his mystic cult were known
in China in the seventh century, there are Chinese texts to show that in the second
half of the eighth century he was worshipped in his double form ; and if the introduc-
tion of the ritual for the worship of Kuan-shi-t’ien is not to be attributed to Haiian-
chao, it was probably brought to China, or at least translated for the first time, by
a celebrated Indian pandit Subhakara-simha.
Subhakara-simha* waa the von of a king of Orissa, one of the Tantric centres of
India. At the death of the king, Subhdkara reigned for several years and then
abdicated in favour of his brother, preferring a life of contemplation. He was
initiated into the Secret Doctrine by the celebrated gurx Dharmagupta, who coun-
selled him to go to China to reveal the tenets of the Yogacara school.
1H. de VE .O,, tome i, p. 204, * ap. 684-705.
* R.Z., Yi-teing, trad. Chavannes, Introductioa, 5 ap. 710.

p. xv. © ap, 637-735.
* aD. 665.
cad L

--- Page 98 ---
4 GANESA IN CHINA

Unfortunately, Subbakara left no accounts of his travels as did Hsiian-tsang and
T-ching ; but there are records which note that he left India for China about AD. 715
carrying with him many Tantric texts and the Mahd-Vatrocana-sitra. On account
of the troubled state of central Asia, the only safe way of travel was by sea, and he
probably embarked for China from the port of Palur near the Black Pagoda, a
celebrated land-mark for navigators along the east coast of India.

Subhakara arrived in China in 716 and proceeded to the Chinese capital of
Ch’ang-an, where he was received at court with many honours by the greatest of
Tang emperors, Haiian-tsung. In spite of his advanced age of eighty, his activity
was remarkable, not only aa a propagandist, but as a translator; and among his
most important translations into Chinese was said to be the Mahd-Vairocana-sitra,!

Strangely enough, one of the last translations made by Subhakara when nearing
the end of his life? was a ritual for the worship of Kuan-shi-vien.? Was this Tantric
text among the works that he had brought with him from India, or was it from the
archives of oue of the vihdras at Ch’ang-an, or found among the sanskrit books left
by Hsiian-chao in the Ching-ai-ssii temple, at Lo-yang? No records solve these
questions nor why Subhakara, with so many important Buddhist works still untrans-
lated, should have spent the ehort time left him for productive activity in trans-
lating this seemingly unimportant ritual. Was the translation made by imperial
command ? Even if so, the only logical reaaon for translating the liturgic text for the
worship of Kuan-shi-t’ien into Chinese would scem to have been that the double form
of Ganeéa was already known in China and that there was need of a ritual
in order definitely to establish the cult.

At any rate, we know that towards the end of the eighth century the esoteric cult of
Kuan-shi-t’ien was already being practised in China, for it is recorded in a religious
work written by the Chinese monk Chung-shé about a.v. 7744 that Han-kuang, also
@ Buddhist monk, transmitted to the author by word of mouth a minute description
of how the double form of Ganeéa should be represented and the benefits to be
derived therefrom by worshipping him when accompanied by the prescribed rites
and ceremonies.

About this time, that is to say, in the second half of the eighth century, lived the
most remarkable of all the Chinese mystics, Hui-kuo.> At the age of seven, he had
already begun his religious studies under the guidance of the learned Sinhalese pandit
Amoghavajra, who taught him the use of mantras and dharanis; and was initiated
by him into the doctrine of yoga, mastering, before he was thirty, the mystic
Mandala of the Two Parts in which, aa we have stated above, Ganeéa figures in the
assemblies of deities. It is eaid of Hui-kuo that he not only studied every esoteric
form of Buddhist doctrine that reached China but mastered it with perfect under-

standing. May it not be inferred from this, that the esoteric cult of Kuan-shi-t'ien
was not unknown tohim? At any rate, according to tradition, his illustrious disciple,
1 Ganeés was looked upon s century Iater in * Taisho 1274, called Kangi Séshin Bindyaka
Japan as # manifcetation of Vairocans: v. Pp. 84. ten gyd2d don giki: Japanese name, Kaihitau.
; altro 735 and waa buried at Lung men. * Japanese: Kei-kwa; 4.0. 746-805.
1o i

--- Page 99 ---
GANESA IN CHINA 78

Kobé Daishi,’ introduced the cult of Kuan-shi-t’ien (Kangi-ten) into Japan, inoor-

porating it in the Hidden Doctrine of the Shingon sect which he founded on his
return to Japan from China?

Unfortunately no Chinese image of the double form of Ganeéa is known to us, and
there is thus no material proof of his having been worshipped in China. From
Chinese and Japaneas texts,> however, we learn that his secret cult was practised
in China as late as the eleventh century, for the emperor Chen Tsung issued an
edict in a.p. 1017 prohibiting the inclusion in the Tripitaka of the ‘siya in four
volumes’ on the worship of Ganeéa in his double form of Kuan-shi-t’ien ; and forbade
the translation into Chinese of all similar texte. The emperor very likely prohibited,
at the same time, the making of images of Kuan-shi-t'ien, and thie is undoubtedly
the reason why no representations of the double form have heen found in China.

There is therefore a wide gap between the Vinayaka form found in the rock-cut
temple of Kung-hsien executed in the first half of the aixth century, and the Vina-
yaka form which, towards the end of the eighth or the beginning of the ninth cen-
tury, appeared in China in the mystic diagrama of the Mandala of the Two Parts,
that is, the Vajra-dhatu and the Garbha-dhatu.

‘The esoteric cult of Vairocana as taught by Amoghavajra in China in the cighth
century, which later bad an influence on the worship of Ganeéa in Japan, was founded
on the doctrine of this double mandala which had both an exoteric and an esoteric
aspect—the two sides of Absolute Reality.

According to the exoteric explanation of the diagrams, the Garbha-dhatu repre-
sented the material, the phenomenal world, and the Vajra-dhatu, the spiritual, the
noumenal world ; and although they were apparently separate, they were in reality
One and the Same or the Dharma-dhatu, that is, the Universe, the Coamic world.

According to the esoteric doctrine, Vairocana aa represented in the Vajra-dhatu
diagram was the soul of the Universe while his manifestation in the world of pheno-
mena or Vajrasattva, as figured in the centre of the Garbha-dhatu, was the embryo
of the Universe. It was taught that the Two Parte of the Coamos were symbolized
by these two mystic diagrams, the hidden meaning of which waa only to be revealed
after the disciple had received the abhigeka or ‘baptism’ of initiation.

The mandala of the Garbha-dhatu was probably introduced into China by
Subhakara-aimha. At any rate, the earliest known diagram of the mandala is
attributed to the learned pandit. In the earlicst conception of the Garbha-dhatu
diagram, the deities were not figured but were indicated by the inscription of their
names in the enclosures. It is not known what Buddhist texta were used by Subha-
kara to construct the diagram, but since the name that he inscribed in the centre

of the eight-petalled lotus is Vairocana (in reality Vajrasattva, according to esoteric
teachings) it is safe to say that it was inspired by texts bearing on the esoteric
cult of the deity. .

The diagram underwent several changes during the lifetime of Subhakara-simha.

) Japanreo: Ku-kai. * ap. 806. Eliot, p. 139.

+ v. new edition of Tripitaka, published by —* Naujio, no. 1661; v. J. R., Sir Charles Eliot,
Takakusu, nos. 1266-75 and J. B., Sir Charke p. 139.

--- Page 100 ---
16 GANESA IN CHINA

More enclosures were added to its original form and the number of names of deities

was augmented; but although the name of Idina (Siva) is found in each of the

transformations of the mandala, in none of the diagrams as conceived by Subhakara

is to be found the name of Vindyaka. On the other hand, in the outer enclosures of

the most ancient diagrams of the Garbha-dhatu in Japan, of which one, according

to tradition, is the original and the other a copy of the original diagram brought from

China by K6obé Daishi,' the image of Vinayaka is shown third from that of Iéana
in the north exterior enclosure.”

Toganod tells us in his Mandara no Kenkyu that
the Garbha-dhatu diagram conceived by Subhakara
was copied by the Corean priest Chisho Daiji while
staying in the T’ang capital towards the end of the
eighth century; and furthermore, that Chisho be-
came the guru of Hui-kué and gave him Buddhist

4 texts to read that had been translated from Sanakrit

¥ » into Chinese by Subhakara-simha.* If the Corean

¥ yp priest showed him, at the same time, the original, or

A x SAG his copy of the original, diagram of the Garbha-dhatu

wy); (y) drawn by Subhakara, Hui-kué would have first seen

ZY, the mandala without the image of Vinayaka. The

Sn question thus arisea as to when the representation

SS of Vindyaka was first incorporated in the outer

EY) FS assembly of deities in the Garbha-dhitu mandala.

The Vajra-dhatu mandala, we are told, was con-

Fo. 4 yintyane in the atructed according to the Vajra-éekhara-yoga and

. was painted by the Indian saint Nagabodhi, who

tranamitted his copy to his disciple Amoghavajra when he returned to China in

A.D. 746. The diagram contained nine assemblies of deities arranged in three rows

of three. The central parisad or assembly was made up of five circles each containing

five gods; and the whole parigad was framed by an enclosure containing minor
deitica among whom were five different forma of Ganeéa.

According to Toganoé, however, the diagram of the Vajra-dhatu was not con-
structed in India but was conceived by Amoghavajra from the Buddhist esoteric
texta that he had brought back to China on hia return from India, where he is said
to have learned the method of drawing the mandalas from the saint Nagabodhi
himeelf.

At any rate, there is little doubt that the mandala of the Vajradhatu, aa well as
that of the Garbha-dhatu, took on definite form in China; and that the image of
Vinayaka under the direction of Amoghavajra was inserted for the first time in the
mystic diagram of the Garbha-dhatu. In fact, direct Indian influence is apparent
in the outer enclosure, where, besides Vindyaka, there are the Hindu gods Iéana,
Indra, Yama, Varuna, Vaidravana, and the grakas or planeta and raksasas.

ly. p. 78. ® y, Mandara, Toganod, p. 48.
# Called Sasge-im (to the left of the diagram).

--- Page 101 ---
GANESA IN CHINA ”

Another question arisea aa to why there were five images of Ganeéa in the Vajra-
dhatu while there was only one in the Garbha-dhatu.

The ravaon Petre of four of the five forma of Ganeés in the Vajra-dhatu may
possibly be his reputation as a powerful protecting deity if properly propitiated.
We have ecen above that in India, as well as in Tibet, he was placed over the
entrances to temples and monasteries for that purpose. Amoghavajra was evidently
aware of this, for in one of his Commentaries (Taisho No. 1003) he states that
Ganeéa was ‘placed over the four en-
trances’, that ia, protecting the four
sides, undoubtedly, of a vihdra. This
custom, probably based on a astitra
which, unfortunately, ia unknown to 0 Se
ua, seems to explain the presence of VA 2 ~
Ganeéa in the centre or vulnerable point \ \ v
of each side of the outer enclosure (Satge- NY
in) framing the central parigad. He thus /\ %, <—F
protected the four quarters against evil NSCOXY AL
spirits, following the directiona which est" y , ©
Amoghavajra had undoubtedly brought Grr ( AG \
from India. cH \. t

The fifth image of Ganeda in the Vajra- ox £5)
dh&tu, called Vindyaka, is, as it were, Wena
hors série. He is represented in the usual GS
Indian form of the ‘Remover of Obstacles’ S LAC >
except that he carrics the radish instead — 5
of the broken tusk. His position in the
mandala waa below the Ganeéa guarding Fro. 5. Viniyaka in tho Garbha-dbatu.
the north? aide of the parisad, while the
Vindyaka of the Garbha-dhatu is aleo on the north? aide of the outer enclosure and

is placed in the suite of Téna (Siva).

As au explanation of the presence of the fifth Ganeda in the Vajra-dhatu, it may
be suggested that when Subhékara’s diagram of the Garbha-dhatu in which the
deities were not depicted was adopted by Amoghavajra and hia disciple, Hui-kud,
to form, with the Vajra-dhatu, the Mandala of the Two Parts, they inserted in
place of the names, the figures of the deities, probably copying them from the
Vajra-dhatu. Amoghavajra would certainly have remarked that there was no
image of Ganeda in the Garbha-dbatu diagram of Subhakara. As we have seen
above, ho believed in the efficacy of charme and mantras and was probably not
insensible to the Indian tradition in regard to Ganeda; and, aa a wise precaution, be
might have inserted a figure of the ‘Remover of Obstacles’ in both diagrams to
ensure them against al! ‘obstacles’ that would hamper the secret rituals of the
Mandala of the Two Parts.

ty. p. 79. compass differ in the two randalas.
+ That is, the right aide. The points of the ® That is, the left aide.

--- Page 102 ---
CHAPTER VIII
GANESA IN JAPAN
HE ‘Remover of Obstacles’ was unknown in Japan up to the ninth century,
Thre the Buddhist monk, Kobd Daishi,’ who was sojourning in the Kamadera
temple at Takaishi, came upon a roll of manuscripts that proved to be a Chinese
translation of the MaAd-Vairocana-sitra,? the ‘Tantric doctrine of which, a few years
later, was to influence the rites and ceremonies of a Ganeéa cult.

As K6bd Daishi was unable to grasp the hidden meaning of the sdra, and as no
one in Japan waa able to reveal it to him, he begged permission of the Emperor
to be allowed to go to China. Accordingly, in company with the Buddhist monk,
Dengyé Daishi, he joined the suite of the ambassador to the T’ang court, and
arriving in China,? be wandered from temple to temple in search of a Buddhist
echolar versed in the Hidden Doctrine. In the Taing-long-ssii,* he found the great
pandit Hui-kuo,’ head of the Shén-yven* sect, who greeted him with the words:
‘I knew that you would come to me and have been waiting for you. Prepare to
receive the Doctrine of Mia-kué.’7

According to Shingon tradition, Hui-kué revealed the Hidden Doctrine to K5bd
Daishi after having given him the abdhiseke or * baptism’ of initiation ; and ordering a
copy of the Mandala of the Two Parts to be painted by the celebrated Chinese
painter Li-chén, he transmitted the two diagrams to his illustrious disciple. The
enclosures in the diagrams as well as the images of the deities were outlined in gold
on a black background, and the two mandalas, called the ‘Takao Mandala’, are
now in the Jing6-ji at Takaosan. The ‘T6ji Mandala’ in the Kongo-in at ‘Toji is in
colours and is believed to have been painted by Kdbé Daishi himself, in 821, from
the ‘Takao Mandala’.

In spite of the various copies of the Mandala of the Two Parts, the representations
of the deities have preserved their Indian aspect; and the forma of the four images
of Ganega as Guardian of the four sides of the central assembly or parisad (joshin-e)
of the Vajra-dhatu may be found in India. The guardian of the west,* called Vajra-
v&sin, carried a bow and arrow; the guardian of the east, Vajra-cinna, held a
parasol; Vajra-bhakaana, guardian of the south, carried a garland (mala) of flowers,
while Vajra-mukha, guardian of the north, grasped a sword. Qne of the guardians
may have the head of a wild boar possibly in order to frighten away evil epirita,
for, as will be seen below, Ganeéa was believed to have the faculty of taking on
any form he desired.

> Ku-kai. 7 Hidden Doctrine. Japanese: mikkys.

+ Translated, according to Japanese tradition,  * The points of the compass in the Vajra-
by Subbakarasimpbe (Zemmui). dbatu are:

* av. 804. west

5 epanooe: Seirye i. south —}- north

© Japanese: Shingon (True Word). east

--- Page 103 ---
GANESA IN JAPAN 79

None of the representations of Ganega in the Vajra-dhatu, however, were adopted
popularly in Japan except the fifth form or Vindyaka, who was to be found directly
below Vajra-mukha, the guardian of the north side of the mandala. As the image
of Vinayaka in the Garbha-dhatu was also placed on the north side of the diagram,'
it seems to prove, especially aa they both carry the same attribute, the radish,?
that they were meant to represent the same aspect of the deity, the ‘Remover of
Obstacles’.

We have aeen above that the radish as an attribute of Ganeéa was unknown in
Ceylon as well aa in India, except in the north-east part bordering on Tibet and
Nepal, where, on the contrary, it was found almost without exception in the place of
the broken tusk.? It seems evident, therefore, that the original diagram was con-
ceived and constructed in north-east India; but by whom? According to Japanese
tradition, the sramana Nagabodhi who had taught Amoghavajra on the latter's retum
to India the method of constructing the mandalas, had received instruction in tum
from the eaint Nagarjuna who lived in the middle of the seventh century. Although
a native of southern India, ‘Tantric’ Nagarjuna, it is recorded, ‘went to the Hima-
layas, where he began to study, teach, and propagate the Mahayana’.* He was one
of the earliest writers on Tantric Buddhism; and, according to B. Bhattacharyya,
was responsible for two sddhanas in the Sddhanamdid of which one, relating to the
worship of Ekajata, he is said to have ‘rescued from the country of Bhota, which
is identified with Tibet’. It would acem from this that Nagarjuna reached at leaat
the borders of Tibet, in which case he must have been familiar with the form of
Ganesa holding the radish; and if the diagram of the Vajra-dhitu transinitted to
Amoghavajra by Nagabodhi was constructed by Nagarjuna, his guru, the presence
in the mandala of the form of Ganeéa with the radish is apparently explained, At
any rate, the representation of Ganega holding the radish seems to have been
handed down without change in its original form to Amoghavajra, who carried it to
China, whence it was introduced into Japan by Kobo Daishi.

Japanese Buddhism wove a legend around this form which might well be called
a ‘composite’ legend, for it was made up of elements that we have met with before
in other Asiatic countries, but in legends in no way concerned with Ganeéa.® The
myth runs as follows: there waa once a king by the name of Mararuratsu (2) who
ate only meat and radishes; but when he had eaten all the animals in the kingdom,
he was given the flesh of his dead subjects to cat. When there were no more dead
in the kingdom, his frightened officials killed his subjects to furnish him with food;
but the people revolted and the king, who, in reality, was a wicked demon, took

' The points of the compass of the Garbba- B. L. Suzuki, Bastern Buddhism, vol. iii, 1924.
dbtu are: ® Buddhist Ksoterism, p. 68.
cant 4 y. the beginning of the Pali jaaka no. 537;
i z 31; Bhadra-Kalpdveddna, no. 34,
north —{— south ne een at avenue by Ed. Chavannes,
weet pon. 41 and 133; The Story of Kalmdgapada, &e.,
‘yo p77. by Watanabe in the Journ. Pali Text Soc, 1909,
9 y. p.38. pp. 236-310.
* The Shingon School of Mahdyina Buddhim,

--- Page 104 ---
80 GANESA IN JAPAN
fright and assuming the form of a Vinayaka, disappeared in the heavens. It will
be seen below how Vindyaka was subjugated and became a ‘Protector of Buddhism’.

In time, the ‘Remover of Obstacles’, particularly venerated, according to Sir
Charles Eliot, as forming part of a mandala, gained a certain popularity in Japan.
Statuea were made of him copied from his Viniyaka form in the mandalas, and
temples such as Hozan-ji at Tkoma were dedicated to him. As was inevitable, his
representations later took on other aspects, and we find him in his classic Indian

form holding hig broken tusk and with one tusk

. missing. His images were given a more human aspect

a in Japan than in India, and he was sometimes depicted

ids 0 with a laughing expression.! He was often repre-

ae i — Ks & sented standing, with from two to six arms. In his

st a D he: %) Vajra-vinayaka form he carried a tujra, while in his

e: ES ‘4 form of Kaku-zen-chd he was conceived with three

@ {¥ Y Po, heads each having three eyes, and in his four arms he

3 1 zy ares held a sword, a radish, a round object (modake 2),

he e and a sceptre. He was supposed to be seated on a

4 2 ch mountain and was referred to as ‘ King of Elephants’.

iil 4 5 It is not probable that any of these forms, however,

eat aft were known until long after KObo Daishi's time. At

Ley , any rate, the Vindyaka form remained one of the

Leek, minor deities, and there is no record of a Ganedéa

PACES cult other than that of Kangi-ten, said to have been

C HCO brought to Japan, as we have mentioned above, by

\ Kobo Daishi.

ra The cult of Kangi-ten, which was secret and es0-

(ee as , teric, was based on the doctrine of Yoga; and the

f) Fame BO, ‘Divine Couple’ was looked upon by the Shingon sect

Sore ~ as representing the Union of the Soul of the Universe

Fic. 6. Vajra-vindyaka. (Vairocana} with the Primordial Essence {the Eleven-
° headed Avalokitesvara in feminine form).

In order to understand the strange cult that developed around the double form
of Ganega, we must return to China and trace the religious movement before Kabé
Daishi’s sojourn in that country.

‘The tenets of the Hidden Doctrine (mikky6) were brought to China from India
in 720 by the Indian $ramana Vajrabodhi? and hia Sinhalese disciple, Amoghavajra.>
They introduced not only the use of mantras, dhdranis, mandalas, and other Tantric
practices, but the cult of the Adi-Buddha, Maha-Vairocana, which was founded on the
doctrine of Yoga conceived as the Union of the Individual with the Universal Spirit.

After the death of Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra returned to Ceylon and India in
search of a copy of the Mahd-Vairocana-sitra, their manuscript of which had been
lost at sea in a violent storm on their voyage to China. We have seen above that
he met the saint Nagabodhi in south India and studied with him the mystic diagram

1 y, PL 37. » Jepances Kongd-chi 2 Japanese Fubd-sanzi.

--- Page 105 ---
GANESA IN JAPAN 81
of the Vajra-dhatu. On returning to China,’ he brought back with him not only
the Mandala, many Tautric texts, and a copy of the Maha-Vairocana-siitra, but,
according to Japanese tradition, a statue of the Eleven-headed Avealokitesvara.?

The doctrine of Yoga which had permeated into China even before Huiian-tsang’s
time and, by his disciple Déshd, had penetrated into Japan, was still more
firmly established in China by Amoghavajra and his Chinese disciple Hui-kud, both
of whom claimed supernatural powers. When the abhiseka of Kobé Daishi and
hia initiation by Hui-ku6 took place, a miracle, according to Shén-yen (Shingon)
tradition, was performed: Kobo Daishi became One, for an instant, with the
Adi-Buddha Vairocana.*

The Shingon sect in Japan had also its tradition of a similar miracle. After his
retum to Japan,‘ Kobo Duishi was commanded to present himself at court and
disclose before the Emperor, the court officials, and the heads of all the Buddhist
schoola the tenets of the Shingon sect which he had founded. While expounding
the doctrine of mikkyé, Kobé Daishi took on, before the astonished assembly,
the aspect, for an instant, of the Adi-Buddha, who thus manifested himself in the
form of Vairocana.*

After this miracle, the dogma of the Union of the Individual with the Universal
Spirit waa firmly incorporated in the tenets of the Shingon eect; and the eccret
cult of Kangi-ten, the material demonstration of the dogma, was adopted by the sect
as the ritual for his worship which had been brought from China by Kobo Daishi.*
There are no records, however, to show whether Kobd Waishi actually carried
back with him an image of the Kangi-ten along with the Tantric texte; but if not,
since among the manuscripts brought by him to Japan was the work compiled by
the Chinese monk Chung-shé,’ it is safe to say that the Shingon Buddhists faithfully
followed its detailed prescriptions for making a statue of Kangi-ten. ‘That is, the
image ehould be executed in metal and never higher than 22 inches. The two
standing figures should be represented facing cach other with the elephant-head
posed on the left shoulder of the opposite figure and the arms of each encircling the
other. They should wear long robes falling to the feet.

There were certain characteristica of the Japanese images of Kangi-ten which
may not have figured in the work of Chung-shé. For example, in the earliest
representations, the female figure usually has the mouth open while the male deity
has the mouth closed. ‘hia detail is apparently of mystic significance in Japan,
since the Ni-d, guarding the outer gates of Buddhist temples, have the same charac-
teristic.” In fact, there is a similarity ao marked between the Ni-6 and the Kangi-ten

1 ap. 746, 2 Development of Jopancse Buddhism, by A.

2 Japanese: Ju-ichi-men Kannon. The atatuo Lloyd, Journal of the Asiatic Society of Japan,
in said to have been brought to Japan in the — ¢ aD. BOG.
first half of the eighth century by s Chinese + Shingun School of Makdyina Buddhism, by
Priest, Kanshin Daishi, whu presented it to the B. L. Suzuki. .
Mikado Shomu. It later came into the ponemico * Taisho, no. 1274, Sdshin Biadyrka ten gyed
of the Daimié Awoyama and was enshnned in Aon gi.
the Baisi-in, the temple being the burial-place of |? Japanese: Kaishiles. ¥. p. 74.
the family at Akasaka, 8 v.@. of NB, p. 170.

ms u

--- Page 106 ---
82 GANESA IN JAPAN
that the question arises as to whether there is an affinity between them. Both are
guardians of temples. Like the Kangi-ten, the Ni-6, although a dual form, ia to be
conceived as One; and they also form a part of the Mandala of the Two Parts in
their manifestations of Aizen, symbolizing the material world or Garbha, and Fudé,
standing for the nourmenal world or Vajra. As guardians of the temple entrances,
they are called Misshaku and Kongd (Vajra). Misshaku was represented with the
mouth open, undoubtedly to emit the sound of his rija—a; while Kongo was figured
with the mouth closed, very likely to pro-
i nounce the mystic syllable of his vija—hum.?
2) ae We find these two deitica as far weat as
ef A = Chinese Turkestan guarding the entrance to
San NN a grotto-temple at Baziklik ;? and again in
j . India, this time with elephants’ heads, atand-
N vy ing on either side of a colossal statue of
ey lig. Ganeéa at Unukoti hill in the Tripura state?
eA , In both cases the guardians have the above
Faye | feature which is, as we have said, charac-
iF wld when “A teristic of the Ni-6.as well asof the Kangi-ten,
“ vy The female Vindyaka may wear a small
fi crown‘ and the male may balance a cinta-
] mant on his head.* According to the direc-
y tions of the Chinese monk Han-kuang, the
fS' female form should have the shoulders
rae f Lys covered while the male might have one,
ot or both, bare. Sir Charles Eliot mentions
(C a form of Kangi-ten that was shown to him
CNS ey a» in Japan where the two deities are back to
OS OS OD, back.* In late representations they were
not alwaya figured facing each other but
Fio. 7. Kangi-ten. sometimes side by side? and both have a
laughing expresnion.

In Japan the image of Kangi-ten had three different interpretations: one, exoteric;
the second might be termed ‘intermediary’, while the third waa esoteric. There
waa also a fourth form known only to those who had undergone the abhigeka of
initiation. Under each of these aspecta, the Kangi-ten was worshipped in secret and
never shown to the lay devotees. When not exposed for worship in a private chapel
of a temple, they were always hidden either under a Hiaga-shaped cover’ or, if they
were in @ zuchi,® the doors were closed. The Chinese ritual,'® which is followed even
to the present day, consisted in constructing ‘an altar for celestial beings’ for the

1 The myskyijo chinshd. § Japanese Ruddhiom, p. 356.
? v. Chotscho, von Le Coq, Pi. 32. 7 y, PL. 37.
+ v. Archaeological Survey of India, 1921-22, * vy. Pl. 38 (a).
PL XXX (a). © v. Pl. 38 (4).
* v. Pl. 38 (4), yp. Bl.
6 vy. Pl 38(¢).

--- Page 107 ---
GANESA IN JAPAN 83
purpose of ‘dispersing evil spirits and gaining the desired resulta of prayer’.! Tho
rules for prayer were transmitted by K6bd Daishi himaclf; but we do not know
whether he worshipped Ganeda or not, or if so, whether in the single or the double
form. The ceremony began with the offering of sake and of the fruit of the pome-
granate, accompanied by the burning of incense, while chanting a Tantric stotra
addressed to the deity. The statue waa immersed in temple water or in consecrated
oil, Curiously enough, a statue of Kannon usually accompanied the Kangi-ten
shrine.

The ‘intermediary’ form was looked upon as representing Vindyaka and the
Eleven-headed Avalokiteévara (Kannon) ;? and the coupling of a demi-god with the
greatest of Bodhisattvas secma at first incomprehensible. Undoubtedly the earliest
interpretation of the double form in China was that of Vindyaka and his éakti,
eapecially if the form came originally from Tibet; and the identification of Avaloki-
tedvara with the éakti of Vindyaka might be plausibly explained if there were
documentary proof that the Sinhalese form of the Bodhisattva, Loka-naétha, was
known as carly as Amoghavajra’s time.

In the Sinhalese work on iconography, the Sariputra, where the deities are
minutely described, the Sinhalese form of Avalokitesvara called *Loka-natha’ is
vhown as having cight aspects or manifestations. The first four are: Brahma-natha,
Vignu-natha, Siva-natha, Gauri-natha.>

It will be remembered that Gauri (Parvati) was the dakti par excellence of Siva.
The Bodhisattva, in his fourth and feminine aspect, thus became in his manifesta-
tion of Gauri the dakti of Siva. De La Vallée Poussin statea‘ that the personification
of the Cosmic Female Energy (Gauri) in India shows that the Chinese transformation
of Avalokiteivara into a female deity (Kwan-yin) had probably already been
effected in India.

The cighth aspect of Loka-natha mentioned in the Sariputra was Gana-natha,®
the description of whom practically tallies with that of the Indian god Ganeéa.
Thus the Bodhisattva was identified with Vindyaka also in the Sinhalese work
which was not of great antiquity, but which ia believed to have been compiled from
and based on ancient tradition. At any rate, in the Adranda-cyiha, with which
Amoghavajra was undoubtedly familiar, we find the Bodhisattva identifying himself
with Ganeéga when he declares that he will not enter into Sanyala until all human
beings are saved; and that, in order to teach the Dharma to all creatures, he will
take on the aspects of Brahma, of Visnu, of Siva, of Ganesa. .. .*

In Buddhist texts such as the Vindyaka-sdtra,’ for instance, Ganesa was associated
with the Bodhisattva, as in the following legend: Mahesvara (Siva} had 3,000 children
of whom 1,000 were benevolent and were commanded by his son, Sendyaka, while
the rest were demons under the command of Vinayaka. At that time there was a

} Letter from the Rev. M. Monto, Shingon 3In the Mahtainvina-teatra we find ‘Gana-
prieat of the Monastery of Kuya-san, Japan hatha’ mentioned as one of the twelve mam.

2 y. the Shi-bw-Ad and the ixwen Kokatsu. festations of Ganeda, p. 25.

> -“Mahdyanem in Ceylon’, by Paranavitane, © v. Buddhist Exoteriem, by B. Bhattacharyya,
Ceylon Journal of Scence, vol. ii, part 1, Dec. 1928, p. 28-29.
4 v, ‘Avalokite$vara’, Hastings’ Bneycl KR. E. Tv. Tripitaka, vol. xsi, no. 1270.

--- Page 108 ---
yy GANESA IN JAPAN

wicked king by the name of Kangi who had plunged his kingdom intoa state of
misery such that his ministers and people revolted and addressed their prayers to
the Eleven-headed Kannon to save them. The Bodhisattva accordingly took on the
aspect of a beautiful woman; and appearing before the king, excited his passion.
She, however, reaisted his advances, telling him that she was a fervent Buddhist,
and that if he desired her, he must be converted to Buddhism. The Viniyaka king
forthwith consented to follow the precepts of the Buddha and promised to protect
the Dharma, whereupon the Eleven-headed Kannon became the wife of the Vindyaka
king, Kangi. There is a variation in the legend where Senayaka, mentioned above
as son of Siva, but being in reality, Kannon, takes on a feminine form and becomes
the wife of her brother, Vinayaka, in order to turn him from his evil ways. The
interpretation of Kangi-ten as representing Kannon and Vinayaka may poasibly
be based on one of these two legends.

In the third and eaoteric aspect of Kangi-ten, the ‘ Divine Couple’ was worshipped
exclusively by the Shingon priests who were fully initiated in the mikkyd; and in
this form Kangi-ten was looked upon as pereonifying Maha-Vairocana (Universal
Spirit) and the Eleven-headed Kannon (Cosmic Female Energy). There are no
tecords to show whether this esoteric interpretation of the Kanyi-ten came originally
from China or was evolved in Japan by the Shingon sect. We only know, as we
have said above, that Kobé Daishi introduced the double form into Japan and
brought the rituals for their worship from China.

Tf, aa is believed, the statue of the Eleven-headed Avalokiteévara, now in the
Baied temple at Akasaka, was brought originally from Ceylon by Amoghavajra,!
it is probable that the learned Sinhalese pandit was responsible for the Chinese
feminine form of the Bodhisattva worshipped under the name of Kwan-yin. The
doctrine of Yoga being at the height of its popularity in China towards the end of the
eighth century, it should not be aurprising to find the double form of Ganeda taking
on @ mystic and esoteric significance; and it is conceivable that the Kuan-shi-vien
should have been looked upon in China at that epoch as personifying the Gaurt
aspect of Avalokitesvara (Coamic Sakti) and the Vairocana aspect of the Adi-
Buddha (Soul of the Universe).

Although the worship of Kangi-ten waa not held publicly in the temples, the
double form of Ganedga, in time, became known to the uninitiated as well as to the
Shingon monks and priests; but in the Hidden Doctrine of Shingon, a myatic form
of Kangi-ten was worshipped which was only revealed to the few who had attained
the highest degree of Yuga, that is, profound meditation or samadhi. The esoteric
aspect was to be conceived as representing the fusion of the double form into one,
in other words, as symbolizing supreme Yoga ; and for that reason was to be visualized
as having one body with four arms and four legs.

Thus we find in Japan another esoteric form of Ganesa, and an aspect of
Kangi-ten etill more mysterious; but here the questions arise as to where and by
whom this form was conceived. Strangely enough, while in Japan no image of this

2 ¥. Mahaydniem in Ceylon, by Paransvitane, 1 Through the kindness of the Rev, M. Morito
p. 42, of the Shinton Monastery of Kaya-san.

--- Page 109 ---
GANESA IN JAPAN a5
mikkyé conception of Ganeéa is known, in China there seems to be a representa-
tion of this myatic form in a fresco which is in the Buddhist grotto temple of Tun-
huang.!

At first glance the freaco is apparently that of the usual Vindyaka, seated and
having two arma and two legs. He is represented hare to the waist and wearing
very full trousers gathered into a narrow belt. He is in the mahdrdjalild position,”
with the left knee lifted while the right leg ia bent parallel with the body.

Has this figure of Ganeéa at ‘Tun-huang four legs?

If we closely follow the folds of the loose trousers, the form of a second pair of
legs is seemingly indicated. The right knee, which would be directly under the
normal knee, is somewhat hidden by the arm of the guardian deity below; but we
can easily follow the lower line of the leg bent inward, with apparently a fold of
the trousera lying on the support of the deity. This detail will be found again at
Endere. The line of the left. knee is visible directly behind the foot of the uplifted
normal leg; and the presence of this second leg seems to be further indicated if we
follow the folds of the trousers drawn towards the left side. The two feet of the
eecond pair of legs would be naturally placed behind the normal right foot and thus
hidden underneath the folds of the voluminous trousers,

Again, in the Buddhist temple of Endere in Chinese Turkestan where a painted
panel of Ganeéa of the eighth century was found by Sir Aurel Stein,® there is
apparently represented the same mystic aspect of the Elephant-faced god that is
still worshipped in Japan. The deity is imaged with one head, four arms and,
according to Sir Aurel Stein, with two legs and ‘seated on a cushion’.

But is the Ganega of Endere seated on a cushion ?

In the frescos of the eighth century in Chinese Turkestan it was not unusual to
represent the deities seated on a cushion-dsana inatead of on a lotus flower, especially
at Dandan Uilig, where, for example, a painted panel of Vajrapani so represented
was found by Sir Aurel Stein. Were it not for the four arms, the deity might be
mistaken for a Saasanian cavalier with his black beard, tiara-ahaped turban, tight-
fitting tunic, and high boote; and he is seated on the typical cushion found in the
frescoa of Dandan Cilig which is high and stiff with rounded corners.‘

The painted panel of Ganega of Endere, on the contrary, is Indian in etyle with
no trace of Persian influence. The ‘cushion’ on which, according to Sir Aurel Stein,
he is acated, is lower than, and quite different from, the cushion-dsana of the
deitiea at Dandan Uilig.

On close and careful atudy of the original painting now in the British Museum,
it becomes apparent that the ‘cushion’, in reality, is a second pair of legs. Under
the right normal leg, for instance, the bend in the knee of the lower right leg is as
clearly indicated aa is the bend in the upper and normal knee. If we follow the
lower line of the same leg, it is apparent that it bends inward and that the foot is
behind the point of the tiger-skin, the curve alone of the dhoti indicating its presence.
The lower legs are covered with looser trousers than the normal pair, for underneath

1‘ y. Pl 36 (a). 3 y. Pi. 33 and p. 41.

* ¥, Glowsary. “=. Ancient Khotan, Pl. LXI.

--- Page 110 ---
86 GANFSA IN JAPAN
the line of the second pair of lega are folds such as we have seen above in the frescos
of Tun-huang.

A detail which seems to indicate without question a second pair of legs is that
there is a second dhoti, red in colour, which separates the normal! legs from the
lower pair and falls in a point under the tiger-skin. The artiat has thus avoided
the difficulty of representing two pairs of feet, one above the other, by placing the
lower pair, as at Tun-huang, under the folds of the trousers, and at Endere, under
the points of the tiger-skin and red dhoti.

Does the fresco at Tun-huang, a3 well as the painted panel of Endere, represent
the double mystic aspect of Ganesa known in Japan as Kangi-ten?

If they are to be looked upon as representing the yoga, that is, the fusion of two
deities, their conception might be traced to one of the Tantric centres of India where
representations of coalesced Hindu gods may be found among the most ancient
Indian sculptures. The Hindu conception, however, aa we have seen above, waa ex-
pressed somewhat differently. The ardhanari or coaleeced form of Siva and Parvati,
for example, waa also represented by one body but with two legs and two arma, the
right side being Siva and the left side, Parvati) We bave seen above that the fusion
of four Vindyakaa into one deity was referred to in the Smrt of Yajiavalkya, but
there is no indication as to how the god was to be represented. On the other hand, in
a Tantric ritual translated from the Sanskrit by Fa-shien of the Sung dynaaty,?
there is the description of a Vindyaka with siz legs, but it is unfortunately
not explained as to whether or not, this form represented the fusion of three
deities. The author, however, understands that there existed such a conception
in Nepal.

Even if the two paintings are not to be traced to India, may not the Endere
aspect of Ganega with four legs be due to Tibetan influence? In the eighth
century the Tibetan armies crossed the bordera of China, overran Nepal and
Mongolia, and established themselves in Chinese Turkestan, where their influence
was predominant until the middle of the ninth century. Undoubtedly they brought
with them the distorted form of Buddhism as taught by the guru Padmasambhava
and carried with them the images of their deities with many arma and legs. It
should, therefore, not seem strange to find a representation of Ganeda with four
legs in Chinese Turkestan or, as a matter of fact, farther cast, since in Shingon
mikkyé, founded by the Chinese Buddhist sect, Shén-yen, there still remain vestiges
of Tibetan influence in their rites and ceremonics.*

In fact, these and other aspects of Ganesa, as we have seen above, are still
shrouded in mystery, and more than one hypothesis advanced by the author is open
to discussion. No divinity, either Hindu or Buddhist, has had go varied a ‘career’.
From a humble village deity worshipped in connexion with the harvest, he rose to
unbelicvable heighta, surpassing the Trimtrti: Brahma, Visnu and Siva; in fact,
equal to Brahman himself. Accompanying the traders as ‘Remover of Obstacles’

1 y. PL 6 (a). 3 y, Shingon School of Mahayana Buddhiem,

2 Nanjio, no. 1059, By the kindacas of M. B. L. Suzuki.

Demiéville

--- Page 111 ---
GANESA IN JAPAN 87
on their adventurous voyages across the acas, wo find him adopted by Hindu and
Buddhist alike, and represented in the pose of a Buddha.

His cult persiated and penetrated into China, where it took on a mystic and esoteric
form unknown in India. ‘The Yogacdra caught him in ite meshes aud wove around
him secret rites and ceremonies; and although he was only a demi-god, the Elephant-
faced deity became aa widely known as the great Bodhisattva Avalokiteévara with
whom he was finally identified.

There are those who look upon Ganeda as a fétiche, as & ‘grotesque invention’.
The author, in reply, can but quote the gentle reproach of Parmentier when review-
ing work on eastern art: ‘That we are incapable of judging the conception of an
eastern mind, seems proved when a writer looks upon the representation of the
Elephant-faced god with amusement rather than with comprehension. ... The
heavy, corpulent body required to support the massive head of an elephant, may,
on the contrary, awaken an impression of real majeaty’. If there is an element in
the representation of Ganeda which, to western eyes, ecems amusing, it is tinvolun-
tary on the part of the sculptor, and takes away nothing from the special idealiam
of the figure of the Elephant-faced Deity’.

VIGHNARAJA KSAMASVETI

--- Page 112 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ALVIELLa, Cte Goblet d’. La Migration dea Symbolea. Paris, 1891.
‘Avalon, A.’ Tantra of the Great Liberation (Mahanirvans-tantra). London, 1913.
Baccut, P. C. ‘Some Tantric Texte studied in Ancient Cambuja’; in The Indian Historical
Quarterly, December 1929.
Banrast, R. D. ‘Esatern Indian School of Medieval Sculpture’; in The Archaeological Survey
of India, New Imperial Seriea, vol. Ivii, 1933.
‘The Haihayas of Tripuri and their Monuments’; in The Archaeological Survey of India,
vol. xxiii, 1931.
Bartn, A. The Religions of India. London. 1882.
Brat, S. Si-yu-ki, or the Buddhist Records of the Western World, from the Chinese of Hiven
Tsiang. 2 vols. London, 1906.
Buannawar, R.G. Vatsnaviem, Saiviem and Sfinor Religious Systema. Strassburg, 1913.
Buatracuarrya, B. Indian Buddhist Iconography. London, 1924.
An Introduction to Buddhist Esoterism. Oxford, 1932.
BuATTasatl, N. K. conography of Buddhist and Brahmanical Sculptures in the Dacca Museum.
Dacea, 1929.
Bose, P. The Indian Teachers in China. Madras, 1923.
Bovngure, A. ‘Brahmakarma ou Lea Rites Sacrés des Brahmans’ (Traductions); in Annales
du Musée Guimet, tome vii, 1884.
Beroras, J. 2. ‘Hock-cut Temples of Baddm! in the Dekhan'; in The Indian Antiguary,
December 1877.
2. Elura Cave Temples. London, 1883.
3. Buddhist Art in India. London, 1901,
Cuavanngs, E. ‘Six Monuments de la Seulptare Chinoise’; in Ara Asiatica, vol. ii, Paris, 1914.
(Trad.) Mémoires sur lea Religieur Eminente qui allérent chercher la Loi dans les Pays d'Occi-
dent, pur Yi-teing. Paris, 1894.
Corps, G. ‘Bronzes Khmérs’; in Ava Asiatica, vol. iii.
Coresnoog, H. T. Miscellaneous Essays. London, 1837.
Corzmay, C. The Mythology of the Hindus. London, 1832.
Coomaraswamy, A. K. Yakgas (2 parts). Washington, 1931.
‘Ganesha’; in Bulletin of the Boston Museum of Fine Aria, vol. xxvi, April 1928.
‘Early Indian Iconography’, in Kastern Art. Philadelphia, January 1929.
Covsens, H. ‘Medieval Temples of the Dekhan’; in Archaeological Survey of India, vol. xlviii.
Caleutta, 1931.
‘The Chalukyan Architecture of the Kanarese District’; in The Archaeological Survey of
India, Calcutta, 1926.
Crooxr, W. Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India. London, 1896.
Darra, K. ‘Two Saura Images from the District of 24-Parganas’; in The Indsan Historical
Quarterly, vol. ix, No. 1, March 1933.
Dea, H. K. ‘The Doorga Poogs: a Federation of Divinities’; in Calcutta Municipal Gazette,
October 1932.
Dowson, J. Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology. London, 1903.
aad x

--- Page 113 ---
90 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Epxins, J. Chinese Buddhism. London, 1893.
Euror, Sir C. Hinduism and Buddhism. 3 vols. London, 1921.
Japanese Buddhism. London, 1935.
Euisexrr, S. Mythologie Asiatique. Etudes d’Orientalisme publiées par le Musée Guimet a le
mémoire de Raymonde Linossier. 3 vola. Paris, 1932.
Fa-man. Pilgrimage of Fa-hian (Calcutta, 1848). Translation from the French Edition of the
Foe Koue Ki of Rémusat, Klaproth et Landrousse. Paria, 1836.
Fangunar, J. N. An Outline of the Religious Literature of India. London, 1920.
Fercrasox and Burorss, Cave Temples of India. London, 1880.
Finot, L. Siéles Historiques du Cambodge. Etudea d’Orientalisme. Paris, 1932.
‘La Religion des Chams d’aprés les Monuments’; in B.E.P.E.0., tome i.
‘Nouvelles Inscriptions du Cambodge’; in B.F.F.E.0., tome xxviii.
*Archéologie Indo-Chinoise (1917-1930)'; in B.C.A./.
Fizer, J. F. ‘Inscriptions of the early Gupta Kings and their Successors’; in Corpus Inacrip-
tionum Indicarum (ed. by J. F. Fleet}, vol. iii. Calcutta, 1888.
Foucngr, A. Iconographie de I'Inde, vol. ii, Paris, 1900-5.
Francxg, A. H. ‘Antiquities of Indian Tibet’; in The Archaeological Survey of India, Neo
Impenat Series, vol. 1xxviii. .
Goris, F. Bijdrage tot der Kennes der oud-Javansche en Balineesche Theologie. Leiden, 1926.
Govis paswasa, SK. ‘A Pala Image of Ganapati at Kumbakénam’; in Journal of indian
History, vol. i, part 3. Madras,
Guuzrson, G. A. ‘G&papatyas'; in Hastings's Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.
Grorseverpr, V. P., und Branpea, Dr. 8. J. L. Catalogus der Archaeologische Verzameling
van het Bataviaasche Genootachap van Kunstenen Wetenschappen. Batavia und ’s Gravenhago,
1887.
Grostier, G. ‘Les Collections Khméres au Musée Albert Sarraut & Phnom Penh’; in Ave
Astatica, vol. xvi.
Grocaset, R. Histoire del’ Exteéme Orient. 2 vola. Paris, 1929.
Gronweng., A. Altbuddhistische Kultatitien in Chinesisch-Turkestan. Berlin, 1912.
Gcwrpnxatis, A. de. Zoological Mythology. 2 vola. London, 1872,
Gupte, B. A. ‘Harvest Festivals of Gauri sad Ganesh’; in Indian Antiquary, vol. xxxv,
November 1906,
Havewt, F. B. Ideals of Indian Art. London, 1911.
Horgins, E. W. Epic Mythology. Strassburg, 1915.
Husrs, E. ‘Etudes Indo-Chinowea'; in B.E.F.E.O., tome ix.
Jacont, H. ‘Brahmaniam'; in Hastings’s Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.
Jones, Sir William. ‘On the Gods of Greeoe, Italy, and India’; in Astatickh Researches; or, the
Transactions of the Society instituted in Bengal, vol. i. London, 1806.
Jovveau-Desrecit, G. Archeologie du Sud de I Inde. 2 vols. Paris, 1914.
Juyxpou., Dr. H. A. Catalogue ran Rijks Ethnographisch Museum, Deel 5. Leiden, 1900.
Kag, R. C. ‘Antiquities of Basohli and Ramnager'; in Indian Art and Letters, vol. vii, No. 2.
London, 1933.
Kewnepy, Lieut.-Col. K. Researches into the Nature and Affinity of Ancient and Hindu Mytho-
logy. London, 1831,

--- Page 114 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 91
Kost, R. P. Symbolical Language of Ancient Art and Mythology. New York, 1802.
Krom, Dr. N. J. Indeiding tot de Hindoe-Javaanische Kunst. 2 vols, The Hague, 1920.
‘L’Art Javanais dans kee Musées de Hollands et de Java’; in Ars Asiatica, vol. viii.
Paris, 1926.
Le Coq, A. von. Chotecho. Berlin, 1913.
Lroce, J. A Record of Buddhtstic Kingdoms (translation). By the Chinese Monk Fa-hien.
Oxford, 1886.
Lévi, Sylvain. Le Népal. 3 vols. Paris, 1905.
‘Pour I’Histoire du R&mayana’; in Journal Asiatique, Jan., Feb. 1918.
Sanscrit Texts from Bali (Vindyake-stotra). Gaekwar's Oriental Series, vol. Ivii. Barods,
1933.
‘King Subhakara of Orisea’; in Epigraphia Indica, vol. xv. Calcutta, 1919-20,
Luorp, The Rev. A. Developments of Japanese Buddhiem. The Asiatic Socioty of Japan,
Tokyo, 1894.
Mrrzoun, G. J. Genealogy of the South Indian Gods (translation). Bartholomacus Ziegenbalg.
Madras, 1869.
Mirra, H. ‘Ganapati’; in The Vidvo-Bharati Quarterly, First Series, vol. viii, part 4, 1931-2.
Mrrna, R. The Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal. Calcutts, 1882.
Mon1eR-WiLLiams, Sir Monier. Brahmaniom and Hinduism. London, 1887.
Mooxe, E. The Hindu Pantheon. London, 1810.
Mos, P. Les Religions de U'Indo-Chine. Paria, 1931.
Nawgio, B. Catalogue of Chinese Tranalations of the Buddhist Tripitaka. Oxford, 1883.
Twelve Japanese Buddhist Sects. Meiji, Toky3, nineteenth year.
Ouprraxp, H. A. Sketches of Nipal. 3 vols. London, 1880.
Panper, E. Das Pantheon des Tochangtecha Hutukty. Berlin, 1890.
ParanaviTane, S. ‘Mahaysoinm in Ceylon’; in Ceylon Journal of Science, vol. iv, part 1.
London, December 1928.
Parkur, H. Ancient Ceylon. London, 1909.
Parwentize, H. ‘Lea Monuments du Cirque de M’i-so'n'; in B.E.F.E.0., tome xix.
‘Catalogue du Musée Cham de Tourane’; in Ars Assatica, tome iv.
Priuior, P. Les Grottes de Towen-howang. 6 volu. Mission Pelliot, Paris, 1921.
Phar, N. ‘Haritl, La Mére-de-Démona’; in 8.2 F.E.O., 1917.
Poussin, L. de La Vallée. ‘Avelokitedvara'; in Hastings's Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.
Przyiusxi, J. ‘Notes de Villes Indiennes’; in Bulletin de ia Société de Lingutstique de Paris,
tome xxvii, 1927.
Rarrias, T.8. The History of Java. 2 vols. London, 1817,
Ramachanprax, TN. S'he Golden Age of Hindu-Javanese Art. Triveni, Madras, 1931.
Rao, T. A. G. Elements of Hindu Iconography. 4 vols. Madras, 1916.
Ray, N. R. Brahmanical Gods in Burma. Calcutta, 1932.
SaxpaeKo, G. Tsbdet and the Tibetans. London, 1906.
Saster, K. South Indian Images of Goda and Uoddesses. Madras, 1916.

--- Page 115 ---
92 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Scomirgua, S. Monumental Java. London, 1912.
Saamasastry, KR. ‘A Theory of the Origin of the Devanagari Alphabet’; in The Anliquary,
vol. xxxv, September 1906.
Stain, Sir AcREL. Ancient Khotan. Oxford, 1907.
Kathana’s Rajatarangini: a Chronicle of the Kings of Kashmir.
Srein-CaLLexrens, P. V. van, ‘Oost-Java.’ Oudheidkundig Verslay, cersve en tweede kwartaal.
‘s Gravenhage, 1928,
Stevenson, W. B. ‘Analysis of the Ganesa purdna’; in J.R.A.S., vol. viii, 1845,
Sterrenuria, W. F. Oudheiden van Bali. 2 vols Singaradji, Bali, 1930,
‘Meaning of the Hindu-Javanese Chandi’; in Journal of the American Oriental Society, 1931.
Taxaxcso, J. (Translation) 4 Record of the Buddhist Religion as practised in India and the
Malay Archipelago, by I-teing. Oxford, 1870.
Tavior, T. Handbook of Hindu Mythology and Philosophy, Madras, 1896,
Voort, J. Ph. Indian Serpent Lore. London, 1926.
The Relation between the Art of India and Java. The India Sociely. London, 1925.
Wappen, W. A. ‘Cult of Avalokiteévara’; in J.R.A.S., 1894.
“‘Dharani Cult’; in Ostasiatische Zeitschrift, July 1912.
Warr, J. (Translation) ‘Wei Shou on Buddhism.’ T'oung Pad, 1933.
Wreins, J. W. Hindu Mythology. Calcutta and London, 1882,
Wrstgenrtz, M. ‘Ganeéa in the Mahabharata’; in J.RAS., April 1898,
Wrison, H. H. Essays on Sanekvit Literature. London, 1564.
Woopsorrs, sir John, v. ‘Avalon’. Shakti and Shdkta: Shakta Tantrashastra. Madrae and
London, 1920.

--- Page 116 ---
SANSKRIT TEXTS OF REFERENCE
Agni-purana. Gayatri-tantra. S&dhana-mala.
Aitareya-brahmane (1, 2}. Garuda-purana. Sankara-vijaya (Ch. 15-18).
Atharvadira-upanishad. Téana-Sivagurudeva-paddhati.  Saéradatilaka-tantra.
Balabharata. Kuméra-samhita. Sarvadurgataran!-odhans.
Brabwa-vaivarta-puréna. Mahaganapati-krama. Skanda-purana.
Chandogya -upanivhad. Mahanirvana-tantra. Suprabhedagama.
Ganapati-hrdaya. Malatimachava. Taittiriya-dranyaka.
Ganapati-stotra. Manava-grhya-sitrs. Veraha-purins.
Ganspati-tdpaniya, Marjari-tantra. Vajraiekhara-yoga.
Ganapati-upanishad. Mataya-purana. Vinayaka-samhita.
Ganeda-gité, Mudgala-purins. Yajhavalkya-smrti.
Ganeda-kalpa. Pingala-mala.
TIBETAN TEXTS OF REFERENCE
Tandjur, Textes du ‘Tandjour sur Ganeéa: Rgyud, Lrix. 49, 92; Ixxii. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36; Ixxxiv.
37, 38, 41-8, 51-60; Ixxxvi. 86-7.
JAPANESE TEXTS OF REFERENCE
Aaaba-shd. By Shéché (Taisho, no. 3190).
Binayaka-ganahachi-yuga-sbiteujibon-hiys. By Han-kuang (Gankd) (Taish6, no. 1273).
Daishijuhokyé (or Daishishuhdkyd). Translated by Bodhiruci (Taisho, no. 1268),
Daishdkangi-sdshin-daijizaiten-binayakyad-kiinenju-kuySb9. Translated by Subhakarasimhs
(Taisho, no. 1270).
Daiahokangiten-sdahimbinayakya-hd. Translated by Amoghavajra (Taish6, no. 1266; Nanjo,
no. 1403).
Daisho-kangi-sdshin-binayakyaten-gydzdbon giki. By Kiong-cho (Keihitsu) (Taisha, no. 1274),
Hizdki. By Kobé Daishi (Taishd, no. 2921).
Issainyorai-kongd-sango-saijd-himiteu-daikyddgyo. Translated by Che-hu (Sego) (Taishd,
no. 885; Nanjd, no. 1027).
Iseninyorai-shinjitewsh6 -daijé-genshd-nammai-daikyddgyo. Translated by Che-hu (Sego) (Tai-
sho, no, #82; Nanjé, no. 1017).
Kakuzen-shé. By Kakuzen (Taiah6, no. 3022).
Kongdcho-issainyorai-abinjitsushd-daijd-gensh6-daikydogys. Translated by Amoghavajra
(Taisho, no. 865; Nanjé, no. 1020).
Konjiki-ganahachi-darani-kyd. ‘Translated by Vajrabodhi (Taishd, no. 1269),
Kongératta-setsu-binayakyaten-jdju-giki-kyd. Transtated by Ha-hien (Hiken) (Taishd, no.
1272, Nanja, no, 1059).
Makabirushananyorai- joekinte- nyiisammayashin -soshin -daikangiten - bosatsu -shugy6 -himit -
subd-giki. Translated by Amoghavajra (Taishi, no. 1271).
Shijuhoky6. ‘Translated by Bodhiruchi (Taishé, no. 1267).
Sbé-kangiten-shikiho. By Hannye-nyakara (Taishd, no. 1273).
Soshitsuji-kyara-ky6. Translated by ‘Subhakarasimha (Taishd, no. 493: Nanjé, no. 533).
Soshitauji-kyara-kuydbd (Hobdgina, Soshicchikarakuyohé). Translated by Subhakarasimhs
(Taishd, no. $94; Nanja, no, 1425).
Himiteu-jirin. By Tomita, Tokyo, 1911.
Mandara no Kenkyi. By Togsuoo, Tokyo, 1934.

--- Page 117 ---
GLOSSARY

Abhaya-mudrd. Geature usually of the right hand, indicating protection. The hand is raised
with the palm turned outward and all the fingers extended upward.

Asana. Seat of a god or of a group of gods. The padmdsana is the lotus support on which all
the important Buddhist deities are represented seated or standing. The vajrdacna or
‘diamond throne’ was the support of the Buddha when meditating under the bodhi-tree.

Asuras. Demons, enemies of the déras.

Batasa. v. Modaka.

Cintdmans, Magic gem which, in Mahdyina Buddhism, hes an esoteric significance. It is repre-
sented round, except on top where it is slightly pointed.

Dharani. Magical prayer or merely a suite of mystic eyllables supposed to be efficacious in
bringing about the desires of the worshipper.

Dhoti. Picco of stuff wound around the hips and legs and, with the exception of Indis, held at
the waist by a belt. In India it may fall to the knoes or to the ankles, but the sampot in
Indo-China and the sarony in the Malay Archipelago usually fall to the ankles.

Dhyana. Meditation. The dhydna-mudré ia represented by the hands lying on the lap with
the right above the left. Tho palms ahould be turned upward with all the fingers extended.

@rahas. Planets. Group of nine planets called the Navagrahas.

Kalada. Water-veasel.

Kapala. Bow] made out of s human skull. It in used in Tantric ceremonies.

Koranda-mukufa. v. Muluja.

Kirijo-mukula. v. Mukuja.

Tinga. Phallic symbol.

Mahdrajalild. Attitude called ‘royal ease’. The deity is seated with the right knee lifted while
the left lies on the dsana parallel with the body.

Manas. The mind when considered as a ressoning factor.

Mandala. Magic circle or diagram in which deities and symbols are placed, the whcle repre-
senting a hidden meaning.

Mantra. Short magic formule.

Modaisa. Round cake made of rice and sugar. It is somewhat larger than the balesas which
are presented in a bowl, while the modaka, being a aymbol as well as an attribute, is
presented by itself.

Mukuja. Stiff head-dress almost entirely covering the hair worn by hoth Hindu and Buddhist
Geities in India and Indo-China. The muduta may be karanda, kirita, or jaja. ‘The karanda-
mukuja is bow!-shaped and not 60 high es the other two. It msy be terraced and, in later
examples, highly ornate. The kirifa-mukwa is conical-chaped and covered with jewelled
disks and bands, while the jafé-mukwa, which is still higher, is the most complicated of
the three. It is made up of five braids of matted hair {jafas) tied into knots, coiled into
loops, and ornamented with crescent moons, cobras, &c.

Padmasana. v. Asana.

Tarjani-mudré. Threatening gesture of the hand. AU the fingers are closed except the index
which is extended.

Pajd. Hindu religious ceremony accompanied by the offering of flowers and fruits and the
sapersion of the image of the deity.

Purdsa. Religious poem wherein are found the geneslogies of the Hindu gods.
Sadhana. Magic formula for the invocation of a deity.
Séita. Sakte sect which worships Durgi as the Salts of Siva.

--- Page 118 ---
GLOSSARY 95

Sakti. Every impo-tant deity has a divine dakti looked upon as the personification of his energy.

Sramana. Learned religious teacher.

Stotra. Religious hymn to a deity.

Tilaka. Merk on the forehead indicating the religious sect to which the worshipper belongs.

Ornd. Small, round protubersnce on the furebead above the bridge of the nose. A Buddhist
mark indicating spiritual insight.

Véhano. Mount of a deity on which he may be seated or standing, or the oahana may be
represented beside him.

Vajra. Literally ‘diamond’ but usually translated ‘thunderbolt’, or that which destroys but.
in iteelf indestructible. It is represented by a short bar with prongs at each end which
touch at the tips, and is held by Hindu and Buddhist deities.

Vajrdsana. v. Asana.

Vihdra. Buddhist monastery.

Vij. Literally ‘seed’. It ia the germ of a mantra and every important deity has his vija which
is used when he is invoked.

Vitarka-mudra. Gesture of argument. The hand is raised with the palm turned outward and
all the fingera extended except the thumb and index which touch at the tips.

Zuchi. Small Japanese shrine for a deity having doors by which it may be closed.

--- Page 119 ---
INDEX

abhaya-mudrd, v. Glossary. Bhadra-Kalpavadana, 79 n. 6
abhraeka, 33, 75, 78, 81, 82. Bhadravarman (King), 50.
Adi-Buddha, 80, 81, 84. Bhadreévara, 50.

Aditya, 23, 24. | Bhagavad.gita, 8

Aihole, 28. ! Bhagavata.purana, 35.
Airavata, 8. Bhigiratha (Saint), 35,
Aitareys Brahinava, 3 n. 6, Bhairava, 13, 57, 60.

Aizen, 82. Bhandarkar (Sir R. G.), 3, 4.
Ajanta, 67, 68. Bhatari, 59, 60.

Akasaka, 84, Bhatari Guru, 60.
Akhu-ratha, 13, ' Bhatgaon, 40.

Akra, 26. Bhattacharyys (B.), 37, 43 n. 4, 44, 71 n. 4, 79,
Akshobhya, 4. 83 n. 6,

ALBirani, 3 n. 8. Bhattadali (N. K.), 8. 8, 31 un. 1, 33.0.5, 34,
Allahabad (pillar at}, 10. | sins

Amaravati, 13 n, 2, 26 » Bhera-ghat, 22.

Ambika, 3. Bhimesvamin, 22.

dmnayas, 21. Bhota, 79.

Amoghavajra, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79, 80, 81, 83, 44, 87. Bhrkuti-Tara, 37.

Ananda, 37. ' Bhumara, 17, 25, 26, 97.
Angkor, 47, 53. bhimisparéa, 53.

Aparajita, 8, 12, 43. Bhatedvara, 34.

ardhandriga, 28, 59, 86. ; Bhurancéa-Gavapati, 13.
Ardimoclo, 59. Bon-po, 71.

deana, v. Glossary. | Bomeo, 32.

Afoka, 10, 38. Boro-Budur, 61.
Atoka-Vinayaka, 38 n. 5. | Brahma, 4, 5, 19, 23, 32, 44, 48, 49, 55, 64, 83, 86.
Astamatrkas, #2. Brahmanan.peti, 2.
Astasiddhia, 12, 36. Brahmi-natha, 83.

asuraa, v. Glossary. Brahmancarin, 35.
Atharvadiras-upanishad, 3. | Brahmavaivarte-purapa, 7 n. 2,
Avalokitedvara, 40, 61, 80, 83, 84, 87. Brahmi, 11.

Ayuthia, 47. Brantas (river of), 58.

Breut, 65,
Brhas-pati, 2 n. 8, 4.

Badami, 28 | Brhae Samhita, 62.

Bagchi (BC.), 4, 18 n. 2. : British Museum, 55, 56.
Bagmati (river), 43. Buddbanandi, 69.

Baisd-in, 81 no. 2, 84. | Buddbi, 35.

Balabhérats, 3. | Burgess (J.), 29.
Bala-Gageda, 8, 13. :

Baleni (pars of), 32.

Ballaur, 16. Cakracakra, 59.

Balsane, 31. Cambodia, 47, 48.
Bandhudatte, 40. | Candanagiri, 54.

Bangkok, 48. | Candra, 21, 68.

Bare, 58. Candra-Vinkyaka, 38 n. 4.
Barth (A.) 54. Chilukya, 27.
bataen, v. Glossary. Chalukyan (temples), 31.
Bazaklik, 4b, 82. 1 Cham, 29, 46, 47, 49, 50.
Belur, 11, 27. | Chamupda, 11, 29.
Bergaigno (H.), 54 0. 4 and 7. . Chandor, 29,

as oO

--- Page 120 ---
98 INDEX
Ekajata, 79.
Giang an. 74. Elephant, al.
pana 85 Eliot (Sir €.), 46 n, 1, 65 nn. 1 and 3, 64 0. 2,
Chavannes (E.), 79 n. 4. | Tu (Sr Oh
chideka, 41 ’ ;
Cheans, ’ Ellora, 28, 29.
peaigr ana Endere, 41, 68, 85, 86.
Chen.taung (Emperor), 75. ,
Ching-ai-esii, 73, 74
Chind Daiahi, 76. ! ;
{ Fechrien, 55, 09, 86.
crea Brey. ot * Fe-bsing-taung, 72.
Chung-ahé, 74, 81. * Fecbeing tu
ee ne ; Fatebgarh, 26.
enulanarirs on (J.), 28 and n. 6.
Codingtan (8 de 2), 28 n. 7. | Pilbwat (0). il 2, 12a. 1.
beac ae 49, 60 ” Finot (L.), 54 on. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6, 60.
‘onch-thella, 30, 48,
Coomarsrwamy (A. K.), 4, 25,27, 38, 602, 8,71. feng, 18 (ay. 22 9.4, 41n.8,82 a.
Cronke (Wo) Ene de Francke (A. H.), 42 nn. 1, 2, 3 and 4.
i Frey (Dr. de), 49.
Dacea, 15 Fudo, 65.
Damrong (H.R. H. Prince), 47, Penecaned, 80 1.4.
Dandan Uilig, 41, 68, 84. Funan 49,
danta, 1. ;
Daatio, 1. |
Datta (R.), 10 n. 5. ! Gaja-Lakemi, 31, 33.
Davok Tochet, 68. Gale mukhawurs, 13
Ded (K }, 13. - Gajanana, 8, 12 n. 5.
Demiéville (P.), 86 0. 2. ee be 8
Dengys Daishi, 78. ' Gapa-nitha, 12 n. 5, 83.
Deopars. 16. Gana-nayeks, 12 n. 5.
Desss Woedjel, 57. Gayapati-brdaya, 37, 70.
Dhénuki, 31. | Ganapati-linga, 18, 20.
dharani, v. Glossary. | Gaoapati Naga (King) 10.
Dharma, #4. | Gapapatinamakranta, 43.
Dharma-dhatu, 75. pneereniinld
Dharmagupta, 73. Gapapati.Vinivake, 3, 13, 38.
dharmapila, 38, 40, 42, 43. Gaaepatya, 518,20.
dhoti, ¢. Glemary. Gass, 1, 2, 3,4, 13, 25.
Dhamrabha, 12 n. 5. » Geena gtd, &
dhyina, ©. Ghoaary.  caeesilk.
Dbyini Buddhas, 70, 71. ig sere S.
Dieng (plateau), 29, 58. Gaveéa.purdoa, 19.
Dig-grias. 90. Ganté-bal, 22.
Djembaran, 85. Ganté-Ghati, 23.
Djembe. 68. Gapedvara, 2.
Dosen Kobatau, 83 n. 2. Cae dn. 3, 30, 35.
Deshd, 70, 81. Genes Bhattdeall, 8.
Dravidin, 1. Gaaga-dhara, 35.
Durgs. 59, 60, 64. Garbhe-dhatu, 67, 75, 76, 77, 97.
dedrapila, 26, 40, 41, 42. _ Guha
Dviravati, 48. ae
dei-bargha, 19. Ga, 4, 83, 8.
Dvi-dehaka, 13, 41. i Gaur a4 oo
| Gauri-Sadkara, 20, 39 n. 5.
Eakins (The Rev. J.), 69 n. 3. | Gayetsi-tantem, 4, 48.
Fleianta 2, 12 n. 5, 15. * Gelugpa (monastery), 42.

--- Page 121 ---
INDEX °
Ghatiyals, 30. | Janus, 14.
Goblet d'Alviells (Cte), 18. Jatake-mals, 79 n. 6.
Gol, 32. jalé-matuia, v. Glossary.
Goloka, 7. Jayanti, 14.
Goloubew (¥.), 69. * Jayavarman, 48.
popas, 32. Tingo-ji, 78.
popia, 32. | Jodhpar, 30.
grohas, v. Glomary. i joshin-e, 78.
Groatier (G.), 49. 1 Jouvesn-Dubreuil (G.), 15 0. 10, 16 p. 1, 25 n. 3.
Groumet (R.}, $7, 50 n. 7, 67,72, n. 5. ; Jubbulpur (Jabalpur), 29.
Grinwedel, 41 1.7, 44. j Ju-ichi.men Kannoa, 81 n. 2.
Gubernatin, 1 n. 3 | Juynbolt, (H. H.), 62.
guhya, BH. |
Guhyasamaja-tantra, 70, 71. i
Guhyedvari, 33, 58, 59, 60. Kailiaa (mount), 3, 8, 19, 29, 63.
Guimet (Musée), 50. Kak (R.C), 180.8.
Gojerat, 29. Kaku-zen-chd, 80.
Gupta, 10, 25, 27, 29, 37, 47, 67. | kalaks, 2. Glossary.
Gupte (B. A), 15. Kame, 21, 68.
guru, 4, 72. Kamadera, 78,
Kanarese (temples), 27.
. Kendal, 49, 50.
Hemp), 31. 74. 82. Kandeah, 31
jan-kuang, 74. 82, sede te
Hanoi, 48. eta 67, 75, 80, 81, 82, 84.
Hanuman, 55. , Kangré, 34, 35.
Hoaridré-Ganapati, 20 n. 4. ee
Haribara (temple of), 18. | Kunoco oa
Hari Parbat (hull off, 22. | Kansbin Daishi, 81 n. 2.
Haripufjays, 47. Kantaka Cotinga, 25.
Fansnea n | Kab-trang. 72, 73.
Herambs, 15, 39, 40. i baile. vr Cloneary. "
Hi 2, 48. + karanda-mw. i ta, v. Gloenary.
Hirsoyedim 7 | Karanda-ryibe, 83.
Hou tena mi, 69. | Karang Kates, 59.
Hew Fh | Karttikeya, 1, 12, 39, 34, 35, 37, 41, 42, 63.
Haiian.chad, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74. ee poh
Haiian-teang, 40, 67, 69, 70, 73, 74, 81. eae Oe nT
Hui-kud, 74, 78, 77, 78, 81. Keikwa, 741. 5,78 0. 5.
Aakabeng 69. Kennedy (Colonel), 5 n. 6.
. 82. Kern (Dr.), 62, 68 n. 1.
Huvipka, 10, 32. : Khmer, 48, 47,49. 82
Khotan, 40.
Lching, 70, 72, 73 1. 2, 74. | Khoabilai, 45.
Tdamburi, 16. | Hinle-mabta,v. Glomary.
Ikoma, 80. Kirtipar, 12 n. 8.
Indo-Javanese, 58, 59. | Kishen-gange, 23.
Indonesia, 58, 69, 65. ! Kaba Daishi, 75, 76, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, B4.
Indra, 8, 44, 76. | Kecanknetvare, 48.
IndrBoi, 11, 12. | Kombeng, 63, 64.
Idina, 76, 77. | Kompong Thom, 54
Iékna Sivagarudevapaddhati, 12. © Kongo-in, 78.
Kongé-chi, 80 n. 2.
jombu, v. Glowary. _ Kotei, 63.
Jambu-dvipa, 23. Kéya-san (monastery of), 83 0. 1

--- Page 122 ---
100 INDEX
Krigna, 7, 8, 21, 32, 53. Madjusri, 44, 69.
Krom (Dr. N. J.), 55. mantra, v. Glossary.
Kuan-shi-t’ien, 67, 72, 73, 74, 75, 84, 86. | Manu, 2. .
Kukai, 78 o. I. | Mara, 8.
Kula, 9. ' Maricf, 44.
Kumari, 11, 40 n. 6, 28. Marehall (Sir J.), 71 0. 1.
Kung-hsien, 67, 68, 69, 75. Matburé, 26, 62.
Kavera, 33, 62. _ Metaya-purips, 70. 1.
Kwan-yin, 83, 84. + Matulinga, 53.

| mdyd, v. Glonsary.

| Menam (river of), 7.
Lakkandi, 27. : Meru (mount), 45.
Laksmi, 36, 58. mia-kud, 78.
Lakemi-Gagapati, 13, 20. mikkyd, 78 n. 7, 80, 81, 84, 86.
Lambodara, 12 n. 5, 19. Mi-ao'n, 50, St, 54.
Lankeévara, 29. ij Mimhaku, 82.
La Vallée Poussin (de), 83. | modaka, v. Glonsary.
Le Cog (von), 82 n. 2. | Mon, 46, 47, 48.
Lévi (Sylvain), } n. 7,6 nn. 2 and 4,8 no. Sand 6, weap bey Rev. M.), 83 n. 1, 84 n. 2,

38 0. 6, 39 n. 1,55 0. 2, 600.1. Mus perdoa, 13.
Li (Shaman Hwin), 70 n. I. : mubkuia, v. Glossary.
Li-cben, 78. : Munshiganj (district), 15, 32.
Lidar (river of}, 22. mupha-vahana, 15, 16.
Lippe (Prinon 2u), 34.
Lhakbang, 42. _ Naga, 13, 32, 39, 60.
Lloyd (The Rey. A.), 810. 3. | Nagabodhi, 76, 79.
Loks-nitba, 83. ; Na&girjuna, 79.
Lokibyata, 73. : Nalandé, 70, 71, 72.
Lokesvara, 63. | Nandi, 1, 12, 23, 34, 57, 64.
Lo-yang, 72, 73, 74. : Nar-t'an, 45.
Lang-mén, 74 0. 2. Natardje, 39.
Navagrahas, 10, 11, 30, 31, 37, 68, 68.
Ni te i, 20 n. 4.
Mababhirata, 2, 3, 7, 12, 48. H Negmusss ™
Mabé-Buddhi, 18. Hl Ngedirago, 57.
Mahé-Ganapati, 20. i Ni-d, 81, 82.
Mahikals, 40-45, 62, 63. _ Nirmand, 42.
Mahinirvans-tentre, 2, 9, 12, 18, 23, 36, 0 n. 2, | Nytta-Ganapati, 38, 65.
aS.

Mahérijalils, v. Gloanary. » Odiydna, 43.
Mahé. Vairocana, 80, 84. om, 5.
Mahé Vairocana-sitra, 74, 78, 80, 81. Oldfield (H. A.), 12 a. 8.
Mebiyains, 38, 40, 56, 67, 69, 71, 79. Orissa, 47, 73.
Mabi-yosi, % | Orissan (temples), 30.
Mahesvare, 83. !
Miheévari, 11, 28. i
Mihodara, 12 n. 5. | Padmasam bhava, 86.
Mik (Péank}, od n. 5. ' padmdeana, © Glowary.
smakora, 29D. 7. Pagan, 46, 53.
Malini (rapa msvslana + Piage-pa, 45.
manas, v. . ; pale, 1.
Minavagrhys-sitra, 3. patca-pivds, 24.
mapgala, v. Gloesary. + patos-tettea, 12.
Mandala of the Two Parts, 74, 75, 77,78, 8%. | Paficika-Mahdkéla, 62.

--- Page 123 ---
INDEX 101
Pasigrahana, 33. Rakta-tunds, 2, 12 n. 5.
panydkarvala, 7. Rakta-Vinayake, 38 0. 8.
paramdtma, 21. Rauna, 55.
Paranavitane (S.), 25, 83 n. 3, Sn. 1, Raméyags, 3, 55.
porijdta, 4. Rémedvars, 29.
Parikeit (Tjandi), 57. . Rao (T. A. G.),4, 18.2. 5, 18, 10, 20n. 2, 21. 5,
parinindna, 37. i Ba.
parisadaa, 13, 41, 42. : Rach, 33.
Parkarhar, 26. rat, 1, 18, 39, 40, 47, 48, 62.
Parmentier (H.), 58, 87. Retnasimha, 72.
Parvséavari, 38. ‘ Ravana, 32, 55.
paryanka, 53. | Révaoe-ké-khal, 28.
Parvati, 3 n. 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 15, 23, 24, 28, 20, 33, ; Ravi, 30
34, 35, 57, 59, 64, 83, 88, j Ray (N. BR.) 53.

Patna, 31. + Rig-Veda, 2, 4.
patra, 6. rithie, 34.
pella, 1. + Rudra, 2, 5, 33.
Perquin, 50.
Philadelphia University (Museum of the), 60.
phurbu, 43. Sachay, (E.), 3 2.8.
Piljaiyar, 1, 23. sadhana, v. Glossary.
piaka, 1. Skdhanamilé, 43, 79.
Ppille, 1. Sadyojita, 33, 34.
Pingala-Gayapati, 20. Saige-in, 76.
Pingalamall, 4. sake, ©. Glowsary.
Pita-epardjita, 43. kikta, v. Glossary.
pomegranate, 18, 21. j Ati, © Glossary.
Po-neger, 51, 54. | Sekti-Ganapati, 2 n. 1, 20, 36.
Prab Kennis, 49. | Saktiam, 20, 36, 71.
Prab Pada, 54. aama.bdasiga, 19.
Prajfis, 60. samadhi, 70, 84.
Prajiéparemité, 60. Samantabhadra, 69.
prokyts, 28. | sarepot, v. Glomary.
Priskt Keo, 60. ' Semudragupte (King), 10.
Priait Trapéa Ran, 54. | Saatchi, 61
Pravarapura, 23. + Sani, 7.
Pravarasena (King), 23. Sankiss Mound, 26.
pre-Ankhorian, 49. Santana-Gapspati, 20 0. 4.
pre-Kbmer, 49. Saptamatykaa, 10, 11, 12, 27-31, 69.
Preyluski (J.), 1 0. 5, 2, 10, 70 0. 4, ; Garaditilake-tantre, 8, 13, 22, 24 n. 2.
pajd, v. Ghoasary. Saraavati, 59.
Pulikesi, 1, 28. sari, 4
purdna, v. Gloasary. Sariputra, 83.
perusha, 28. Sarman (His Holiness Garuré} K.), 40 0. 2.
Pugpabhadra, 7. Samnith, 37.

sarong, ¢. Glossary.

| Servadurgatipariéodbans, 8.

Quang-nam, 60, 51. | Saetri (K), 12.0. 7, 13 0. 6, 24 a. 3.

Satahr, 32.

Shyana, 2.
radiah, 18, 31, 32, 41, 62, 79. Seiryy-ji, 78 n. 4.
Réjegtba, 37. Senyike, 83, 84.
Rajput, 4, 34, 36. Sees, 39, 64.
Réjababi (district), 16. shan, 73
rakpows, 78. Sbén-yon, 78, 81, 86.
rdkpasi, 6. Shi-bu-bd, 83 n. 2.

--- Page 124 ---
02 INDEX
: P . | tapdaca (dance), 28, 60.
Shieh-pien, 78. | Tandjur, 8.

Shingon, 78 n. 6, 80, 81, 84. : Tending
Shomne (stikedo). sin 2 Tantras, 9, 14.
Sider $1. Tantra Séatra, 21.
yore -« Tentrayina, 70.
gaan Tentria, 70.

, i : a tarjani-mudré, v. Glossary.
Sidebidtas, 4. 57. Terupe Ganapati, 18.
Siddhi-Vindyake, 38 n. 5. Thal 4.

Seen But shikyat, 22, 25. tilak, v. Glossary.
Singneari, 9, B7, 58- ' Togancd, 76.
Sita. 6 3. | Toji, 78. n
Sivarana Candriké T'on-mi Sambhota, 71.
Siveen 2 | Tourane (Musée de), 29, 61, 52, 83, 57, 59.
Siva tinga, 48, 50. * ‘Trailokyavijaya, 4.
Siva-ndtha, 83. iibeuphe, 1
q anda witee * ‘Trichinopoly, 31.
on aaa Trimarti, 5, 44, 49, 55, 86.
Smith (VA) 1 ” Tripitaka, 75, 83 a. 7.
pain aay ‘Tripurésura, 19.
poe math, 5 on 58. Tripurl (State of), 16, 30, 82.
Ps Sear 80 ‘ Techangtcbs Hutukta (Pantheon of the), 43.
dramana, ¢. Gloneary i Taing-long-a0i, 78.

Tt a eo ine
ive 2 ” | Tun-boang, 67, 68, 70, 85, 96.

an. Tao! Phak Kin, 26, 49.

s -tean-gampo, 70, 71. ao
Set (Sir Aurel), 23, 40 0. 6, 41, 85. ‘Turkestan (Chinese), 41.
Stein. Caenfels (P. V. van), 69. |

‘ Veehi- Koril, 5.
eaacoryaaraee | Dacha Ccoapats 18 n, 11, 20.
Statterheim (Dr. W. F.), 58, 65. Unbebhakalya 29,
abe, 78-77, 18 2.3. Umi, 3 n. 3, 6, 29, 50.
pray Ma Unakoti (hill af), 30, 82.

od, Ly Ope-parice, 5.
iagaionTe nes Urddhve-Gesapati, 20.
eun-worahippers, 1. | Oridbr
Sung Yin, 69. , - Glomary
dunyeta, 83. | settee, +. Glomary.
eae TI 31, 6, 68 |
Saye Ganapati, ln. 1, 38, 39. | vahalbadan, 25.
ettra, v. Glowary. | vdhoas ©. Glossary. 8, 80, 81, 84.
Suruki (B. L.), 79-n. 4, 81 a. 5, 860. 3. * Vairocans, 70, 72, 74 n. 1, 78, 78 0. 8
Srarne Ganapati, 200. 4, . Vetgoarl 1 1s
Svayambhd.mirt, 13, 22, 23, 26, 58. ! Vaivthib . ist 31, 33.
i Vajra-bhakeans, 78.
Vajrabodbi, 80.
Turban, 73 Vajre-chinna, 78.
Taiuiriye-draoyake, 1 Vojra-dbita, 42-7, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81.
Tee Vejre-Gapapati, 8.
Takakow (L), 700.2, 750.3. " Vajresmakb, 78,78
Takao, 78. vjrepini, }, 68, 86.
Tamil, 1. vajrdsana, v. Gloaary.

--- Page 125 ---
INDEX 103
Vajrasattva, 75. Visnudbarmottars, 13.
Vajra-dekhara. yoga, 76. Visnu-nathe, 83.
Vajreviain, 78. vitarka.mudni, v. Glomary.
Vajre-Vinayake, 80. Vogel (J. P.), 58, 64.0. 1.
vakra, 2. Volkerkunde (Museum fiir), 52, 61.
Vakramajit, 39. Vyiae, 3, 4, 15, 48, 61.
Vakra-tunda, 2, 10.
Yaambun 16. | Waddell (W. A.), 43 0. 3.
Valmiki, 3 | Wang Heiian.te's, 72.
Vamicare, 36. | Ware (J.), 69 n. 3.
Vardba, 41, 42. | Watanabe, 79 2. 6.
Varkha Mihira, 62. ! Wal (Brapeeae) 2
yerupe poraos, Ou. 3, 21, 68. Wen.ch'eng (Princesa), 70, 71, 72.
Vv, ra, 33. Winternitz Of), 3.
Yarote x6. Wa Tee-t'ien, 72, 73.
Vaau (N.N.). 10-1. 1.
Vaquke Bhairevakelpe, 13. | gab-yum, 71, 72.
Vedic, 1, 2, 4, 33. i Yajfiavalkya, 3, 86.
tidya-mantras, 73. | yoker, 13, 26, 43, 58.
Vighns, 43 | Yams, 21, 27, 76.
Vighna-ndshane, 12 n. 5. | Yasogupta, 69.
Vighnandyeka, 12. 1 Yave-dvipa, 55.
Vighnintake, 43, 44. : Yeh Poeloe, 65.
Vighnaréjs, 6. 1 Yoga, 70, 71, 72, 80, 81, 84.
Vighaeévare, 6, 48. ! Yopacéra, 67, 70, 71, 73, 87.
eihara, 0. Glowary. | Yogetvari, 1, 12.
vija, c. Glossary. ' Yogini, 29.
Vikata, 12 0. 5.
vind, 35. .
Vinkyaka-sitra, 83, Zemmui, 78 9. 2.
Vianu, 1, 5, 7, 8, 16, 19, 23, 24, 44, 46, 49, 60, 55,  Zimpi-Tandu, 38.
64, 83, 86. ruchi, v. Glossary
ACNE A te"
£Bb- ¥8/
4 ¢ Deptt of Arte d
kee :
out or NON

--- Page 126 ---
VLVIE I
warcias, ded RABAT ase ana adIMe a) fyi
Aaj HTS, Aas ARS BAIT om POP IETS Lace AEA WaT ORANGE AR
q ‘eo Fg ) S P te

a Madan dietatne the Mehdbheruta to Gaines t

ot SEE AR ‘ay a i hoo
oF mpcea parang RS eRe eae oe | saan
ATU RIRMGZY Ue ry « gf SPaManrMics i
an MP PEHNET MD gy SAAT ia

Bo Gouapate Heri ba woth ferangbe per te interact
Cr | yeu TP - E  See,
hay Ne a iy ; ‘ arr . = of
©, Gamesa as serihe and the Si adiega

--- Page 127 ---
PLATE

oe AK 4 % . an
@ Basoehet deo Matha 4 Sitalese intige
. 7 A il the.
4 h . Be Moa d 3
ny sr : » 4

t te 440
4 \ : 3 ioe 1
aD H a hase £
¢. Ganesa with the Seven Divine Mothers at Blloea

--- Page 128 ---
mo
ee rs
ony - oe
Via 7: > ie 2 a Ler. ‘4
~ ’ N. a 5
be 2 Ba : <n?
haa % ij og
23 5
2 _ Miao, ‘ ww
Qu $ ny? - }
"2 (ae 7,
. : ov ¥ cn
fé 4p aici —
free. * ee ye aL a
BW Ciinesa win the Delis
4 Canede sind ite Ter Bhaeana =

--- Page 129 ---
goat. . . Wit? pro it Sr
_ are o a BaSe-. oe
ro : ee 3 % mow. ate LN. ratte,
a bai a ae Ses , Era oy .
ret. By 8 Pe ae Ds anes Wi at Ewe
fiw & and ne ~ Leen ael « EA : oe A
~ = a lags SC me a ie
“4 ~y f. an , “sn? wo (4% y
Sin 2 LF — et TS
~ ~ as - + a =
; oo. ag <0 8 ae ss 1
“2 Tro NgStanen hw de ee eee y s.
id," 3 ’ ° y re tai ae ee” ,
a. Ganesa and Shti frou Baudebkhaad 6 Viverneadedd Gar ieate

--- Page 130 ---
a
yd
AS 2
ys i 7“ a non ta ;
ve A es Psd a ‘ orf nen : i. om
_ a d . a
Soe eae PT aE . _~ 7D pee =.
a Dirvilet nace bo Veasnban nage 2

--- Page 131 ---
s a see NY ‘
, a mae ral ee, 1
‘ _ ar " meg : rier, a
- ee e:.l AS: *& aor ee
: voeey Ware” tae a 4? y YS.
Foo eae ar .
on Se, ae : . {
a Siaand Parvati ns aedhandsisa Siva daveing the tindara

--- Page 132 ---
hee 77. : & at : >

--- Page 133 ---
PEVEE OS
‘ : ' “i * ft
5) Ok ; ‘ AK
F 7 i SS Lata aaah
a Gaaesc ne the Ravn an bar Bo Siva dance the tandura at Badawy
Be 9 Oita
Ma eS Nhe
Ft EST & aur We ¥ ~ | Ca ie’
Baten ho NES
6 Mariage crnenons of Siva ane Parvati at Eller

--- Page 134 ---
ertrarirrerretroreaeectyn cay: eo © © © % © © © @ 8
Reena arctan a 9.45 e i -_ : SS , °
Ne 7 aa.
Lg %, oP . e) tee - °
is far. Oe ot 4 {¥
ty - oad . . ote
16 Bae e AMD can e
ee ee —
. s © © © @ @ @ @ @ © &
Siva Gailey eo Vlenatea Sa Et anes =

--- Page 135 ---
Sak Oe aot ‘, e | &F “ Yd . ali
a. Siva,‘ Uphalder of the Ganges’ 4. Rajput drawing in the British Museum

--- Page 136 ---
VENTE 1
Ag EB eee, ee
. 4 he Nia! 1 Se z cw f
Ss LeSe APO eS 3
‘4 apy fe ff
. ears ia 5 i:
aS OP ng nn SA { Cte !
——e 1
AN 805 wo, !
ae as
ae “ae fe Bid

Gayeta with Buddhi wud Siddh P)

--- Page 137 ---
SPUR R AGU RG a
Sore ty Verte Boe EEE NET Ee et :
ae ae ie i Ie SO ma Se a
Ee EES OCR RRS CERN REY 8 iE Sel ee Oe.
whew. a tal HS ae RRR Bi oe ci BE SIRES RET A
yao See Bee Ree ree ati Rs oe ck as ae
Sake oh ame Pet om Mane isd ARM RET a Bere he ae
PES EEDA Se wh gt MR ESE
GFP Sth Sa gabe RS 3 a Sos ona ah Adi Soe <b OR Bea as
SS fae Ee ig PRS Ce RN ee ik aes Reg Mad gc hss (Oi oa ed a od
Site PRN pent aR fone Ca, Oe ara Ee Seer eee eS
een fac ak oe Die ame yee ergy ee
SURES ST CRE RN eee Sse Saas oom
1 Peas TU pgaiie Cae i eee cot gah oe
COG. BE. Una r e kaeaes avert Te re eg SAS a Gis ae ae
ae Be ee pt aet Resa eas ERC ee ae ea eet aoe
+ Oh ee sl PARES SEES ree Seed GU SMe att 3s see ye ete
Same mebs 3. SRN es Poa de a Satie Le ew Sot 9 cv ae
Bm SNe Coa ee a pre PENSE EPONA
‘2 a uae SRST e igh o apharreaba SR ST ATEN RE CAE aE
PRR ON casei 2 ie a Bee cera eat Bow ae:
1 NOIRE Big GR ote Ra es sac EE
RE Gs, Soke tart rarer Seam cra PEE
- 55% eM RE RECE NEES tian eA iphpiete sy ge
Od Hage : Pe Pal ote chee Nee eon coisas RR
Imac ate 8! en a we eae I Li eC
CE et ee eae PO sais te hate Rian seat EFL aa ae

--- Page 138 ---
ULATE 13s
7 . ‘ AY ‘
* Fee ma . =I
eo Image in the British Museu & Colicetion Naka Caleutts,
. o ’ .-
‘sy F
“a uy’
A tel yp
e. Museum (ar Volkerkunde @ Collection Nahar, Caleutts
Munich

--- Page 139 ---
PLATE 4
Ba wy ny dM ren
me ria y . ny
‘Cod a an & :
Vf WS
Ps (Ae we a4 Py
3 ye tS
ae + eer ES .
‘ gr - a € oF
fon ee Sm = ee
a Karly Nepalese bronze imieze & Ganesa holding the Ganapati linge
Sed ap. a ve ry &
re ee & aro ) Pa ’ Ay
Ory iN NE oan. ’ “s
Wa S xe } ;
’ las | a ps r iy 7. Si
sgt E> See
. Slr » Pera roy \
¢. Ten-armed Canesa and sabti d Tage worshipped bs the Saivite sect

--- Page 140 ---
PLATE te
-
ry
we ya.
Be wy Pat So.* ~ =
‘ aS we
i: , mt ™
a Altaf the Five Great) Bralocor Godly
’ S
‘3 q r 0
‘ ie,
{ é t
x - 2
KY a . : 1 a
‘ !
P~ Ss x \ r
: 2 _ my .
7
4 Bala-Resna © Bala Ceapesa

--- Page 141 ---
TRAE
\ . w
Ly * a
Sif ae » \ F >
=f lis
.. ia
. ~ ig f
ob,
Tt ==
wen maar, . |
ee “ -
d —-
--
a Pees trons Newtie Dache. Bb Untase trem South Gadi
ij PAKS \S
2 We a \ 2
mah CA EN el
mle % | on: cy
q : ‘ mn
S a a: .
oe , Wee Ke!
se ie cee ~y
mwa ~ ; : begs ee
6 Sia temed Nepalese figure 2. Bengalese ims holding the radish

--- Page 142 ---
PLAGE OG
é i . : 4A eh 4 ¥ i
4 NS
\ * “ RS .
‘mt \ p' | wy
Sa NS Z.
« e. SN
oe FEDS IPDS
a. Mahakada on male and lemale Ganesas bo Matijusee treaeliens an Capapatt
q Sg Ai, neg ON
se | (ESING
- 7 as : .
allel Dad eB
3 Bee re 0. oo
c. Nepalew Gayedr standing on two rats d. Mahakale treading ou Gaqesa

--- Page 143 ---
PLATE Is
RBDS
oh Ri, a0) SINS
i: a on ok Oe aS
Bees CATE a te 5
SE” eee Gi ad asi) A
GE oe ante
a ianesa under the fect of Vishndntake 4. Manjugri treading on Ganesa
we ia . .
Siig /eA v.
Ore SS FSO
Aen ty ne >},
. a ‘Oe (i AS . a
SO eee J ~, wa See ‘a
ky ae a _s ae —
d, Vighnantaka standing on Gauega ©, Nepalese Ganapati Heramba

--- Page 144 ---
ty
ae _
ca, \ey ‘= ,
A) Meh eo?
¢ \ ~e , oA cae,
ip vy X 4
a
oem 28 a one %
Nepalese hepa wit stn sant owe Huet anal rat

--- Page 145 ---
SN “ ee 4 ¥ r ePog N
ey, 0. NER 8 Maron
Le aopee Ba Be Sa o
Wr cw 6 oU Ne
, a ee | od . Lyi He ‘: Ww. |

S re | @* ane BN

eS ae ; ;
@. NattaGanapati Nepal f Gatapaly Hern las Ne peti

--- Page 146 ---
ne Sx
oa : , 36 ay y

kee UF hf yg %

aS . ‘" § $ 7 .
Weer Peo

--- Page 147 ---
PLATE 22
| FS tis 0 if ape
@ »S may Hoe = wee SS
4 > Gs ~~ p 7 , a ij we
ws? od > : x id Need’. >
5A oe + ab "Sud Ty tk Be bs
- + 4 ff - rf ® | anneal =
i Recs eS pL
is Ninn Ee at Ff ‘e rE eee
oy ea ~ % pe ee “Pre
os Ten Food x he j Led
a. Ganesa and the gands & Gaved pillar, Poloruirnsa
Se ES TE
we — ee Te mam
~ “es ~“ BR ket NO dame — “eee 7
la ae aH je it OVE TR a ~e
© Ganedi azul the qaees an the Kautaka Cetingn str pe

--- Page 148 ---
PLATE xt
3 BSN Byrn Yate Tara) Lihag apne
fe ty ne amily
a, Ganega shrine, Trichinepaly fh, Ganesa shine near Hampi
+. Gageda shrine entrance to tenple, Hallabid

--- Page 149 ---
roma wy Sat ee tages
q <, Fea wn A é Pe I BY
bay & —— 2 ae a? alias,
Sea Mare 3, CS a : ry .
Riemer * ee | | 3 i a.
a Rag . aoe ie . aig
ep bas “3 eas? Was e
‘ee pt Bur pane. r ae a, Be 4
ae ¢ rh .’ P e tt. 7 “ 4 cade 7 .
ws ‘ oh a Fr rs wk x4 : ak Er ue ei
we eet nT O° ‘ x a yf
a Gauesa in the pose of a Baddta A Cit eget Gegesa wart Randdiaer bowie.

--- Page 150 ---
CLATE te
: nm .
[ r
ere eee : Sen
a Poe Rlnner ae & Rhiner image
i, y / i
4 :
& { a7 4
rm 3 i.
bi ae |
t 2 x
eo Pre KRbmer tigare : ad Chant figuie Flom Mian

--- Page 151 ---
PLATE a
ul
wi
8
Ross BY
i, ow \
X t t Pel etad)
“ 4% Wwe
“ams fs
‘ inl ye ae 4 iAGS NY
neo. ee
OSG. are gee Paper. pei
nS Lae Ke ge!
he Aig gt Dee "
_ is . 1 ’
erat meenemenemnnnets
Cannbedian bronze statue of Ganesan

--- Page 152 ---
PLATE 27
4 .
a A A . ‘ ry
WM x, 1 cas if Si,
a as vé Has i
° Fadl a = Wo:
. ' . a »
— = fi cious
Shay as
‘ > ~ a
a. Ayuthian branze, swe view bh Ayuthian bronze, frant view
“ ~
..
ee ‘ we
a oo 4
' ; . n
aa s. ae
rd oa re, oY a Tha
an te i. g
~—
‘Sonal - ae .
¢ Fonr-headed Gugese froin tnde China

--- Page 153 ---
VEVEE gs
& WZ,
y
mts < F: \
ii . ” 9 it
Reh <1
wo inary bronze mace 6 Rhrnee hance scat:
eae. ape
mit A Sen
A ae
ask on (Sa “y
o Be = y 2 nm ay “4
Kier bronze image with Buddhist Ho Rhiner beanze inage, sube view
features:

--- Page 154 ---
PLATE 29
FN igh ‘a Li ORE kate =:
foe Weg oe:
SNe ARieae _&
te ey 7 es Cs eae aa ‘. eo
tay i Nee ot
a Prngitive day anes > bronze fo Karls Javaurse stone sculitiar
a h
way) rr
«i i ‘as
4 ~ 8 yi Be
1 A ° S iN wv
aes 9,6,
° ° map Bey
ayn ieee
e Javanese bronze Tbene

--- Page 155 ---
PEATE to

pea) peels

paclocay a es
ees 3 rege
? ‘es ~ we Nes _ ia

a. Gaesa col Bana front vies A Ganesa ol Bara. back view

AN ACray Pavey eee

© finaze from Tyan Pariksit 4 Lavee tom the Dien: ptatean

--- Page 156 ---
PLATE 3
a“ aD» wN aa 4
f.. getPos! 2 - eT ae
yo. oe =a ab.
en ay eetg
gee wt zit \
ef Tyinds Surtas.tt Canes A Javanese stasubing ligare
meaery. “a ae 8, 0 =
RE SA EES gf
. oy EY pine,
AN dy ee
He ‘ OS Ce a . FO na nce at &
Smeg eer SZ,
+ Ganeda from Karan Rates do Hartse type ut Javanese nage

--- Page 157 ---
PLVEPR GL
Get «. Bey *\.
etl {-2 “es
eet ered
i 3 ER SD
if ray: . a a ae beeen
ao Jvanese breaize iinace & Stotw tigare from Parnes
. m |, ‘av
oN 4 47
WTR be a
\E 8 ~-
3. “aa
*,
+t, »
ae Petree reer yiegener—~
aw .
© Bronze ieage. Dati hiner (4 dd. Bronve tigare Crom Bornce

--- Page 158 ---
t a eat - bey ee ht
a 2 Ee ypu ., ‘ .
~ e ; Dy: Sere
Mein: es
wage OTF we eS . “» =
a Vedinese Gaenesa a. cule al Purl & Vales ated _

--- Page 159 ---
PEAVEE 3a
ce . '
{ _ oy louie
$81 Agate SSS
Flagg, Ger" ae a -) ‘q
-* eieimneerenenrer™
o davanese hronse unase be Giltbranze ase Chinese
i
.
/ if rin ~
ee “,
© Nepalese bronze image

--- Page 160 ---
PLATE 35
ees ae . . Nee -
gAN ¢ a .. . Ne 7
Ge ie mm 3

| | ay —ee
aA BF vane
eT rer) Se
— - aa tgs ow .
ae ae ae ny rn
4 ee “ ee .
oa, S : os »
a ° Ph Ee Ce 7 Sm eae we. a!
Painted panel from Kudere, Chinese ‘Turkestan

--- Page 161 ---
eS , or . me _ AN oS
ep oN Nee FE
ta - BN in es fe ~ e. . ry A 2

i fb Bas velwt any lace nt Dacleli cat ate te

--- Page 162 ---
PLATE 37
¢) ees.
a ee)
A ED 10
. | aa oe e\-y “eae
io” Way ©
! ae. “oA “a” -
igh 8. LAK S
Kakemono in the Monastery of hey aan

--- Page 163 ---
ee [>
Sie

ste A

wo. gk

© Kansi ten do KRangi ten

--- Page 164 ---
PLATE a9
re ae  ~
yi wav 7 Tl
RR ARS
! i) a Sad G(s tad
at Bitar ot
= hee ; mci
ning acinus aati Ani dana |
a Wofeaineasar. Vidas stre
(2 |
= ss : 2. ow
de SRAOT PERG
Sp YOST A ND cee oa
é a 4 al t \, ct ay
SFE Say a ~~
wie TT ae am wrrembotiernes eet
6. Mahasiglowsv ara ona turtle: ©. Mahavicbnesvara the Conyneror

--- Page 165 ---
PLATE
oe 5 . bos ah
{ > <i - - . ee} we o~
i> J owed ~ Vf Pn tis YS
{° ps Me @ ioe aa? RO
OF, pare a4 ad a b Agee
a. ye ES SE Be i
Eas a nate OO
ee gis ad ee ey od = rae
7 ae oy. ae “a ae & *,
‘ ae FAIS ray ava Kile eo! “.
ta AC gS . 7: pe NOR uae SSE R MTV
Ganesior i the arcade of the tanple of the Gauri Sankara at Bhera-ghat
(ESS
a oe
(Bo. 413! ~‘:
i joptt of Arte 2
wtb cb
OT GEO

--- Page 166 ---
binge ee sg enna “eee Bigieed ia Picea. beeen ICEL ce seal SE genceG8
aS imate st ae ee es eee deer ee Pe Saget, nee
TORE UA) utes pa ie eee “tats ints a ena: See aera fee Lo Eat Ee ae, a eer Mean :
BER steko aS Bay cpp eee Tipe eee Rood taafek tiara Fy rar ose ie,
wt tba Se iy ieee hip rec ARE, aba ape apie ot Bien ae ne NE
a ol tee vee ce crn Catena RD Cota bs athe the wie aed aaa vie ep TRE 7 nt
Fes ET eee ee ae cae ee ars rade
SOR 1s aeecsig a Se ip et SE sine thee " ate ttt
Bice ot ie ae es ice eet acca eee te
Sete Heese aie Neer bee iin pewesnie es Be ar al sii sacar é aa ter ae
2 oT ee eis a Te ra EL ais ae pes that ee aa fe Pedegen in

Fae fecyguatals ian ini ear gies Sg a \. Li aa Vereen Tats mn

aes. eho ayaa me rs aR eeereaeee cae aa hie Raat cto ;
a tnt ee Seecine SS a ee ae ee oy
‘ Sas a ee aay Fe Sa RE Sce et Maat | eee te aan Ses ies
ane See ee be ere aS Be cr pe ee eb pUalipe cell Re ot | aR ea
7 BN ak be a Es ye ey hy ree ee EBRY os ee oe “ire
Cs an ee 4 Pee ter ky nce ese eee eg area ea ae es
piece ees Sores ia RCE da aie it pee aaa
Ege roa ee LT AEE a 0) ee ae? ee piilie cath hae el BE ey einen
Ge eat eel ae aarp Re rac ire esate nee 78 ce NC
; ERS . RY oa ae te A oats TE ia tee os ALM Sonar: eee een
ae ae 2 Sa a ss egiat EP Rael ee See tiie ae eeted aeek
Bee x Sea ue =e alge hae ibs atheit ADS eae = ia ‘
“* i ae he 5 oe reeds hag tO Speers Hie fs
seg hot sf Stee. ren aa ee ee = ase reel een
eee lea Oa: eetia te eae ees eT et Sa
ae Capea he ernie Lee api oS ot LS ee Te
ees Sete 2 ea ro pas ecole Cee, oe faye yee. ES oe Ugh
ae re BAe Usa “ea See ces ee ea ep ee ;
ve ES ieee ee * Saag Br uaa See SS ear
fie 7 ay
