--- Page 1 ---
GaneSa in China: Methods of
Transforming the Demonic
_ Lewis R. Lancaster
Ther are three sources for a study of GaneSa in China: the extant im-
ages and paintings, the Japanese Shingon cultic practice centering on
GaneSa with texts and rituals that can be traced back to China, and the tex-
tual references to GaneSa found in the Chinese Buddhist canon. The first
of these three, the art that still survives, has been described in the pioneer
work of Alice Getty.! The number of pieces of art devoted to Ganega in
China is quite limited. One painting of the elephant-headed deity is tound
in Cave 285 at Tun-huang, a chamber that was excavated in the Northern
Wei dynasty, although some of the decorations in it date to the T’ang dy-
nasty. Pelliott suggests a date of the first part of the sixth century for this
representation of Ganesa.? A stone sculpture of the deity is to be found at
Kung-hsien, and this image carries an inscription dating it to the year 531
A.D.° Both of these are of special interest because they predate any image
of this figure in India.‘ A third piece of Chinese art depicting GaneéSa is in
the Cleveland Museum; it is a seated figure with arms outstretched, one
leg resting on the pedestal, and an earth deity holding up the throne. Pro-
fessor Getty was aware of this image and included it in her plates but did
not attempt to date it and was not certain of its Chinese origin. Munster-
berg in his study of Chinese Buddhist bronzes identified it as Chinese and
on the basis of style placed it within the T’ang dynasty.° These few pieces
of artwork in China indicate that Ganesa has been a part of the religious
tradition but has not had a sustained base of support.

The Japanese situation offers much more information with which to
research the Chinese approach to the cult of Ganesa. We see reflected in
the oral and textual traditions of the Shingon sect a preservation of the an-
cient teachings that were being passed on to Japanese monks in the ninth

277

--- Page 2 ---
278 Lewis R. Lancaster
century. This material focuses on the dual form of Gane§a, the two ele-
phant-headed figures embracing.’ Since the dual GaneSa plays such an im-
portant role in Japan, most scholars there have concentrated on the partic-
ular texts that discuss this aspect of the deity, and they have tended to
ignore the other major description of Ganega as Vinayaka, the Hinderer.
There is a great deal of material in the Chinese Buddhist canon that
focuses on Vinayaka, and that material is the focus of this study. In most
of these texts, Vinayaka is considered to be the one who keeps the practi-
tioners from progressing and is thus a negative force that must be over-
come. There was also a revulsion expressed toward the fact that this spirit
was shown in the form of being a human with an elephant head. One of
the earliest descriptions of this feature came in the Dharmaguptavinaya
translated by Dharmaksema in the fifth century. In this text the Chinese
| were to find that the punishment for breaking the rules of conduct as out-
lined in the vinaya were severe, and those who failed to fulfill their obli-
gations to those rules of conduct could expect to be born with limbs miss-
ing, with two heads or even three, or with the head of an animal, either
horse or elephant.® Paramartha, in the sixth-century rendering of the Lo-
kaprajnaptyabhidharma, provided the Chinese with the frightening notion
that there are those whose karma is so bad that they will be born into one
of the hells, and in that hell with all its tortures and fires, they will have the
further punishment of possessing the awful feature of having the body of
a man with the head of an elephant.’ This aversion to the elephant head
continued to appear in texts. The famous Korean disciple of Hstian-tsang
(Xuanzang), Wonchuk, in his commentary to the Jen wang pan jo po lo mi
ching (The Perfection of Wisdom of the Benevolent King) speaks of the el-
ephant-headed spirit that hinders all vows.!° Danapala in his 983 transla-
tion of the Mahasahasrapramardanasitra lists the elephant-headed one as a
yaksa.'! Paramartha in 558-59, provided a translation of the Li shih a pi’i
t‘'an lun (The Abhidharma of the Natural Laws), a text concerning astron-
omy and cosmological features, where we find a description of the hell in
which there are creatures with bodies of men and heads of elephants.’
The same idea of the elephant-headed ones in hell was echoed by the
translation team of Jih-ch’eng and Dharmaraksa in the Fu kai cheng hsing so
chi ching.’ Thus long before any of the cultic aspects of Ganesa appear in
the extant texts, the Chinese had an idea that elephant-headed creatures
were the result of bad karma and were the symbols of evil actions.
This negative view of the elephant-headed creatures was to be rein-
forced by much of the literature that resulted from the translation bureaus
in China. Under the name of Vinayaka, the Hinderer, Ganesa became an
important part of the pantheon of demonic beings described in the canonic

--- Page 3 ---
Ganesain China 279
literature of the seventh and eighth centuries. The Chinese were intro-
duced to a new spirit, one that had no counterpart in their own culture, a
spirit with a grotesque form that could hinder the process of moving
toward enlightenment. But if the Buddhists presented a new and hereto-
fore unknown problem, they were also ready with a solution. The texts we
identify as belonging to the Tantric tradition present a wealth of references
to Vinayaka along with the spells, dharani, mudra, and other rituals that
could keep this malevolent spirit under control. As early as the middle of
the seventh century, a Chinese monk was translating a text about the rit-
uals used to control Vinayaka. Chih-t’ung, in the Kuan tzo tsai p’u sa sui
hsin chou ching, provided an account of a simple ritual procedure for dealing
with this bothersome deity. There we read that it was not always necessary
to make an elaborate altar, but one could take a small tree branch and ayali
flowers with fragrant oils and conduct a ritual that would cause Vinayaka
to be sent far away.'* Ina translation entitled Pu k’ung chin so t’o lo ni ching,
Li Wu-ch’an in 700 provided a description of a ritual for dealing with hin-
drances to practice. The recitation of the spell, done 108 times, followed by
a fasting period of one day and night or three days, will result in the de-
struction of the barriers such as the fears produced by hearing strange
sounds in the night, and having driven away Vinayaka, the mind will be
concentrated.'* The same idea was given ina text ascribed to Amogha-
vajra, a text similar to the Amoghapdasakalparaja,’* where the ritual at the al-
tar with the use of white mustard seeds is said to cause great difficulties
for all malevolent devas, yaksas, enemies, and Vinayaka, and thus make
them move far away.

Atigupta in 654, in his translation of the Dharanisamuccaya, gives a
classic description of the positive view of the intertwining elephant-
headed creatures. The text provides the information that, in order to
achieve the desired results, one should make an image, using white solder
and copper, wood and other material, to make either cast images or carved
wooden ones. The image should be in the shape of a man and wife in em-
brace, with the bodies of humans and the heads of elephants. The image
should be made without regard to its cost. Having made the construction,
on the first day of the full moon in a place that has been ritually purified, a
circle made of cow dung is to be used as the area for the placement of the
image. Pure sesame oil is to be heated and after reciting the spell 108 times,
the oil is sprinkled over the head of the image 108 times. Ii this procedure
is followed correctly, good things will occur in accordance with the wishes
of the one performing the ritual, and all calamity and misfortune will dis-
appear.’ It is this account that gives us an indication of the way in which
the dual Gane§a is treated in Japan. Later in this same text of Atigupta’s

--- Page 4 ---
280 Lewis R. Lancaster

we have an account of dream interpretation. A dream of a predator bird
attacking or frightening domesticated fowl is an indication that Vinayaka
has been offended.'® While Atigupta could give a positive account of the
dual figures, he also has a negative view of Vinayaka, for his translation
says that when the spell is chanted the entire cosmic realm will shake and
Vinayaka and all of the evil spirits will be fearful. The unbelievers feeling
the trembling of the earth will want to run away to the mountains or to the
sea, but they will be unable to do so.’ This mixed message about the ele-
phant-headed creatures gives the suggestion that in the Tantric tradition
represented by Chinese translations, there are a variety of these creatures,
and while the dual ones are helpers, the demonic ones are to be controlled.

The Buddhist literature in China takes on a new form with the arrival
of such Tantric masters as Vajrabodhi, Bodhiruci, Ratnacinta, and Subhak-
arasitmhha. These teachers came one after the other by sea and the ancient
central Asian trade routes. Bodhiruci reached Ch’ang-an in 693,”° and in
the same year Ratnacinta is reported to be in Lo-yang.”' Vajrabodhi, one of
the senior monks of the Tantric school, travelled around the Malayana pen-
insula and started his work at present-day Guangzhou in 719.7? The work
of these monks constitutes the major part of the textual references to Ga-
ne§a in his Vinayaka form.

Bodhiruci undertook the task of translating the Amoghapasakalpara-
jasutra and completed the work in 707 at Hsi ch’ung fu Monastery.” In this
text we find the description of spells that can be used to control Vinayaka.
One of these spells when recited seven times will cause blood to gush forth
from all of Vinayaka’s facial orifices. The same source also relates the
spells for the control of Vinayaka in terms of lunar cycles, such as the
eighth day of the full moon down to the evening of the fifteenth day. As a
part of the ritual process, the practitioner should spend one day and night
without speaking. In a smaller work, the Fo shin ching, Bodhiruci pro-
vided the Chinese with a passage that promises, as part of the reward for
this chanting of the spells, the attainment of the enlightened state and the
perfection of the wisdom of the Bodhisattva and the ability to keep the
spell constantly in mind for seven days. When this occurs all those who
have fallen into the path of Mara and all the Vinayakas will seek to come
near and give homage.” The Padmacintamanidharani translated in 709 gives
even more glowing reports of the rewards and powers that are to be
achieved through the use of the spells. Enlightenment will come to
Vinayakas and others who have accumulated terrible karma. Even those
who are in hell, if they recite the spell, can themselves open up the gates
and escape. All beings will be able to attain liberation and exhaust all birth
in the lesser realms and be born into a heavenly sphere where they will

--- Page 5 ---
Ganesa in China 281
experience bliss and joy.” By 706, Bodhiruci had produced a number of
translations at his center, among them the dharani text that says, on the
one hand, that the Vinayakas hearing the spell will attain full enlighten-
ment, and on the other, that the right use of the spell will destroy them.
The reciter will be able to crush all Vinayakas and will be able to attain the
state of being invisible to all yaksas. In this state of invisibility, one is pro-
tected from those who hate them and wish to do harm.” A later transla-
tion of 709, I tzu fo ting lun wang ching, says that if Vinayaka produces bar-
riers and defilements, then a ritual using rice mixed with black oil put into
the fire and followed by the recitation of the spell 1,008 times over a period
of thirty days will remove all hindrances. In this text, we again see dream
divination where creatures such as demons, wild boars, dogs, deformed
beings and dead men appear to frighten the dreamer. However, by reciting
the spell, one can make these types of unlucky dreams fade awav, and in
their place pure spiritual dreams will occur; the practitioner will have a
comprehension of the true nature of the body and, with the power result-
ing from this insight, can remove his body from any place where Vinayaka
holds forth, even in the dream state.?8

Subhakarasirmha provides us with another selection of texts that deal
with GaneSsa. The message regarding Vinayaka in these translations is
similar to that found in Bodhiruci’s corpus of texts. Vinayaka is defined as
a Hinderer, but if one makes use of the ritual power of the spells, then Vi-
nayaka will become fearful and take flight.2? One who fully comprehends
the spell cannot be defiled by demons such as Vinayaka.” There is a great
focus on the magical quality of the spells, a power that is great enough to
cause flags to flutter when there is no wind or incense to burn sponta-
neously.*! By use of the spells the reciter can have the magical power of
bringing disasters to the malevolent spirits — floods, great windstorms,
day and night without any light, thunder and lightning causing injury —
and finally the vajra scepter can be used to crush evil demons until they
are ground into powder and dust. Vinayaka will in this way be mortally
wounded, and there will be no necessity of fearing him.”

The next missionary to take up the theme among the Tantric schools
was Vajrabodhi. He was a contemporary of Subhakarasimha, and the
works that occupied him had themes similar to those already discussed.
In one of his dharani texts, he provided a description of the iconographic
details of the Vinayaka image. The image could be made by drawing on a
piece of white cloth or carving either white or purple sandlewood. The
wood should have a pleasing scent and be hardwood, described as being
difficult to polish. The body of Vinayaka is made in an upright position
with the trunk curved to the right. In his upper arm he holds a sword and

--- Page 6 ---
282 Lewis R. Lancaster

in the other arms, knives, circles, rope, and so on. Above his head are five
colored clouds in which are seen devas scattering flowers. Along side of Vi-
nayaka, are four yaksas, each with a different head, one a cow-headed
creature, the others either boar, elephant, or horse headed.* Here is an ex-
ample of a situation where Vinayaka with his elephant head is the central
figure in the ritual painting or the aitar, while a separate being, with the
body of a yaksa rather than a human one, is surmounted with an elephant’s
head. While Vinayaka has been described in one aspect as a yaksa, in this
text we see him as being a special being with a body that is human in form,
and thus he is not always to be seen as one of the yaksa genre of deities. As
we follow the other texts translated by Vajrabodhi, we can perhaps see
something more of the reason behind and procedures followed in the rit-
uals related to such images. We are informed, ina text devoted to the Bud-
dha Vairocana, that Vinayaka and all of the evil yaksas will be seized with
fear and run away when they hear the spell being recited.* More specifi-
cally, all those who obstruct or destroy the dharma of the Buddha will, by
the power of the spell, be instantly transported seven leagues away from
the practitioner and no longer cause trouble. These who obstruct are Vi-
nayaka, evil spirits, ghosts, and the like.*

At the end of the seventh century, Ratnacinta arrived at Lo-yang com-
ing from Kashmir. In two of his translations, we find evidence of Vinaya-
ka, who is described in terms similar to those often used for Mara. He is
the one who causes fear that is a barrier to practice and can destroy the con-
centration of the meditator. In the Amoghapdasakalpardajasitra, we find that
the method for chasing away Vinayaka is to scatter white mustard seeds in
the area of practice.* In the 705 translation of the Ekaksarabuddhosnisacakra,
there is a firm promise that for those who follow the subtle teaching there
is protection from aii evil spirits who are under the control of Vinayaka,
and the demonic forces cannot evade the power of the spell that will scatter
them by means of this teaching and use of spells.*”

Later in the eighth century, the most famous of all the Tantric teach-
ers in China began to translate texts that contained, among other things,
information about Vinayaka. Amoghavajara was a unique teacher because
even though he had been born in Ceylon, he was brought to China by his
uncle at an early age. While in China, he met and became a disciple of
Vajrabodhi and traveled back to India after he had reached adulthood.
With his background it is little wonder that the Chinese looked upon him
as a very special person, an Indian who was Chinese in many respects.
After his 741 — 746 trip to India, he was able to provide the Chinese Bud-
dhists with the newest information on Tantric developments in the south-
ern regions.”*® It is not surprising to find that the texts associated with

--- Page 7 ---
Ganesa in China 283
Amoghavajra echo the themes found in those of his teacher Vajrabodhi.
The practitioners are told that if one recites the spell 108 times, ‘all those
who obstruct and hinder progress, such as Vinayaka, will be banished.»
In addition, the incantations and ritual use of sesame oil will provide the
meditator with power over this demon, by virtue of the fact that the Tantric
teaching will be fulfilled* and one can crush him.*! The Mahamanivipulavi-
manavisvasuparatisthitaguhyaparamarahasyakalpardjadharani provides us
with at least one explanation for making an image of Vinayaka. If one
wishes to control him, the oil of white mustard seed should be poured on
the head of his image while reciting the spell 108 times. This is followed by
washing the image in milk so as to achieve liberation.*? Another text re-
counts that when Avalokitesvara pronounces the mantra, the earth shakes
in six ways and from the sky flowers fall down, the cold hells warm up, the
hot ones cool off, and a glow is created that can be seen all the way to Aka-
nistha Heaven. As these wondrous events occur, all of Mara’s hosts, Vi-
nayaka and his gang, are vanquished, and they howl and rage in despair.
As a contrast to the wailing of the demonic, the devas with melodious
voices chant in unison the verses of the Sutras.* In the Vajrakumaratantra,
the process of taming Vinayaka takes place when the spell is recited and
‘the world systems shake in the six directions. Vinayaka and his hosts of
demons feel their palaces being severely rocked by the quakes, and they
become frightened and uneasy. After thirty days of this ritual and contin-
ual shaking, these once-mighty beings are all cowed and can be easily con-
quered.*

Perhaps one of the most complete descriptions of the Vinayaka ritual
occurs in the Maricidharanisutra done by Amoghavajra sometime between
746 and 774.* An image of Vinayaka, here called the ‘King of the De-
mons,” is to be made from mud that is taken from the soil of the two banks
of a river. Using this mud, the image of the king is made as well as one
hundred images of his demon gang. Vinayaka is to have the head of an el-
ephant and the body of a man. The other spirits are depicted with the
heads of animals, some of short stature, others tall. They have four or eight
arms. After the figures have been made, they should be put on a platform
made of wood that has been soaked in the river water. On the platform are
placed six thrones, made of five-colored soil, two to the north, two to the
south, two to the east, with one in the center. The master of the ritual sits
in the western ‘‘gate”’ of the circular altar and faces east. The image of Vi-
nayaka is placed on the central throne. Using incense, flowers, and other
ritual items as part of the ritual, the master recites the spell 108 times. After
this, he takes seven-colored string and binds up the images of the dernons,
and with the feces of a young calf he draws 108 circles around the images.

--- Page 8 ---
284 Lewis R. Lancaster

This traps the demons, and they can do no harm for a long time. For the
one who constructs such a temporary altar beside the river, even if he be
near death with a sickness that is the result of bad karma, health returns.
The spirits who have for eons been caught in the life of a malevolent
ghostly presence will be set free from this existence that has brought so
much distress and fear to others. When the spell is recited over the images
thus bound up in the thread, they will all achieve liberation. They will give
a reward to the one who can exorcise them; that reward will be prosperity.
In this we see a glimpse of the process by which Vinayaka within the ritual
setting has become a bestower of prosperity, as he moves from bondage in
a state that causes hindrance and fear to others, to liberation through the
power of the ritual.

The theme of aiding the demonic spirits in order to control them and

to stop the hindrances they create is continued in the works of a mid -
eighth century Chinese disciple of Amoghavajara. Han-kuang pointed out
that Vinayaka had many forms, the embracing figures, Ganapati, and the
elephant-headed king. This Chinese Tantric master taught that the ele-
phant-headed king is a symbol of the great power Vinayaka possesses, but
just as an elephant can be tamed by the keeper, so Vinayaka can be tamed
by certain rituals. Thus, when a meditator finds that there are obstacles to
success in his practice, he should anoint the image of AvalokiteSvara 108
times and then anoint the image of Vinayaka. When this is done, Vinayaka
will be like an elephant that is fully tamed, and all the hindrances will
spontaneously disappear. )

After looking at all of these texts and seeing the way in which Vinaya-
ka was viewed as being a spirit who causes distress, fear, and obstacles to
spiritual progress, it is understandable that a proscription went out from
the Chinese court regarding the making of his image. While the Amogha-
vajra text suggested that the freeing of the demons from their terrible state
of existence could result in great rewards, the Chinese canonic literature
was dominated by a negative image of Vinayaka. When we see the high
esteem within the Shingon group in Japan for the dual Gane§a, it leads us
to the conclusion that Japanese models for practice do not always work for
China. In a situation such as the one surrounding GaneSa in China, we
find that the canon provides us with the source for making a study of what
was being taught during the T’ang times. The negative view-of this deity
dominated the Tantric tradition in China, and it is understandable that the
cult of GaneSa did not thrive. On the other hand, inadvertently, the
Chinese translations of those early Tantric texts from India give us a
glimpse of the history of Ganega and an older aspect of how he was seen
by Indians. His identification as a giver of prosperity is seen in these

--- Page 9 ---
Ganesa in China 285
Buddhist texts as the result of his appreciation for the services rendered
him by the Tantric practitioners in helping to free him from the terrible
state of being an elephant-headed spirit. Using all of the resources, we can
perhaps begin to reconstruct the shifts that have occurred over the centu-
ries regarding the conceptions associated with Gane§a.
NOTES

1. Alice Getty, Ganesa, A Monograph on the Elephant-faced God (1936; reprint ed.,
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1971).

2. Getty, Ganesa, 67.

3. Getty, Ganesa, 68.

, 4. Getty, Ganesa, 69. But see the essays in this volume by Brown and Dhavali-
ar.

5. Getty, Ganesa, pl. 34b.

, 6. H. Munsterberg, Chinese Buddhist Bronzes (Tokyo: Tuttle, 1967), pl. 125.

7. See Getty, Ganesa, and references given in James Sanford’s paper, this vol-
ume.

8. Taisho Shinshu Daizokyo: The Tripitaka in Chinese, J. Takakusu and K. Watan-
abe, eds., 85 vols. (Tokyo: Taisho Issaiky6 Kankokai, 1924-32), 1428-814b (here-
after T).

7 9. T. 1644-208c.

10. T 1708-—408b.

11. T. 999-582a.

12. T. 1644-208c.

13. T. 1671-739b.

14. T 1103-462b.

15. T. 1096-412c.

16. T. 1098-—439c.

17. T. 901-—884c.

18. T. 901-—885a.

19. T. 901-851c.

20. See biographies: Hsu ku chin i ching t’u chit by Chih-sheng (T2152 — 371a);
also his Kai yiian shih chiao lu (T. 2154-570a) and Yuan Chao’s Chen yuan hsin ting
shth chiao mu lu (T. 2157-—872c).

21. See biographies above: T. 2152-369b; T. 2154-567a; T: 2157-867b.

22. See biographies above: T. 2154-571b: T. 2157-875a, and Ming -—chuan’s Ia
chou k’an tung chung ching mu lu (T. 2153-372b).

23. T. 1092-—258a.

24. T. 1092-—267c.

25. T. 920-3b.
