--- Page 1 ---
GaneSa as Metaphor:

The Mudgala Purana
a ~Pylis: Grrarnoff
I. Introduction
Mee scholars pondering the question ‘‘Who is Ganesa?” are only

the most recent representatives of a long line of seekers who endea-

vored to fathom the mysteries that lay behind the elephant-headed god.
For the classical Indian tradition not only sang the god’s praises, lovingly
represented him in art, and wove intricate narratives about his deeds and
powers; it also strove to understand the hidden and symbolic meaning that
so greatly contributed to the awe that GaneSa could inspire. In many ways,
the modern and the traditional scholar have approached Ganeéa in strik-
ingly parallel fashion; each has told and retold Gane§ga’s stories, and each
has sought to analyze those stories within a recognizable intellectual con-
text and framework that would make apparent the unconscious motifs and
structures that ultimately shaped the stories told. But here the similarities
end, for the intellectual context of the modern scholar differs greatly from ,
that of the traditional reader. Where the modern scholar can call upon the-
ories of psychoanalysis and anthropology, just to name a few of the tools
available, the traditional scholar moved in an intellectual world that pro-
vided very different models for understanding. '

At least one group of traditional scholars who asked, ‘‘Who is Ga-
nesa?,’’ were philosaphers, and they sought their answer in creative trans-
formations of the models that classical Indian philosopny offered for the
understanding of the visible world and ultimate reality. They had at their
disposal core texts from their tradition, which provided them with a fixed
point of reference for their speculation. What is remarkable is the freedom
with which they could manipulate and interpret these texts to arrive ulti-

85

--- Page 2 ---
86 Phyllis Granoff

mately at a new synthesis and a new understanding of these fundamental
texts. It was through their reinterpretation of standard philosophical con-
cepts that they ultimately also created a distinctive understanding of Ga-
neSa.

The philosophers who speculated on the nature of Ganesa in medie-
val India remain largely anonymous. They have left us the record of their
thoughts not in systematic treatises, but in texts that carefully combine
storytelling with philosophical discourse and often divulge their philosoph-
ical content through images and metaphors and through the medium of
hymns of praise and allegorical tales, rather than through the philoso-
pher’s tools of rigorous argument and debate. The main text we have today
that tells us of the philosopher’s quest to understand GaneSa is the Mud-
gala Purana. Nothing is known of its date or provenance, and little work has
been done on any aspect of the text, although it would clearly repay a full-

; length study.”

| This paper is meant as a first step in studying this text, and its ap-
proach will be to describe two of the reinterpretations the Mudgala Purana
offers of fundamental philosophical texts in its tradition: of the scriptural
statement tat tvam asi from the Chandogya Upanisad, 6.8.7, and of the sys-
tem of yoga that was first codified in the Yogasutras of Patanjali. Perhaps if
we can begin to understand how the Mudgala engages other medieval phi-
losophers, we can begin to reconstruct its context and arrive at a meaning-
ful understanding of its time and place and position in the history of Indian
philosophy. The Mudgala can also teach us much about the diversity of
philosophical speculation in medieval India, a diversity that is not always
obvious to a student who concentrates solely on the systematic treatises
and is unaware of texts like this Purana with its own contributions to scrip-
tural exegesis and the practical religious quest. In a brief concluding sec-
tion the paper will suggest directions for continuing research on the text.
II. The Mudgala Purana and tat tvam asi

The Mudgala Purana offers more than one interpretation of the scrip-
tural statement tat tvam asi, ina striking departure from the usual practice
of medieval philosophers, which was to settle on one meaning of any given
scriptural statement through a strict reliance on a fixed set of rules that
govern scriptural interpretation. This phrase in the Chandogya Upanisad
had always been central to the system of Advaita Vedanta, for it was one of
the key statements or mahavakyas from which Advaita sought the neces-
sary scriptural authority for its doctrine of nonduality. To the Advaitin the
statement meant “That Thou art,”’ and it propounded the unity of the in-

--- Page 3 ---
Ganesa as Metaphor 87
dividual soul with the highest real, Brahman. Every subsequent school of
theistic Vedanta was also compelled to deal with this line from the Chan-
dogya Upanisad in order to refute the Advaitin claim that their system was
firmly supported by this and other similar statements in the sacred texts.*
In the debates that ensued over the meaning of tat tvam asi we can in fact
see something of the extreme flexibility that existed in classical Indian her-
meneutics. Madhva would argue in his commentary to the Chandogya
Upanisad that the statement should be read atat tvam asi, adding a negative
to mean, “You are different from the absolute.’* Vallabha would offer still
another interpretation, arguing that the tvam was an abstract suffix and
not a personal pronoun and that the statement was intended to prove that
the individual souls are a part of God.> Ramanuja offered yet a different
interpretation. And between themselves the supporters of these inter-
preters debated vigorously the significance of this one seemingly simple
line.° But where they all converged was in agreeing that the statement had
one fixed meaning; the individual words in the context in which they ap-
pear in the Upanisad each had a specific referent, and that referent could be
determined by recourse to the well-established rules for determining the
meaning of a statement that were part of the Mimamsaka tradition.

It comes therefore as something of a surprise to see the Mudgala Pur-
ana enter this debate with a very different assumption: tat tvuam asi is not
one statement but many; each term has a plurality of meanings, even
within the one unchanging context of the Chandogya Upanisad, and no one
combination of these words and their meanings can be privileged above
any other. In fact the statement that sets forth a term tat, another term
tuam, and the copula that unites them, asi, is a mirror image of the ele-
phant-headed god himself, who bears the body of a man (likened to the
term tvam) and the head of an elephant (equated with the term tat) and is
himself the unifier of both these disparate terms (as is the copula, asi). Ga-
neSa and this scriptural statement with which Ganeéa is identified both
have many meanings and explanations.’

Gane§Sa and the scriptural statement are not single, unvarying, fixed
entities. Instead both serve as symbols that elucidate the complex nature
of reality. They function as metaphors for reality that this text understands
as unfolding from an absolute that is its source in a process of bifurcation
or multiplication and synthesis. Ganeéa, in having both elephant head and
human body, stands as a perfect symbol for the concept that reality is al-
ways a combination of seemingly disparate building blocks or constitu-
ents. And in an exactly analogous fashion the statement tat tuam asi signals
that reality is made up of seemingly incompatible units, tats and tvams,
but is their sum total or the synthesis that can be achieved between them.

--- Page 4 ---
88 Phyllis Granoff

The possibilities for analyzing the world are virtually infinite, and si
the meanings of the individual words tat and tvam and their synthesis as
are also infinite. Ganesa, who is this synthesis, this asi, is also infinite i
his incarnations or avataras, but the text settles on eight primary forms
and I should like to look at some of these in order to make clearer how th
Mudgala Purana understands GaneSa and how it interprets this famou:
scriptural statement.®

The eight incarnations of GaneSa are first named in 1.17.24—28, anc
the text is subsequently organized so that it devotes separate sections te
each of the incarnations, detailing their exploits in stories that are ofter
clearly allegorical, and also providing philosophical commentary in th
form of hymns and direct discussion. In most cases a specific reference i
also made to the scriptural statement tat tuam asi, and the exact meaning o

- tuam, which is Gane§a’s body, and tat, which is his head, are given, whil
the incarnation under discussion is equated with the word asi, the unior
of the two separate terms and body parts.

Each incarnation in fact represents a particular stage of the absolute
as it unfolds into creation. Essential to the philosophy of the Mudgala Pur
ana is the belief that GaneSa is the physical world; that the absolute is bot
sarvakara, by very nature the world in all its diversity, and nirakara, the sou
as its stands aside from the movement of creation and dissolution of thi
universe.’ The Mudgala Purana offers a distinctive understanding of hov
the absolute unfolds as the world, and some brief introduction to the de
scription of creation in the Mudgala Purana is required if we are to under
stand its doctrine of the eight incarnations of Ganesa as embodiments o
the scriptural statement tat tvam asi and paradigms of understanding real
ity. *° ,

The Mudgala Purana in a way may be understood to frame its narra
tives with a discussion of creation; it first introduces the discussion of cre
ation in book 1, chapter 6, and the last book repeats the description witl
slight variation, in 9.1. The topic in fact comes up again and again in th
text, as if to underscore its importance. As is the case with many of th
philosophical concepts in the text, creation is not only described direct]:
in a dialogue that is taking place between various individuals. It is also de
scribed in hymns, in which Gane§a is praised as a variety of entities tha
represents the various stages of the absolute as it unfolds in the world
These entities are listed in the order in which they appear in creation, an
it thus becomes possible to reconstruct the process of creation from th
hymn." What follows here is a summary of some of the essential steps ii
creation that are critical for an understanding of the incarnations of Ga
neSa.

--- Page 5 ---
Ganesaas Metaphor 89

The absolute prior to creation is devoid of distinction (1.6.7). The first
step in the creative process is a twofold change in the absolute that be-
comes svata utthanaka, a term that means something like “‘awakening on its
own,” and parata utthana, which might be loosely translated as “aroused
by another.’’”? These terms carry very specific meanings in this system,
meanings that are not obvious from the names of the terms.

The svata utthana brahma, the absolute that has awakened to creation
of its cwn accord, is in fact the entity responsible for creation. It begins to
wonder about itself, to ponder its own nature, and through the power of
its thought (vikalpa) it becomes twofold. It becomes a cognizer, and it be-
comes that which is cognized, both, however in an undifferentiated state
(1.6.9-11); in other language, it becomes both the body (deha) and the em-
bodied soul (dehin).

The cognizer is considered to be formless, nirakara, while the abso-
lute as the potential object of cognition, the visible and invisible physical
world, has everything as its form, and is sarvakara (1.6.14). The text
stresses that the absolute as soul and as visible world are on the same on-
tological footing; both are stages in the process of creation; both are the re-
sult of the cosmic delusion that sets off the entire creative process (1.6.15-
16).

At this point in the creative process, then, the absolute exists in sev-
eral different manifestations. From the initial stage came an entity that
would be involved in creation, the svata utthana, and an entity that stood
aloof from creation, the parata utthana. The actual creation of the world will
proceed naturally from the svata utthana. More specifically, it will proceed
from the undifferentiated unity of potential physical objects, which are
seen as in fact four different types of bodies. This undifferentiated unity
of the four bodies is termed the bindu. The process will require as well an
undifferentiated unity of cognizers, which the text describes as ‘’so ‘ham,’
an awareness, “I am,” and which also comes into being from the svata ut-
thana.'3 The bindu is equated with prakrti, primordial matter of the
Samkhya system, while the unity of souls is equated with purusa, and to-
gether they will create the world of souls and bodies. But more important
for our discussion, the text begins here to establish its main principle of
analysis and to set forth its doctrine that ultimately reality lies in a synthe-
sis of the diverging elements. For it stresses that in order for the creative
process to occur there must be something that brings these two things to-
gether, and this is Ganesa, who joins the two units and allows them to pro-
ceed with creation (1.6.19-—20). |

At the same time, there is another important process that takes place.
The absolute exists not only as svata utthana, which divides into two parts

--- Page 6 ---
90 Phyllis Granoff

that GaneSa joins together. It also exists as parata utthana, but it is a cardi
nal principle of our text that units never function except through synthe
sis. If we turn to the account of creation in 1.16, we begin to see how Ga:
nega is not only the synthesis of the undifferentiated collocation of soul:
and bodies; Gane§a is also the synthesis of the two absolutes that arise a
the first moment of creation, the synthesis of svata utthana and parata ut
thana (1.16.5). This is GaneSa as the source of the Puranic gods, Sakti
Surya, Visnu, and Siva. Gane§ga, then, as the synthesis of differentiatec
units, is responsible for the appearance of the entire universe: of its phys
ical elements from the bindu, of its individual souls from an undifferen
tiated unity of souls, and of its major deities.

We are now ready to examine the eight incarnations of Gane§a, eack
of which represents the absolute at some stage in the evolutionary process
and each of which is also a synthesis of disparate elements. First in the se
ries is Vakratunda, “‘the one with a crooked trunk.”” Vakratunda is the ab.
solute as the aggregate of bodies, what we have called above the bind1
brahma. His body is the three physical bodies that are made up of the qual.
ities sattva, rajas, and tamas, familiar from Samkhya thought; this is the
tvam of the scriptural statement tat tvam asi. His head is the fourth body
the turiya or nada, which stands beyond these three physical bodies
(9.3.92). This is the term tat of the scriptural statement, while Vakratunda
their combination, is asi. The next incarnation is Ekadanta, ‘‘the one wit
the single tusk.’ Ekadanta corresponds with Vakratunda in representing
the sum total of individual souls, as Vakratunda was the sum total of bod
ies. It is to be recalled that in creation the svata utthdna absolute differen
tiates itself into a sum total of bodies (bindu) and a sum total of souls. Fo
Ekadanta the text similarly makes an analogy with the scriptural state
ment, with tvam as the body and tat as the head. Here the body is the in
dividual soul, subject to delusion, the jiva, while the head is the soul whx
is not subject to false identification of the body—the saksin, or witness con
sciousness, a term clearly borrowed from Advaita Vedanta (9.3.94).

The next incarnation, Mahodara, is a synthesis of both Vakratund.
and Ekadanta. It corresponds to the absolute svata utthana, which become:
differentiated into the aggregate of bodies on the one hand and souls o1
the other hand. Here the tvam or body of GaneSa is the bindu, the sum o
bodies, while the tat or head is the consciousness or the soul, described a
so ‘ham, ‘I am” (9.3.104).

The next incarnation, Gajavaktra, ‘‘the one with the elephant head,’
is the counterpart to Mahodara. Mahodara is the absolute as it enters th
creative process; this is the parata utthana, the absolute that is aloof fron
creation. It stands somewhat outside the normal equation the scripture

--- Page 7 ---
Ganesaas Metaphor 91
statement tat tuam asi makes because it remains untouched by the created
world of relationships (4.1.15-17). It has no equation of its own, but it is
present in the terms of the equation that mark Mahodara, for the parata
utthana is conceived as a kind of response to the svata utthana. Thus the
parts of its body are the same as the parts of the Mahodara; it exists in and
through them and yet outside them.

The next four incarnations bring us into the stages where the Puranic
gods are created. They are created from the Ganesa that combines the
svata and parata absolutes; their head is the parata and their body the svata
utthdna, and they are as follows: Lambodara, corresponding to Sakti; Vi-
kata, corresponding to Surya; Vighnaraja, corresponding to Visnu; and
Dhumravarna, who corresponds to Siva.

While the Mudgala Purana takes delight in detailed descriptions of the
deeds and wonders of each of these incarnations, this brief description
should make clear that to the Mudgala Purdna GaneSa is a multivalent sym-
bol in a complex philosophical system. It interprets Ganesa and the scrip-
tural statement with which GaneSa is identified in a plurality of ways, only
some of which I have given. Indeed the text does not seem bothered when
even at the same stage of reality different interpretations are given for Ga-
neSa and for the scriptural statement, so long as the basic principle re-
mains unchallenged.'* GaneSa and the scripture that validates him serve
more as metaphors than as single direct statements. They make known the
nature of reality, indicating that reality itself is a complex process that in-

_ volves replication and synthesis, with synthesis always at the beginning
and end of the creative process.
III. GaneSa as Yoga: Beyond the Creative Process

Through the preceding discussion of the accounts of creation the
Mudgala Purana offers, we have tried to understand how the text provides
both a distinctive understanding of GaneSa as the absolute reality and an
unusual way of looking at scriptural statements. We emphasized that Ga-
neSa was regarded as a synthesis, a combination of distinct units. The
Mudgala Purana extends this paradigm for understanding reality to the
practical aspect of its teachings as well. The true path by which we may
come to understand the nature of Ganeéa, the nature of reality, is also a
synthesis and not a single option.

In its discussion of the means to achieve knowledge of the truth and
thus to free oneself from the bondage of worldly existence, the Mudgala
Purana offers a distinctive interpretation of traditional yogic practices that
were formally codified in the Yogasitras. In much the same way as it acted

--- Page 8 ---
92 Phyllis Granoff

as acommentary to the Chandogya Upanisad in its discussion of tat tvam asi,
the Mudgala Purana acts as well asa commentary to the Yogasutras and their
standard commentaries. It deviates from the sitras themselves and from
the Bhasya at a number of points, but its most significant point of differ-
ence is in its understanding of what must be the content of yogic medita-
tion and the nature of the philosophical realization that is behind yoga.

The philosophical background to the Yogasitras is Samkhya. The su-
tras define a process of internalizing the philosophical truths of that sys-
tem. The Mudgala Purana borrows the terminology of the Yogasutras and
the Bhasya, but it greatly modifies the meaning of the terms it uses.” It
keeps strictly to the paradigm for understanding reality that we have out-
lined in the section above; the true yoga, like the true reality, must be a
combination of factors. Indeed GaneSa is yoga, santi yoga, “‘the yoga of
peace,” or piirna yoga, ‘‘the full yoga.’’’ This full yoga represents the syn-
thesis of two alternative understandings of reality; it also represents the

. synthesis of two features that hold true for reality. And in synthesizing the
individual paths, it also transcends them to find a truer religious meaning.

The text here provides its own terminology for the two practices that —
combine to make the full yoga. It calls them samyoga, a term we might ren-
der as “‘synthesis,’”” and ayoga, which might be glossed as “the denial of
synthesis.” It also less frequently uses technical terms that are found in the
Yogasutras, bhavapratyaya, and upayapratyayasamadhi, although it gives
these terms a new meaning.”

Fortunately for those of us who must read the text without the bene-
fit of a spiritual guide, the Mudgala Purana describes in detail what samyoga
and ayoga involve.'® Samyoga consists of eight stages in which the seeker
identifies himself with GaneSa, or absolute reality, at the various stages of
the creative process. We recall that at creation the absolute begins to stir of
its own accord (svata utthana). This awakened entity then begins to wonder
about itself, to ask what it is, and from its imaginings it conceives a body
that is the undifferentiated causal state of the four bodies that will even-
tually evolve (bindu). It also conceives a soul for those bodies, that again at
this stage exists as an undifferentiated whole (so ’ham). The aspirant in the
synthesis yoga begins by identifying himself with the bindu (9.6.3—9). The
process of identification is described in some detail; the aspirant must con-
centrate on the fact that he is not the body, not the gross body, nor the sub-
tle body, nor their combination; he is also not the fourth body (9.6.3; 9.6.6).
What he is doing is denying that he is the differentiated products of the
bindu; by implication he is their undifferentiated unity.

At the next step the aspirant identifies himself with the second prod-
uct of the svata utthana, with the souls as they exist in an undifferentiated

--- Page 9 ---
Ganesa as Metaphor 93
whole (9.6.9-9.6.19). In the third stage he identifies himself with the svata
utthana stage (to verse 28), while in the fourth stage he identifies himself
with the parata utthana (to verse 42). In the fifth stage he begins to identify
himself with the combination of the svata and parata utthana, which is Ga-
nesa as he divides himself into the major gods of Hinduism, Sakti, Surya,
Visnu, and Siva. Stages five, six, seven, and eight involve an identification
with these gods. The ninth stage, which goes beyond all of these, is the
identification with Ganesa, who unites in himself all of these differentiat-
ing entities.

The stages of samyoga meditation parallel exactly the eight incarna-
tions of GaneSa and mark an identification of the individual with the cre-
ative process and the absolute reality that underlies this process. Over and
against this, the Mudgala Purdna now sets the next category of yoga, which
it calls ayoga, and in which the aspirant is asked to deny the creative pro-
cess and recognize the immutability of the soul. The process is described
in 9.6.105ff. There are three stages to this meditation, in which the aspir-
ant denies that the absolute awakens by itself (svata utthana); he denies that
it is aroused by another (parata utthana); and he denies that itisasynthesis .
of these two entities (9.6.116ff). What he meditates upon is a pure abstrac-
tion, removed from connection with the world, something that cannot be
subjected to logical scrutiny and that is beyond normal means of knowl-
edge (9.6. 106).

The Mudgala Purana remains content with neither of these single al-
ternatives. Ganesa, as the metaphor for the truth, tells us clearly that truth
is embodied in a combination of alternatives and is never conveyed by sin-
gle exclusive viewpoints. Thus both samyoga and ayoga are to be tran-
scended. And what transcends them is GaneSa as the true yoga, the full or
complete yoga that this text was written to celebrate. It embraces both the
truth of creation and the truth of eternality, but leaves them both behind in
a mystical realization of a unity that defies characterization into polar op-
posites, that defies analysis as either evolving into creation or not partici-
pating in creation, the two alternatives of the samyoga and ayoga medita-
tions (9.6.127ff.).

IV. Conclusions

This paper has given a brief synopsis of only a few of the doctrines
described in the Mudgala Purana. It has attempted to see the text as partic-
ipating in the long and venerable context of commentaries that were writ-
ten on core texts within the Indian tradition. It highiighted only two areas
in which the Mudgala can be seen to have served as commentary, the fa-

--- Page 10 ---
94 Phyllis Granoff

mous line from the Chandogya Upanisad, and the Yogasutras and their stan-
dard commentaries. There is really nothing unusual for a text like the Mud-
gala Purana to offer such reinterpretations of well-known works in the
tradition. Not all commentaries called themselves ‘‘commentaries”’; some
of them, like the Mudgala Purana, called themselves ‘‘Puranas,”’ but in re-
telling the stories that were central to earlier texts they provided implicit if
not explicit commentary on those earlier texts. Indeed the Bhagavata Pur-
ana offers significant commentary on the Mahabharata as it retells the epic,
and the Mudgala Purana should also be regarded as commenting on the
Bhagavata Purana, many of whose stories it retells as well. But just to iden-
tify the general mode in which the Mudgala Purana operates is to open
more questions and to answer none.

The questions become clearer if we look specifically to the sources of
the system of yoga offered by the Mudgala Purana as an example. There is
no question that the Mudgala Purana was not alone in offering its own in-
terpretation of the Yogasitras. This seems to have been a common practice
in medieval India. The Netra Tantra, for example, redefines the terms of the
Yogasiitras, as do the Pasupatasutras.'° The Siva Purana also offered a dis-
tinctive version of yoga, which in many ways is reminiscent of that given

in the Mudgala Purana, in that it proposes a yoga that involves a stage of
concentration in which first the aspirant concentrates on the ultimate as
the universe, then one in which all objects are negated, and finally a
greater stage that transcends both of these.”° But these similarities are su-
_ perficial, for every system of yoga is intimately tied with an entire system
of philosophy, and the challenge that awaits the student is to explore the
sources of the thought of the Mudgala Purana and place it in its proper phil-
osophical context. Until that is done, the remarkable vision this text pro-
vides of Ganesa, combining striking visual imagery with scriptural com-
mentary and meditative practice, all joined together in a coherent system
for which Gane§a himself provides the conceptual model, will retain much
of its mystery and hold back many of its secrets. ,
NOTES
1. The most recent monograph on Gane§a, Paul B. Courtright’s Ganesa, Lord
of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), provides
a good example of the many tools modern scholars employ in their efforts to come
to an understanding of GaneSa.
2. The only article I know of that deals exclusively with the Mudgala Purana is
a short article in Sanskrit by Pandit Giridharagarma Caturvedi, ““Mudgalapuran-
avisayasamalocanam,” Purana 4, no. 2 (1962):339-—50. Caturvedi worked from
