--- Page 1 ---
Introduction
CR L. Brown
I. Various GaneSsas
(, aneSa is often said to be the most worshiped god in India.’ As the

lord of beginnings, he is worshiped by devotees of other Hindu dei-
ties — of Siva, Visnu, the Goddess — either as the initiator of the path to
these deities or as the direct road to mundane goals and success. He is also
worshiped by some as the primary god (istadevata). His cult has its own
texts, such as the Ganega Purana and the Sri Ganapati Atharvasirsa, where
he is presented as the all-encompassing cosmic deity. Thus, he functions
on multiple levels in the hierarchy of Indic gods, from the level of the sub-
sidiary gods to that of the supreme deities, and his worship crosses bound-
aries among the various sects.

His popularity in India, however, is more than a matter of the sheer
number of worshipers in his role as initiator of activities. He is favored with
a singular affection. Part of this popular appeal has to do with the way he
looks. He has an elephant head and a human body. Usually his body is de-
picted as short and squat with an enormous belly. Its girth suggests an el-
ephant, but it also can be seen as the body of a chubby child. Gane§a is
considered the child of Parvati, and usually also of Siva. When Gane§Sa is
depicted as a child in texts and art, he is shown as participating in cozy
domestic scenes with his parents and his brother Skanda.? The Indian de-
light in children and the importance given to the family, seen as well in the
popular child manifestations of other Indic gods,° afford an attraction to
the baby GaneSa. The elephant head seems actually to add to the adorable-
ness of the little Ganesa. From the earliest artistic depictions there has
been a tendency to anthropomorphize the head by moving the eyes to the
front and flattening the face while the eyes become human, sometimes

1

--- Page 2 ---
2 Robert L. Brown
complete with eyebrows. This allows for a direct human-to-human reac-
tion, along with the accompanying emotions.‘

Thus, Gane§Sa’s popularity is multifaceted and widespread. He func-
tions in many contexts other than the three [ have mentioned — that of lord
of beginnings, cosmic deity, and child of Parvati and Siva. This book is
about these multiple contexts, these various GaneSas, and the underlying
reasons he could take the forms and perform the functions he did. Wendy
O'Flaherty writes that

Gane§a has everything that is fascinating to anyone who is interested in re-

ligion or India or both: charm, mystery, popularity, sexual problems, moral

ambivalence, political importance, the works. One can start from Ganesa

and work from there in an unbroken line to almost any aspect of Indian cul-

ture.°
Certainly this versatile god reflects in his many contexts a broad range of
Indian cultural characteristics. While GaneSa’s multiplicity is due to his
taking separate and distinct roles, the essays in this book reveal themes _
that knit together disparate aspects of GaneSsa’s character. It is foolhardy
to say that GaneSa is unique among Indic gods, but it emerges from these
essays that GaneSa’s popularity stems from hopes and desires he uniquely
fulfills, from unique powers and premises attributed to him.

Most interestingly, GaneSa is not only an Indian god. He appears in
China by the sixth century, and perhaps as early in Southeast Asia. By the
seventh and eighth centuries, Indian texts dealing with Gane§Sa are being
translated by Buddhist monks in China. Likewise, Indian GaneSa texts are
translated into Tibetan and introduced into Tibet by monks in the tenth
and eleventh centuries. While based on Indian texts and art, Ganesga de-
velops unique forms outside of India, such as the dual Ganeéga found in
China and popular in Japan. The pan-Asian GaneSa has never been so
thoroughly studied as in this book. As we shall see, it was Gane§a in his
Tantric guise that became most influential outside of India. This side of Ga-
nega, little explored in India itself, becomes an important window on an
obscure aspect of Indian culture.

II. GaneSa in Indian Myth

The mythic GaneSa’s character and life are developed predominantly
in the Puranas, a group of texts that date beginning from around a.bD. 300
and in which, over the next one thousand years, modern theistic Hindu-
ism took its form. In the Puranas, GaneSa is associated with Siva and his

--- Page 3 ---
Introduction 3
family: Siva’s wife Parvati and his son Skanda. His origin within this fa-
milial context is given great stress, particularly in an attempt to explain his
having an elephant’s head. These Puranic origin myths, supplemented by
numerous others in regional texts and oral traditions, provide a wide va-
riety of explanations for his form. Many of them have him violently losing
his human head after birth, the elephant head being placed on his body as
a substitute. In a number of the stories, it is GaneSa’s own father, Siva,
who cuts off his son’s head. Siva in these cases usually does not recognize
his son because Parvati has created him unilaterally* and Siva has never
seen him before. Parvati’s motivation for creating Ganesa without Siva’s
participation stems from her longing for a child and Siva’s unwillingness,
as an ascetic (who must retain his seed) and an eternally living god (who
does not need the sraddha ceremonies upon death), to produce a son. She
wanis a child due to her loneliness and maternal yearnings, but she also,
in these myths, creates GaneSsa to guard the door to her inner chamber or
bath. It is here, at the access to Parvati’s sexuality, that GaneSa’s attempt
to keep Siva from entering results in the physical confrontation that leads
to GaneSa’s defeat and death by beheading.

The replacement of the head by that of an elephant takes a number of
scenarios in the myths, but often involves Parvati’s disconsolation and
sometimes her threats, and Siva’s consequent surprise at what he has done
and his attemptat rectification. The search for a replacement head is some-
thing of a scramble, due to the immediacy of the problem, with the head
of the first creature that can be found, an elephant, being used. In a rec-
onciliatory gesture, Siva makes the restored and now elephant-headed Ga-
nesa part of his own family and entourage by appointing him as leader of
his army of ganas. (Thus GaneSa is frequently called Ganapati, “leader of
the ganas.”’)

Even this very abbreviated condensation of a small portion of the Ga-
nesa origin myths shows how rich these stories are in characterizing the
god. In the Indian context, Ganeéa is the liminal god of transitions: he is
placed at the doorway of temples to keep out the unworthy, in a position
analogous to his role as Parvati’s doorkeeper, and he can set up, as he did
for his father, obstacles to the successful completion of goals. His parents’
ambivalent relationship, founded on the opposing concerns of asceticism
and sexuality, places GaneSa in between. He is created by Parvati as a re-
sult of Siva’s asceticism and refusal to have children, but is annihilated due
to Siva’s sexual interest in Parvati, only to be restored, transformed, as a
bond between the two. He is here fulfilling his transitional role as a means
to integrate opposing elements. The Oedipal themes of Ganesa’s attrac-
tion or attachment to his mother, his attempt to keep his father from access

--- Page 4 ---
4 Robert L. Brown

to his mother, and his confrontation with his father in which part of his
body is cut off, invite psychoanalytical probings of psychosexual develop-
ment.’

While the reason Ganesa needs a head is supplied in these myths,
the question why it is an elephant’s head is not answered. Why not another
human head, or the head of an animal other than that of an elephant? The
failure of the myths to explain the choice may be best explained in histori-
cal terms: the form of GaneSa as an elephant-headed human existed prior
to the development of these Puranic myths. They thus were dealing with
an already existing but etiologically unexplained god. Certainly, Ganesa
appears late in Indic literature (say, around the fifth century A.D.). He does
not appear, for example, in either the Ramayana or the Mahabharata (ex-
cept, for the latter, in a clearly late interpolation).

Much of Gane§Sa’s character is regionally defined, most particularly
in the popular mind. This is perhaps best brought out in Lawrence Coh-
en’s essay (‘The Wives of Ganesa’’), where GaneSa’s bachelor and celibate
nature (as brahmacarin)— the aspect that has been traditionally stressed in
the scholarship —is shown to be predominantly a South Indian character-
ization. It is true that GaneSa is not a womanizer as is his father, Siva, or as
is Visnu in his avatara as Krsna, yet in other characterizations he is married
and is even said to have children. With the possibility of such regional
qualifications in mind, we can finish our composite sketch of GaneSa’s
mythic character. |

GaneSa’s cleverness is often ccntrasted to the slower wit of his more
athletic brother, Skanda, as in the frequently told tale (a version is given in
Cohen’s essay) of the contest between the brothers in which, for a prize
that varies depending on the story, Ganesa and Skanda must go around
the world. Skanda dashes off, but Ganesa merely circumambulates his
parents, arguing that in doing so he is gaining as much merit as one would -
by circling the earth. His parents, flattered by his devotion and impressed
by his cleverness, award him the prize. GaneSa’s association with mental
agility and learning is probably one reason he is assigned the role as scribe
for Vyasa’s dictation of the Mahabharata in the eighth-century interpolation
to this text.

Ganesa may have to be brainy to compete with Skanda’s brawn. At
least GaneSa’s body puts him at a certain disadvantage and makes him
sometimes a comic figure. Lee Siegel writes that ‘‘the elephant-headed
god is a dispenser of magic, of surprise and laughter.’’* His rotund form is
maintained by his insatiable appetite for the sweet cakes that are a major
devotional offering of his worshipers and that he usually holds in his artis-
tic depictions. In another frequently repeated myth, GaneSa has gorged

--- Page 5 ---
Introduction 5
himself on the cakes until his belly bulges. It is night, and mounted on his
rat vehicle, he begins his ride home. The rat becomes frightened by a snake
that crosses the road and shies, causing GaneSa to fall, breaking open his
distended stomach and spilling the cakes over the ground. This scene is
humorous, with the bloated GaneSa tottering on the tiny rat, and his fall
causes the moon to laugh. In anger, GaneSsa breaks off one of his tusks and
throws it at the moon. This act caused the moon to disappear, and while
GaneSa restores it, it continues even until today to wax and wane. Gane§a’s
comic nature is also associated with his role as leader of the playful and
naughty dwartf-like ganas. Further, Ganeéa is described as dancing, al-
though the imagery for this form of Ganesa comes predominantly from art
rather than from texts. The fat, short-legged god dancing, in clear imita-
tion of the beautiful and manly Siva, is again humorous.

III. GaneSa in Indian Art and Ritual

This description of the mythic nature of Ganesa—a child, devoted to
his parents (particularly his mother); clever, comic, greedy; the defender
of doorways and integrator of opposites — could be much expanded, but
in its broad outlines it is a characterization that applies to GaneSa in art and
ritual. It is not, however, that in the art of India GaneSa simply illustrates

the Puranic myths. His images are predominantly iconic in nature, with

few of the popular stories ever represented in art. For example, the crucial
episodes of Gane§a losing his head or having it replaced by an elephant’s
head have never to my knowledge been depicted in art. In later Indian
painting we have some narrative scenes depicted, but it is not until the
twentieth century and under the influence of Western realism that the -e is
an attempt to show GaneSa in the Puranic panoramas, usually done in pa-
pier-maché, that have become popular in India.

One characterization of GaneSa that is avoided in the myths is his de-
monic nature. Paul Courtright says that

the Puranic texts are uncomfortably aware of the discrepancy between the

malevolent, obstacle-creating powers of Vinayaka and the positive, obstacle-

removing actions of GaneSsa, and they attempt to disguise Ganesa’s demon

background through the clever use of false etymologies for the name “Vi-

nayaka.’””
Actually, there are a variety of possible ‘true’ etymologies, or interpreta-
tions, for the name,'° but the Vinayaka form of GaneSa is indeed seen as
having a malevolent side, which in some contexts, such as that of Tantric

--- Page 6 ---
6 Robert L. Brown

Buddhism, predominates. Unlike the myths, the earliest artistic depic-
tions of Ganesa appear to partake in this, the dark side of Ganesa. Even
after the Puranic GaneSa is well defined, in art GaneSa remained predom-
inantly important for his dual role as creator and remover of obstacles, thus
having both a negative and a positive aspect.'' He is usually, therefore,
presented as an icon, to be propitiated, and his narrative and mythic char-
acter is not particularly developed in art.

Ganeé§a’s earliest artistic depictions are controversial in their dating.
Alice Getty, writing in 1936, argued that the earliest images of GaneSa date
only to the fifth century, the date at which she suggests the GaneSa cult
also began.'? Since this is also the approximate date at which he appears
to have entered the Puranic tradition, we have an apparent dovetailing of
mythic, artistic, and ritual evidence for his late appearance in Indian reli-
gion. Scholars, including Getty, have nevertheless consistently noted sur-
prise at his sudden fully developed appearance at this date, and wondered
what his sources might be. Both A. K. Narain and M. K. Dhavalikar argue
in their essays that the ultimate source is to be found in elephant worship —
in the northwestern areas of the subcontinent. Narain (““Ganesa: A Pro-
tohistory of the Idea and the Icon’’) has argued this thesis in detail else-
where, suggesting that GaneSa (or more precisely, a deity with an ele-
phant’s head and a human body) first appeared on an Indo-Greek coin of
the first century B.c.'* But Narain and Dhavalikar (‘“Ganesa: Myth and
Reality’) disagree as to the significance and date of the earliest represen-
tations of GaneSa in India itself. Narain accepts Getty’s fifth-century date,
while Dhavalikar (and myself as well in my essay ‘‘GaneSa in Southeast
Asian Art: Indian Connections and Indigenous Developments’’) feels
some images can be dated much earlier, back to the second century A.D.

The question of when the earliest Ganesa appears is of critical im-
portance, and justifies here a short exploration of some additional artistic
evidence. We might ask: When does the elephant-headed therianthropo-
morphic image become Gane§Sa? Narain is very careful to separate the var-
ious textual and artistic strands that eventually coalesce to produce Ga-
nesa. He feels, for example, that the vinayakas who occur in such early
texts as the Manava Grhyasutra, characterized as malignant demons who
must be propitiated, are quite distinct from GaneSsa, although they are
eventually going to participate in defining him. Likewise some early artis-
tic depictions of an elephant-headed therianthropomorphic figure, such as
Narain’s own first-century B.C. coin image, is, while “‘an incipient Ga-
nesa,’’ not yet Ganesa. The images that Dhavalikar and I believe are earlier
than the fifth century, most of which come from Mathura, are small, in-
dependent images. They do carry some of the attributes that we will see

--- Page 7 ---
Introduction 7
become standard for GaneSsa, primarily the bowl of sweet cakes, and some
of them have the serpent cord that is also to become a common decoration"
(see Brown, figs. 5, 6, and 8). But none come from a context in which we
can judge their use. There is, however, a relief image carved in a cave at
Udayagiri (Madhya Pradesh) that can be dated to ca. 400'° and can be as-
sessed in the context of the cave’s overall iconography.

The GaneSsa image in Cave 6 at Udayagiri (see Brown, fig. 7) is located
on the viewer's left as he or she enters the shallow porch that precedes the
small inner chamber witha Siva linga. Opposite the GaneSa, on the view-
er’s right, are two sets of very worn seven mothers (saptamatrkas). Other
deities— two Visnus, two door guardians, and two images of the goddess
Durga as slayer of the Buffalo Demon (Mahisasuramardini) — are on the
back wall of the porch. It is difficult to know how these various images
were worshiped; the cave curiously combines both Vaisnavite and Saivite
deities, and its very small size would appear to argue against any extensive
movement through space by devotees, such as circumambulation that we ~
find used in worship in later Hindu temples.'* Nevertheless, GaneSa is
clearly spatially paired with the mothers, as worshipers would have
passed these deities first as they progressed toward the inner and most sa-
cred area of the cave. The matrkas and GaneéSa are in fact going to be asso-
ciated in art and ritual from this time onward as Ganesa becomes regularly
placed at the end of the standardized set of seven mothers. The matrkas’
role in Hinduism is, of course, complex,'’ but I wish to stress two points.
One is that the mothers and GaneSa were undergoing very similar pro-
cesses of change from predominantly malevolent to benevolent deities as
they both were being adopted into Hinduism at this time.'* The second
point is that both Ganesa and the mothers were deities that had to be pro-
pitiated in order not to cause trouble, a notion that, even if put into a pos-
itive sense of removing, rather than causing, problems, made them deities
to propitiate before worshiping other gods; thus their placement in the
cave before other deities. In addition, both Ganesa and the mothers were
deities te whom one worshiped for this-worldly success and objectives.
Again, their placement at the outer edge of the sacred space is appropriate
in the hierarchy of Indic sacred architecture where the mundane tends to
be relegated to the outer or the lower sections, the most sacred to the inner
or upper areas. .

While this is not the place to argue fully these ideas, they are sub-
stantiated in a surprising context, the Buddhist caves at Aurangabad. At
Aurangabad, in Cave 7, the veranda shrines, those first encountered by the
worshiper, are on the left dedicated to a very unusual set of six females
flanked by a bodhisattva and a Buddha, in clear imitation of the Hindu sap-

--- Page 8 ---
8 Robert L. Brown

tamatrkas.'? The shrine opposite has images of the Buddhist god of wealth
and the goddess of children (Jambhala and Hariti).* Jambhala in particular
can fulfill some of the functions of Ganesa.*! But also at Aurangabad is the
recently discovered cave located between Caves 5 and 6 that contains as its
major icon an image of Ganesa.” He is at the center rear of the cave, with
the seven mothers with Siva on his right and Durga and two Buddha im-
ages on his left.2* Thus we have here again the association of the saptama-
trkas and Durga with GaneSa, as at Udayagiri, but in a Buddhist context.
One likely interpretation of this unique cave is that its images functioned,
as did these same images at Udayagiri, as removers of obstacles to further
worship, but for the site as a whole, as well as a focus for the fulfillment of
specifically mundane desires. The Ganesa Cave and Cave 7 date to the sec-
ond half of the sixth century.”4 |

Returning now to the topic of the earliest artistic images of Ganesa
and the question ot when we can call the elephant-headed images truly
GaneSa, we can say that as early as ca. 400 A.D. images of GaneSsa func-
tioned in a defined and sophisticated role within temple worship that in-
volved his functions as remover of obstacles, as initiator for further wor-
ship, and probably as locus of worldly desires. This is indeed our “‘real’’
GaneSa. :

In art, GaneSa, like other Indic deities, is frequently given multiple
arms and carries attributes. The attributes vary, but perhaps most fre-
quently one sees the axe, noose, sweet cake(s), elephant goad, and tusk.
The latter is Ganesa’s own tusk, and the images often show him with one
tusk broken off or missing. We have seen how the broken tusk is explained
in one myth by GaneSa’s throwing it at the laughing moon. Other myths
have Siva or other deities cutting off the tusk. The cut tusk can be expli-
cated as mutilation or castration, in terms similar to the beheading,” but,
as with the elephant head, these explanations rely on myths probably cre-
ated to explain an already existing attribute. The earliest GaneSa images,
which tend to be two armed, do not hold a tusk; nor do they appear to have
a broken tusk (see Brown, figs. 5, 6, 7, and 8). They hold the sweet cakes,
usually placed in a bowl, in their left hands, but the attribute in their right
hands varies considerably.”* By the sixth century, however, there are ex-
amples that hold a radish or turnip, and I have suggested in my essay that
the tusk may be a misunderstanding of the radish. The radish would have
been an appropriate attribute as it was an offering, as were the sweet

| cakes, to Vinayaka, according to such early texts as the Yajnavalkyasmrti.””
Being a tuber, the radish is, like onions and garlic, a food that grows un-
derground and is shunned by Brahmins. It is an apt food for the demonic
and later Tantric Vinayaka.

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction 9

Ganesa’s low class origins and clientele have been frequently noted.
Alfred Foucher presents him as a “jungle genius’’ who attempts to rise to
respectability with his adoption into Saivite Hinduism and the Puranic
myths.” He nevertheless retains his primitive heritage. Manu in his Laws
says Siva is to be worshiped by the Brahmins, GaneSa by the sudras.’
There is the notion of GaneSa being the god for Everyman. This is why Bal
Gangadhar Tilak chose GaneSa and his annual festival, around which he
hoped “‘to bridge the gap between the Brahmins and the non-Brahmins
and find an appropriate context in which to build a new grassroots unity
between them’ in his nationalistic strivings against the British in the late
nineteenth century in Maharashtra. Tilak, and Ganesa worship, were
wildly successful. In art, Ganesa images for use by the common people in
household shrines are very prevalent, and these tribal or folk images —
made in bronze, mud, and plaster—are found throughout India. Even tex-
tiles are a popular medium for GaneSa imagery. For example, the embroi-
dered cotton hangings from Gujarat show GaneSa functioning in the
household much as he does in the temple. These hangings are designed
and sewn by household women; each hanging is usually highly individ-
ual.*'! The hanging is worshiped by a bride and groom before their wed-
ding, and then it is installed in the shrine of their new home. Here, Ga-
nesa, worshiped before the marriage is undertaken, is seen as a deity
controlling transitions and new states and is then brought into the house
to promote auspiciousness and insure future success of the undertaking.
IV. Ganesa Outside India

It is difficult even to speak of Ganesa in Tibet, China, Japan, and
Southeast Asia without referring to the essays in this book. There has been
very little written on the Asian Gane§a, and Getty’s book Ganesa: A Mon-
ograph on the Elephant-faced God, published over fifty years ago, has re-
mained the major reference for the extra-Indian Ganesa. It continues to be
a very useful anthology of visual and textual references, despite its early
date, but many of Getty’s facts, and much of her interpretation, must now
be modified. For example, she says in reference to Ganesa images in Thai-
land (Siam): ““Not until the Ayuthian period [1350 - 1767 4.D.] in central
Siam is a Siamese representation of Gane§sa to be found which is worthy of
study.” All of the images from Thailand that I discuss in my essay are, in
fact, from before the Ayuthian period.

Gane§a had in Southeast Asia, unlike elsewhere in Asia, a significant
Hindu presence. His earliest images and inscriptions date to approxi-
mately the sixth or seventh century, and there is evidence in Cambodia

--- Page 10 ---
10 Robert L. Brown

that from this time he had his own temples and perhaps was worshiped,
again as early as the seventh century, as the focus of a cult and as an istad-
evata (primary god), even earlier than extant evidence shows for the prac-
tice in India itself. Also in Cambodia there appears to be a highly unusual
form of Ganesa, one with a human head. Indeed, Ganesa was very popu-
lar in many areas of Southeast Asia, and continues to be today, and devel-
oped interesting local variations, most of which remain to be fully ex-
plored. Nevertheless, his Puranic forms and nature are rarely encountered
in Southeast Asia, either in art or in literature.

Many areas of Southeast Asia shared with Tibet, China, and Japan
an interest in the Tantric GaneSa. This is the Vinayaka or demonic Ganesa
discussed above. In China he becomes an almost entirely negative force,
not causing or removing obstacles, but frequently being the obstacle itself.
The Chinese Tantric texts are frequently those brought from India and
translated by Indian and Chinese monks in the seventh and eighth centu-
ries. These texts are very explicit in their discussion of the way in which
Vinayaka is to be worshiped and in the goals that are thus achieved. They
share with the Tibetan GaneSa texts, many of which are translations of In-
dian texts of the same date, the mundane goals and Tantric ritual used to
get them. These can be startlingly explicit:

make a drawing [of Ganapati] on cotton with mixed together secretions from

an elephant’s temples (S. Gajamada), blood, and maddening semen. Pros-

trate, worship, praise, and make prayers to it. Recite the proper mantra and
admonish him. You will become equal to a Noble One. You must not show
this image to everyone. Offer your prayers with radishes and mantras.

or

Make a copper Ganapati the size of a thumb. Put it in your left hand. Take

some milk from the king’s woman and pierce it with the elephant’s trunk.

Think “She truly loves me” and recite the vidya of the name. Then she will

certainly come.*

It is important to note that these are Buddhist texts, written and translated
by many of the well-known Buddhist teachers of the time. The author of
the lines above, from The Practice Method of the Secret Commitment of Gana-
pati, was Canakirti, and the text was translated into Tibetan by Vairocana
and Chos kyi Grags pa. Canakirti is probably Candrakirti-pada, an eighth-
century Indian Tantric author, while the Indian Vairocana and his Tibetan
colleague, Chos kyi Grags pa, were eleventh-century monks; Vairocana

--- Page 11 ---
Introduction 11
studied at both Nalanda and Vikramasila, among the most famous of In-
dian monasteries. Obviously, the Tantric Ganesa was a deity of importance
for the most renowned monks and was worshiped at the most famous
monasteries in India from as early as the seventh and eighth centuries.

These texts tell how Gane§Sa, usually in the form of an image, is to be
worshiped, but they are more manuals than histories, so that we know lit-
tle about the social or historical dimensions of the Tibetan and Chinese
cult from them. In Japan a form of Gane§a, that of two Ganegas embracing,
became popular as part of Shingon (Tantric) Buddhism. Usually shown as
standing and embracing frontally, the two GaneSas are male and female
and are thought of as sexually linked. This form of Ganesa was introduced
to Japan as early as the eighth century, apparently from China, where it
was also known, but we have little information about it. In Japan, from the
seventeenth century on, there are texts that supply actual social and his-
torical evidence of the cult.

The dual Ganesa very much interested Getty, and she discusses the
icon, its possible sources, meanings, and uses, at length.» But early in her
study she wrote that

very little is known of GaneSa in the Tantras and not until more Tantric texts

are accessible for study will it be possible to determine the exact position of

GaneSa in relation to the other gods who were worshipped in the mysteries,

| or to find the key to the puzzling Tantric aspect of the Elephant-faced god.*
. Inhis interpretation of the dual GaneSa, James Sanford (“Literary Aspects
of Japan’s Dual GaneSa Cult’) has the advantage of having access to texts
unknown to Getty. While the puzzle of GaneSa’s Tantric form has not been
solved in this book, his Tantric occurrence in Tibet, China, and Japan has
been greatly clarified by extensive use of new textual sources.
-V. Shared Themes of GaneSa in the Essays

In outlining Ganesa’s character and roles, I have dealt with the god
in art, texts, myth, religion, and ritual — in other words, Gane§sa as seen
from a cultural viewpoint that is intrinsically multidisciplinary. I have had
the opportunity to mention in the discussion several of the book’s essays,
and my brief overview has been based in large part on these essays. Do the
essays in this book present a new view of Ganesa?

One hopes, by looking at Gane§Sa interdisciplinarily and crosscultur-
ally, to approach him in new ways and through new evidence, and many
contributors have used previously unanalyzed texts and images in their

--- Page 12 ---
12. Robert L. Brown

essays. For example, Phyllis Granoff (‘“Ganesa as Metaphor: The Mudgala
Purana’) examines an extremely complex Purana and finds it rich in sug-
gesting the philosophical sophistication that Ganesa worship sometimes
took. In her discussion, Granoff attempts to understand the text using the
conceptual framework of its ancient authors rather than that of the con-
temporary scholar. The use of texts that until now were little known by
scholars is also stressed, as we have seen, in the essays on Gane§Sa in Tibet,
China, and Japan. These texts, which date beginning from the seventh and
eighth centuries, are interesting because they enable us to see a predomi-
nantly Tantric Gane§a in contrast to the mythic GaneSa of the Puranas. Al-
though these are written in Tibetan, Chinese, and Japanese, they are often
translations from Indic texts that are now lost, and thus help us to under-
stand GaneSa in India as well as East Asia. Two authors, James Sanford
and Christopher Wilkinson (‘“The Tantric Ganesa: Texts Preserved in the
Tibetan Canon’’), have incorporated extensive translations of texts in their
articles, which will be a valuable resource for other scholars working on
GaneSa.

As with previously unanalyzed texts, previously undiscussed visual
evidence of GaneSa is a strength of several articles. Maruti Nandan Tiwari
and Kamal Giri (“Images of GaneSa in Jainism’’) discuss, for the first time
since Getty’s book, GaneSa images in Jainism. Their conclusion is that Ga-
nesa images were adopted by the Jains only very late, perhaps not until the
ninth century A.D., and always in his positive role as remover of obstacles.
In my paper, I focus on visual evidence that analyzes GaneSa in Southeast
Asia in an attempt to determine what was adopted from Indian concep-
tions of the god and what was the Southeast Asian contribution.

While both texts and images are standard categories of evidence used
in past studies of the deity, Amy Catlin (“““Vatapi Ganapatim’: Sculptural,
Poetic, and Musical Texts in a Hymn to Ganesa”’) uses a type of evidence
that is rarely seen in discussions of Ganesa: music. She shows us how mu-
sic, like art and literary texts, is used in India to express a South Indian
Brahmin’s understanding of the god. This understanding relies on an in-
terplay among all three types of ‘’texts’’ and is constantly reinterpreted in
performance, in a process analogous, perhaps, to that in which Ganeé§a is
reinterpreted through history, for different communities, and in different
geographical regions; there is no one Ganesa. Her essay exemplifies the
truitfulness, perhaps even the necessity, of an interdisciplinary approach
to GaneSa.

New evidence, new translations, new approaches are all strengths of
the essays in this book, but do they form a new conception of Gane§a? Is
there, in fact, any coherence to the picture of GaneSa that we get from the

--- Page 13 ---
Introduction 13
various approaches, cultures, and time periods that are dealt with in these
essays? Five themes seem to define GaneSa in these essays: Gane§a’s prac-
tical role, Tantric nature, dual positive/negative character, adaptability,
and transformative power. These do not, of course, define a completely
new conception of Ganesa, but they do amplify, and frequently modify sig-
nificantly, our understanding of the god.

Here and Now

GaneSa worship is unapologetically concerned with success. The
goals of the worshiper are practical and this-worldly, and there is stress put
on the mechanics of ritual that will produce the desired results. Thus, ex-
tensive ritual manuals were produced to guide the worshiper (some of
which are explored in detail for the first time by several of this book’s au-
thors). The practical, materialistic orientation of GaneSa reflects his histor-
ically original nature, as Vinayaka, and it is as a means to mundane suc-
cess that he became popular outside of India. GaneSa’s second role in
India, as a member of Siva’s family, is to my mind a product of the myth-
making of the Puranas and, from artistic evidence, begins only from
around the sixth century A.D., when GaneSa begins to associate himself
with Siva, as at Badami Cave 1 and Elephanta. It is likely that the late adop-
tion of a mythic role for GaneSa is a reason why he does not appear in the
epics, such as the Mahabharata, where he would have been classifiedas one -
of the vinayakas, who, like the yaksas, are mentioned as much by class as
by name. One thing is clear: his mythic role never became popular outside
of India.

It is possible to see the absence of his Puranic identity in East Asia as
in part due to this role being Hindu and thus never spreading outside India
with Buddhism. Nevertheless, even in Southeast Asia, which had a strong
Hindu face, the mythic Ganesa never became popular.

The analysis of GaneSa’s role in Buddhism is a particularly helpful
aspect of this book, especially as it is rarely developed in other studies of
GaneSa. Most generally, Ganesa in the Hindu context is perceived as a
positive force, while in the Buddhist he is negative. One need only read
through Cohen’s paper to sense with what affection GaneSa is regarded by
contemporary Hindus in India. And while his informants saw Gane§Sa as-
sociated with a variety of goddesses in ambiguous relationships of both
son to mother and husband to wife, they clearly felt these relationships
were fruitful and sustaining. Cohen suggests, in fact, that this duality of
relationship is ‘central and perhaps essential to the social construction
and psychosexual maintenance of Indian masculinity.” Granoff shows us
perhaps the ultimate reflection of Ganesa’s positive image in the Mudgala

--- Page 14 ---
14 Robert L. Brown
Purana, where forms of Gane§a are used as a frame on which to order so-
phisticated commentary on understanding reality and the process of cre-
ation.
Tantrism
On the other hand, the depiction of GaneSa in Buddhism is usually
that of ademon whose malevolent nature is to be propitiated either to
avoid harm or to direct the harm toward an enemy. Lewis Lancaster’s pa-
per (‘“GaneSa in China: Methods of Transforming the Demonic’’), for ex-
ample, shows us that GaneSa was consistently considered a negative deity
in China. This is, according to Lancaster, the Tantric GaneSsa. Based on the
papers by Wilkinson, Lancaster, and Sanford on Ganeé§a in Tibet, China,
and Japan, the Buddhist GaneSa is Tantric in nature. Undoubtedly, it is
mainly in this guise that he entered Buddhism. Nevertheless, the Tantric
character of the Buddhist Ganesa — that of a malevolent spirit who de-
mands propitiation in the form of offerings and ritual in order to avoid
harm — is shared by the deity’s earliest form as a vindyaka. The view that
what we call ‘“Tantric’’ is a later label for a constellation of early Indian re-
ligious practices that stretch back perhaps to the Indus Valley civilization —
is given a strong boost by this analysis of GaneSa’s nature.
Po>itive/ Negative
We might, therefore, see GaneSa as almost two separate deities, the
| negative GaneSsa, who takes both an earlier form as a vindyaka and a later
Tantric form, which is the predominant type of GaneSa adopted into Bud-
dhism, and the positive Hindu Gane§a, a creation of the mythmakers who
are producing Puranic Hinduism. It can be argued, however, that Gane-
Sa’s positive/negative personality can also be seen as two sides to the same
deity, rather than as aspects of two “‘separate”’ deities. But it is important
to realize that Ganesa does not so much have a split personality, such as
we might find with Siva, whose benign or horrific and ascetic or lover
forms are difficult to integrate, as he has a modus operandi that has neg-
ative and positive aspects. GaneSa participates in a worldview in which
goals are achieved by overcoming obstacles. As lord of obstacles, Ganesa
controls their existence, through either creating them himself or allowing
those already there to exist (which is negative) or by not creating them or
removing those already there (which is positive). My point is that this in
itself is not a matter of GaneSa’s character as much as the nature of his
praxis. One must consider his intentions, and perhaps the worshiper’s ex-
pectations, to judge Ganesa as either negative or positive. If we do this, j

--- Page 15 ---
Introduction 15
think there is again a clear split between the Puranic Ganesa, who is ex-
pected to aid the worshiper in his tasks (for example, the Ganega whose
image honors the shrines of businesses throughout India), and the Ganeéga
who is expected to be dangerous, difficult, and deceptive (for example, the
Ganesa with whom Tankai fought most of his life, as outlined in Sanford’s
essay). While goals can be achieved through both, and their basic method
of removing obstacles is the same, one is predominantly positive, the other
negative.

GaneSa is called ‘’Vinayaka”’ in the seventh- and eighth-century
Chinese texts (most of which were originally written by Indian monks)
used by Lancaster in his essay, where GaneSa’s negative nature transforms
him into a demon who must be controlled and is thus the object of the wor-
shiper’s spells and rituals in an attempt to drive him away.*” Gane§a in this
case is not worshiped to control obstacles, but is himself the obstacle that
must be removed. This appears to be the original nature of the deity, and
Dhavalikar suggests in his paper that GaneSa was “‘first the obstacle-crea- /-¢
tor (vighna-karta) and later became the obstacle-averter (vighna-harta).’’ He
does not specify exactly when this transformation came about, but implies
that it is around the sixth century and is responsible for his admission into
the ‘hierarchy of major divinities.” It is not, however, that Ganesa gave up
one role for the other, but that the earlier obstacle-creator role continued —
on, defining particularly his Tantric and Buddhist forms as a demon.
Adaptability

In fact, Ganesa’s character, whether Puranic deity or Tantric demon,
was never narrowly defined. His diversity of form, variability of nature,
and ambiguity of relationships are stressed in some way in all the essays
and are features I have termed, in the context of this book’s crosscultural
and interdisciplinary focus, ‘‘adaptability.”” I mean by this Ganesa’s mut-
ability, which allowed him to adapt to a variety of contexts. Within India
itself, Cohen shows how important regional differences are in the percep-
tion of GaneSa, and then how, even within regions, each individual’s own
perception of the god often varies dramatically. Indeed, the various view-
points are often in conflict within the same individual, producing an am-
biguous picture of Ganesa, but one that I would argue adds to his adapta-
bility within a variety of contexts. Even in the Puranas themselves, as Ludo
Rocher (‘‘Gane§a’s Rise to Prominence in Sanskrit Literature’) points out,
the portrait of GaneSa is inconsistent and multiform. And the one aspect
of Gane§a that we might think is by definition immutable, his elephant
head, is in fact done away with in some Southeast Asian sculpture where
he takes a fully human form.

--- Page 16 ---
16 Robert L. Brown
Transformative Power

Gane§a’s constantly shifting character, incorporating sometimes op-
posing traits, fits, of course, with his combined negative/positive nature.
The incorporation of conflicting characteristics is an example of his trans-
formative power, a capability that most fundamentally, in my opinion, de-
fines the special nature of the god and goes far to explain his popularity.
GaneSsa transforms either by synthesizing disparate elements or by me-
diating among them; in either case, he acts as a linkage through which re-
lationships can be reordered and changed. The god’s abilities to mediate,
synthesize, and transform are discussed in almost every paper in this
book. Sanford shows how the embracing dual GaneSas in Japan are inter-
preted as combining opposites. Granoff argues that Ganesa in the Mua-
gala Purana is above all a visual symbol for synthesis: ““GaneSa, in having
both elephant head and human body, stands as a perfect symbol for the
concept that reality is always a combination of seemingly disparate build-
ing blocks or constituents.’” Cohen speaks of Ganesa as mediator between
the material and divine worlds and as facilitator of the new relationship
formed during weddings. Wilkinson translates texts that give GaneSa the
power to transform non-Buddhist things into things Buddhist. Ganesa’s
liminal roles as door guardian and as lord of beginnings have already been
mentioned. All of these examples, and many more that could be added,
show GaneSa being used as the means to bridge transitions and make
changes, a capability that gives him a powerful and unique position
among Indic deities and makes him attractive outside normally restrictive
religious and cultural boundaries.

GaneSa is not easily defined. He contains within himself a variety of
personalities and characteristics. Yet, like the seemingly ludicrous amal-
gam of elephant head and hurnan body, their compresence somehow man-
ages to appear natural. The essays in this book add significantly to our un-
derstanding of GaneSa’s multiform personality, of the human processes
that have produced it, and of the human needs that underlie its integra-
tion.

NOTES

1. Stella Kramrisch, Manifestations of Shiva (Philadelphia: Philadelphia Mu-
seum of Art, 1981), 74.

2. For paintings of the family see Kramrisch, Manzfestations of Shiva, nos. P-39,
P-40, P-41.

3. One thinks most immediately of the baby Krsna.

--- Page 17 ---
Introduction 17

4. The phenomenon is of course well known with children’s stuffed animals,
such as the worldwidely adored teddy bear, as well as animated cartoon animal
characters like Mickey Mouse.

5. Wendy O'Flaherty, “Preface,” in Ganesa: Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings,
by Paul B. Courtright (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), vii.

6. Siva as well creates children himself, most particularly Skanda, when he
spills his semen into the mouth of Agni, who in turn, unable to hold its heat, dis-
charges it into the Ganges River, which in turn throws the embryo onto the bank,
where the child is finally raised by the six Krttikas. Siva and Parvati are seen as
never having children through intercourse. See the various discussions of this mo-
tif in Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty, Siva: The Erotic Ascetic (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1973).

, 7. See particularly Courtright, Ganesa.

8. Lee Siegel, Laughing Matters: Comic Tradition in India (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1987), 13.

9. Courtright, Ganesa, 134.

10. Narain explores these in detail in his essay. He suggests that the word
comes from vi > ni (= nayati), ‘‘to lead or take away,” which agrees with Court-
right, yet Narain interprets this as meaning to take or lead away obstacles, while
Courtright says it means to “‘lead people astray and place obstacles in their paths.”
Compare Courtright, Ganesa, 131-32.

11. Ganesa has two other popular names that explicitly state these: Vighna-
karta (‘producing obstacles’) and Vighnaharta (‘‘removing obstacles’’).

12. Alice Getty, Ganesa: A Monograph on the Elephant-faced God (Oxford: Claren-
don Press, 1936), 25 and 10 (respectively).

13. A. K. Narain, ‘‘Iconographic Origins of GaneSa and the Evidence of the
Indo-Greek Coinage,” in Orientalia losephi Tucct Memoriae Dicata, Serie Orientale
Roma 56, no. 3 (Rome: Instituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1988),
1007-19.

14. The snake belt is explained in the myth given above as the snake that caused
GaneSa to fall off his rat being used by the god to tie up his split stomach.

15. The dating is made in connection with an inscription; see discussion in my
essay, infra. }

16. There is, however, the question of whether there was a built structure at-
tached at one point to the front of the cave that is now lost.

# 17. See Katherine Anne Harper, The Iconography of the Saptamatrikas: Seven
Hindu Goddesses of Spiritual Transformation (Lewiston, NY: Mellen Press, 1989). —

18. Harper, Iconography of the Saptamatrikas.

19. The identification of these standing female figures is problematical. They
may represent on some level the six paramitas. There are other interpretations, R.
S. Gupte, for example, identifies them as the “‘Saktis of the Dhyani Buddhas.” See
R. S. Gupte, ‘An Interesting Panel from the Aurangabad Caves,” Marathwada Un1-
versity Journal 3, no. 2 (1963):59-63.

20. For illustrations see Carmel Berkson, The Caves of Aurangabad: Early Buddhist
Tantric Art in India (New York: Mapin International, 1986), 115, 116, 118, 119, 120,
121.

--- Page 18 ---
18 Robert L. Brown

21. Jambhala (or his Hindu equivalent, Kubera) and Ganesa are sometimes
placed together with a female figure, possibly Sri-Laksmi. See, for example, Getty,
Ganesa, 33.

22. The cave had been completely hidden by a fall of the escarpment above it.

23. For illustration see Berkson, The Caves at Aurangabad, 226, 227, 228.

24. It might be mentioned that a small Ganesa occurs on the doorframe at Cave
3 at Aurangabad, which dates to the second half of the fifth century.

25. See, for example, Courtright, Ganesa, 74-90, 117, etc.

26. For example, the GaneSa that Getty illustrates as the “earliest’’ image and
that has thus been subsequently cited by many scholars, holds what is probably a
citron (matulunga), based on comparison to other early images, such as Brown, fig.
6. It definitely is not a tusk. (See Getty, Ganesa, PI. 2a.)

27. See references in Brown, infra.

28. Foucher, “Introduction,” in Getty, Ganesu, xv—xxiil.

29. Monier Monier-Williams, Brahmanism and Hinduism (London: J. Murray,
1887), 221n; quoted in Getty, Ganesa, 2.

30. Courtright, Ganesa, 233.

31. See, for example, J. LeRoy Davidson, Art of the Indian Subcontinent from Los _ .-
Angeles Collections (Los Angeles: Ritchie Press, 1968), fig. 199.

32. Getty, Ganesa, 47.

33. Quoted from Wilkinson, infra.

34. Getty, Ganesa, 78-87.

35. Getty, Ganesa, 9.

36. See Thomas McEvilley, ““An Archaeology of Yoga,” RES 1 (Spring 1981):42-
77.

37. Any question whether Ganesa’s origins can be found with the vindyakas is,
I think, answered by his later association with them in these Tantric texts, a fact
that is not apparent when only his Puranic form is discussed. Nevertheless, see
Narain’s discussion, infra, for a different point of view.

--- Page 19 ---
Ganesa: A Protohistory of the
Idea and the Icon
A. K. Narain
I. Introduction!

(SG aneSa is an everyday household god of modern Hinduism. He is one
of the five deities of the pancayatana of the Smarta tradition. He is the
patron deity of a cult, a sampradaya, known as Ganapatya, the members of
which consider him above all other deities of the Hindu pantheon. Ganega
is probably the most ubiquitous of Indian gods, and his popularity is not
limited to the sectarian boundaries of Brahmanical Hinduism. He has a
place in Buddhist and Jain worship, too. And he crosses even the territorial
boundaries of India. His presence has been noted in what are now Paki-
stan, Nepal, and Sri Lanka, in Afghanistan, central Asia, Tibet, and Mon-
golia, in China and Japan, in Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam,

and Indonesia, and as far as Borneo in the Pacific.

The historical identity and iconography of this god, in his classic form
as an elephant-faced deity, is generally recognized from the fourth to fifth
century A.D. By about the tenth century A.D. his independent cult had
come very much into existence. During the centuries that followed two
Upapuranas, namely the Ganesa Purana and the Mudgala Purana, as well as
a Gita, namely, the Ganesa Gita, were written.’ Finally, the most important
work for the Ganapatyas, the Sri Ganapati Atharvasirsa Upanisad or Ganapati
Upanisad, was composed during the sixteenth or seventeenth century.’
Thus, starting from the fifth century A.D., Ganesa’s history is fairly clear
for about fifteen hundred years.

But what is inscrutable is the somewhat dramatic appearance of Ga-
ne§Sa on the historical scene.* His antecedents are not clear. His wide ac-
ceptance and popularity, which transcend sectarian and territorial limits,

19

--- Page 20 ---
20. A. K. Narain

are indeed amazing. On the one hand there is the pious belief of the ortho-
dox devotees in Ganega’s Vedic origins and in the Puranic explanations
contained in his confusing, but nonetheless interesting, mythology. On
the other, there are doubts about the existence of the idea and the icon of
this deity before the fourth to fifth century A.D.° Various attempts have
been made to look into the antecedents of Ganesa and how they coalesce
in due course to bring forth the standard GaneSa.’ But the frustration is
evident when, in the latest monograph on the subject, Courtright wants to
stress the point that there is no need ‘’to create a theory about GaneSsa’s
origins’ and that “there may not be any compelling evidence for Ganesa
prior to his emergence into the Brahmanic fold simply because he was
never there.’’* The point is well taken, and, in my opinion, indeed there is
no convincing evidence for the existence of this divinity prior to the fifth
century. We also cannot agree more with him that there is no need to cre-
ate a theory for theory’s sake. But the fait accompli in history is the result
of a process through time and space. Surely this process and its dynamics
need to be examined. Could it be that so far GaneSa has been subjected to
too narrow a focus restricted to the orthodox Brahmanic or Sanskritic tra-
dition and limited to the geocultural boundaries of India only? A broader
perspective is indeed required to distinguish the separate elements that
made so great a creative achievement possible. Such a perspective is, in
fact, demanded by the emergence of the classic form of the elephant-faced
deity, Ganesa, and his hieratic acceptance into the orthodox Brahmanic
fold, as well as his popularity outside of it.

Mythology is not history. Though at times it is supposed to hide ker-
nels of historical truth, the Puranic myths of GaneSa are little more than
grandparents’ stories. One can conclude from them that GaneSa was a
member of the family of Siva and that his hieratic legitimation was linked
to a god who himself perhaps did not originally belong to the Vedic ortho-
doxy.? Going beyond this, delving deeply into the myths and interpreting
their ritual meaning or psychoanalyzing the sexual symbolism involved, is
neither my inclination nor my intention, and I prefer to leave these ap-
proaches to others. '’ Moreover, all the myths are actually brain children of
the mythographers and therefore not of much real use for my purposes. |
propose to go to the time prior to the making of these Puranic myths and
find the historical background and factors that led to the very fact of crea-
tion of Ganesa and inter alia his myths. Points of myths become relevant to
us only to the extent they reflect or camouflage those factors to explain or
justify the fait accompli. We would also agree with Foucher not to be “‘as
short-sighted as a bookworm” to believe that this divinity could have sud-
denly been conceived ex nihilo. We therefore make a fresh survey of the

--- Page 21 ---
Ganesa: The Idea and The Icon 21
ethnographical, linguistic, archaeological, numismatic, and art-historical
data to see if there are meaningful clues to explain the processes of syncre-
tism and synthesis that went into the making of the melting pot of Indian
culture, a veritable example of which, indeed, is our Ganega. Our exercise
here, in brief, is to investigate the protohistory of the idea and the icon of
GaneSa.

II. A Survey of the Names and Their Etyma

The names by which GaneSa became popularly known in the sources

from the fifth century A.D. are many.'! The names Ganesa and Ganapati
literally mean the same thing — the lord or leader of a gana (= a host ora
group). This may be a group of kindred gods or demigods, humans or an-
imals, a body of followers or attendants. '? Specifically, apart from its polit-
ical connotation in ancient India in the sense of nonmonarchical states, the
word gana meant the followers of the teachers of various cults.'* Much
later, it also meant the troops or classes of inferior deities, especially those
of demigods or spirits considered first as Siva’s attendants and only much

later as under the special superintendence of Ganesa."4

Of the two names, Ganapati is the oldest known; it occurs in the
Rgveda.'* But it is used there not as a personal name but as an attribute of
Brhaspati or Brahmanaspati, who is known in the RV as a “‘lord”’ of a
group of gods, or of mantras, as well as the god of rain;'* he is also called a
“Jyestharaja.’”’'” The Rgveda provides some idea of the form and attributes
of Brhaspati.'* There is nothing there, however, to do with the elephant-
faced GaneSa. In fact it is significant to note from the story of the birth of
VighneSvara in the Linga Purana that Brhaspati and Ganeéga were clearly
different from each other.!? Indra is known as another Ganapati, in the
sense of botha “lord’’” and a “‘leader.’’?! But Indra had not yet acquired an
elephant (Airavata) as his vehicle in the Rgveda; that is a later acquisition.
Thus the elephant as a connection between Indra and GanesSa is not pro-
vided in the Rgveda. Coomaraswamy and Courtright refer to the same text
of the Aitareya Brahmana of the Rgveda” for Brahma and Rudra respectively
as other Ganapatis, but Iam unable to confirm their references. However,
Rudra as a Ganapati is referred to in the Taittiriya and Maitrayaniya Samhi-
tas of the Krsna Yaiurveda.*> Nonetheless, it is doubtful if Ganapati was
used as a personal name in the early Vedic literature.* In the long and for-
midable list of as many as eighty-five names of gods and folk deities in the
Papamocana Sukta of Atharvaveda, Ganapati and GaneSa are conspicuous by
their absence, although the names of many Vedic gods — including Brah-
manaspati— and even non-Vedic ones are there.** The occurrence of Gan-

--- Page 22 ---
22 A. K. Narain
apati as a personal name in the Baudhdyana Dharmasutra” as well as in the

Bodhayana Grhyasitra,”’ is considered by Hazra” as of doubtful authentic- "
ity.

y The second name, Gane§a, is not found at all in the Vedic literature _
whether early or late. Nor is it found in the Mahabharata.” Its variants, Ga- _
nesana and Ganesvara, however, do occur there, but they are used for Siva _
and not for our Ganesa.* In one place GaneSvara is used as an epithet of
the vindyakas, and it is said that these ‘’ganeSvara-vinayakas” control all |
the world.2?! Also, Gane§vara occurs in the Harivamsa as the name of a de- ©
mon causing diseases.* Its occurrence in the Bodhayana Grhyasesasutra, in
the section on Vinayaka,*® is hardly a reference to Ganesa. Some scholars
have referred to a synonym, Gananayaka, in a text of Manava Dharmasas-

_ tra,* but the passage under reference is considered a modern forgery.*

The next popular name by which the elephant-faced god GaneSa be-
came known is Vinayaka. This word could literally mean a leader or guide
(from vi > naya)* for regulating, controlling, or implementing order and
discipline (in a group or system).* But this has been derived also from vi
> ni (= nayati)— to lead or take away, to drive away, dispel, expel (a dis- —
ease) — to illustrate the meaning ‘remover (of obstacles), name of Ga-
nesa.’’°> However, in the eighth century A.D., acommentator of Yajnavalk-
yasmrti, ViSvarupa, provides an ingenious derivative meaning of the word

as ‘one who was appointed (viniyukta) as the head of a diverse (vi = vivt-
dha) group or class of men.’’*? So also, if the upasarga vi indicates the quality
of distinction (visista), it means ‘“‘without” or ‘deprived of’ (a leader), too.
We might add that Vinayaka was thus indeed either a “distinguished”
(vi = visista) individual leader or else a plurality of a group without a
leader.* At any rate, unlike ‘‘Ganapati” and ‘‘GaneSa,’”’ which convey the
sense of individual leadership or lordship, ‘“Vinayaka’’ conveys different
and multiple meanings depending upon whether used in singular or plu-
ral number; the ambivalence cannot be denied.

The name Vinayaka occurs first in the Manava Grhyasutra; it is used
there in the plural number to refer to a group of four spirits or lesser gods,
namely Salakatankata, Kusmandarajaputra, Usmita, and Devayajana,
and not for Ganesa.*! The name also appears in Baijavapagrhya as pre-
served in extracts quoted in the commentaries of Apararka and Sulapani
on YS.* But in these two sources the vindyakas are neither connected with
Rudra-Siva nor called leaders of ganas. Also, they are not described as hav-
ing an elephant'’s face. It may be noted further that Brhaspati is regarded
as a distinct deity like Agni, Indra, Soma, Varuna, Vayu, and Visnu.* In
the Mahabharata, too, the vindyakas are looked upon as unfriendly, malig-
nant demons like bhitas, raksasas, and pisacas,“ and their number is taken
as more than two.* Vinayaka is included in a long list of names of doubtful

--- Page 23 ---
Ganesa: The Idea and The Icon 23
authenticity in the Baudhayana Dharmasitra. The list, which includes,
among others, the names of deities to whom tarpana was to be made ina
funerary rite ($raddha), has also Vighna, Vira, Stra, Varada, Hastimukha,
Vakratunda, Ekadanta, Lambodara, and Ganeé§a, as well as the groups of
vighnaparsadas and the vighnaparsadis.* But in the later work Bodhayana
Grhyasesasutra, in the Vinayakakalpa,’’ there is a reference to Devayajana,
and so forth, as well as to Vighna, Vira, Sura, Ugra, Bhima, Hastimukha,
Varada, and the vighnaparsadas and the vighnaparsadis, but not to Ganapati,
Vakratunda, Ekadanta and Lambodara as in the Baudhayana Dharmasutra.

On the other hand, the names Vighnesvara and GaneSvara are men-
tioned as perhaps synonyms of Vinayaka.* It is true that later in the Yajna-
valkyasmrti1, Vinayaka is referred to in the singular number and for the first
time perhaps recognized as “‘one’’ god*? and reported to have been ap-
pointed (viniyukta) by Rudra and Brahma to lord it over the ganas.* How-
ever, it is not clear from the text if a merger of the identity of the four vindy-
akas had already taken place under the lordship or leadership of one of
them,°! and if Vinayaka had thus been elevated to become a Ganapati, or
GaneSa.* In any case he is not given the elephant face. Nor are deities like
Hastimukha, Ekadanta, Vakratunda, and Lambodara denied their inde-
pendent existence. It is also relevant to note here that the statement made
by R. G. Bhandarkar, and followed by others, that Ambika was known as -
the mother of Vinayaka in this text, is not correct. The text actually ap-
pears to ask for the adoration of the mother of Vinayaka and then (tatah) of
Ambika, in order to propitiate him. It does not specify Ambika as his
mother. In fact, the commentary of Visvarupacharya equates Ambika
with either Buddhi (i.e., wife of Vinayaka-GaneSa) or Rudrapatni, but not
as mother of Vinayaka.°°

Related to Vinayaka are also names like Vighnesa, Vighnesvara, and
Vighnaharta, all commonly used for Ganesa. These names are directly re-
lated to vighna (vi-ghna = obstacle). While Vighnesa and Vighnesvara
mean the “‘lord of obstacles’’ and Vighnaharta means the ‘‘remover (harta)
of obstacles,’’* the word vighna itself has been used as a proper noun to
personify a demigod who was a “breaker or destroyer.’’” In all these
vighna- related names a dual role, the negative one of malevolence and the
positive one of benevolence, is indicated. As in the case of Vinayaka, the
first two (Vighnesa and VighneSvara) indicate the lordship or leadership
and the third one (Vighnaharta) the quality of driving away or dispelling
evil or obstacle.

Now, quite in a different category belong such popular names of Ga-
nega as Gajanana, Vakratunda, and Ekadanta.* They are specifically re-
lated to the elephant and convey its physical characteristics. The first name
is simple enough in its meaning to indicate the elephantine face (gaja +

--- Page 24 ---
24 A. K. Narain

anana). The second one refers to the elephantine trunk of the god ina
curved position (vakra) in which it is generally depicted in art, although
there are many examples where it is shown straight with only the tip
curled up.» The third name is curiously enough taken to specify only one
of the elephantine tusks (ekadanta) of the god, supposedly for significant
reasons.” But the word ekadanta can as well mean the one having the
“great,” ‘‘supreme,” or “unique” tusk, like the words ekavratya used for
Siva and ekarat used for a great or supreme king.

Of the names of GaneSa mentioned above as related to the elephant’s
physical characteristics, none has been referred to in the Rgveda. But
names of certain theriomorphic deities that are related indirectly, or partly,
to the elephant’s face occur in some later Vedic texts. For example, Karata
(one with the cheek of an elephant), Hastimukha (one having the face of
an elephant), and Dantin (one with tusks) in the Maitrayaniya Samhita,°!
and Vakratunda (one having a curved trunk) and Dantiin the Taittiriya Ar-
anyaka.** But there are as many as four elephant-related names mentioned
in Baudhayana Dharmasitra® in connection with sraddha tarpana; these are
Hastimukha, Vakratunda, Ekadanta, and Lambodara. But of these only
Hastimukha is mentioned in the Bodhayana Grhyasesasutra.™ It appears to
me that while Hastimukha and Vakratunda are early and often-repeated
names, the other two are later interpolations.*° Moreover, there is no
ground to consider these elephant-related names of the lists as synonyms
of Ganesa as the name “’GaneSsa”’ is not included in them.* And it may be
noted that the inclusion of Ganapati there, as a personal name, has been
considered to be of doubtful authenticity.”

In any case, there is no evidence in the texts we have just discussed
for either Ganapati or Vinayaka having any of the physical characteristics
of an elephant. I doubt very much if the elephant-related names of these
texts have anything to do with our Ganapati or GaneSa, or even Vinay-
aka.® On the contrary these names indicate the independent status of the
theriomorphic elephant-deity in the centuries before Christ. The names
appear to highlight the very distinguishing physical characteristics of this
deity who is worshiped in his own right. This was probably what would be
known later in Patanjali as a laukika devata,® or simply a deva as mentioned
in the Buddhist sources.” Though outside the Vedic pale, they had re-
ceived recognition in the Brahmanic system as a result of the interactions
between the Vedic and the non-Vedic cultures.”!

By the time of Asoka, the elephant had become a popular sacred
symbol and was labeled as Gajatame.” The reference to Hastidasana in ASo-
kan edicts, too, might be taken as another indication of the elephant as a
worshiped or divine object.”3 So also a Hatthimaha was known to the At-
thakatha of a Jataka story as a folk feast or festival in honor of a laukika de-

--- Page 25 ---
Ganesa: The Idea and The Icon 25
vata, the sacred elephant.” In the Pali Buddhist text, Mahdniddesa, the de-
votees of this sacred elephant (Hatthivatika) are included in a list that in-
cludes those of several other sacred animals as well as those of Vasudeva,
Baladeva, Punnabhadda, Manibhadda, Aggi, nagas, supannas, yakkhas,
asuras, gandhabbas, maharajas, Canda, Suriya, Inda, Brahma, Deva, and
Disa.”

Now finally, there are names of GaneSa in languages other than San-
skrit that should be noted. For example, the Tamil name for GaneéSa is Pil-
laiyar. In the Dravidian family of languages pallu, pella, and pell signify
specifically ‘‘tooth or tusk of an elephant,’”’ but more generally ‘‘ele-
phant.”’”* In the Tamil country pille means a “child” and pillaiyar, a ‘‘noble
child”; originally, it probably meant “the young one of an elephant.’’” In
the Paia Sadda Mahannavo the word pilu means ‘elephant,’ and pilua, pi-
luka, “‘the young one.” In Pali, too, the word pillaka has the same mean-
ing.”’ According to R. Caldwell” it is a word of Scythian ongin to be com-
pared with Latin pullus meaning ‘‘young of an animal.’’® Sylvain Levi
noted the Dravidian link in explaining the identity of Dantapura with Pal-
oura of Ptolemy.*! But it is also interesting to note that J. Przyluski thought
this word as of Austric origin and even pre-Dravidian.* But it is significant
that in Sinhalese, an Indo-European language but geographically next
door to Tamil, the word pulleyar does not mean “‘the son” as in Tamil but,

as applied to GaneéSa, “‘the elephant lord of the forest.’’** Similarly, in the
Aramaic in the northwest, the word pil meant ‘‘elephant.’** Some scholars
believe that the Dravidian word pillaiyar was derived from the Sanskrit
word pilusdra, because even in Sanskrit the word pila or pilu means ‘‘ele-
phant.” It is no doubt feasible linguistically, because Sanskrit sa or sa could
change into ya in Tamil. Be that as it may, it is worth notice that the Chinese
pilgrim Xuanzang refers to Pi-lo-sho-lo (Pilusara, ““elephant-solid” or “‘ele-
phant-essence”’) as the name of the local elephant-shaped mountain deity
of Kapisa.*° There are other elephant-related names of places and peoples
in the northwest provided by Xuanzang’s account, as well as by the earlier
accounts of Alexander’s expedition in the region, that strengthen the rec-
ognition of the elephant in a supernatural role.®
III. A Survey of Early Theriomorphic and

Therianthropomorphic Representations of the

Sacred Elephant

It is generally agreed that no visual representation of our GaneSa, per
se (and for that matter of Vinayaka, too, before he became Gane$Sa), is
known that can be placed unquestionably earlier than the fifth century.”
One or two representations of him have been dated a century or so earlier

--- Page 26 ---
26 A. K. Narain

based essentially on artistic style, which may or may not be acceptable to
all.®° So also attempts have been made to discover prototypes that might
have inspired the evolution of the classic form of Ganesa.® A few therian-
thropomorphic examples that are not necessarily recognized as Gane§a of
the orthodox Brahmanic pantheon and that may be dated to times earlier
than the fourth or fifth century A.D. have been identified. One of them has
been noticed by Jouveau-Dubreuil and Coomaraswamy on one of the
Amaravati railings datable in the first century A.D.” However, Getty has
rightly pointed out that the head of this crouching personage is ‘‘unques-
tionably that of an elephant: that is, the eyes, ears, and the lower lip; but
as the image has neither trunk nor tusk, it is questionable whether it is
really a prototype of GaneSa.’’”' In this category perhaps also belongs a
fragmentary Mathura relief, referred to above in note 6, with five elephant-
headed figures.” Getty’s remark in respect of the Amaravati specimen is
valid, in my opinion, also for this Mathura example. It is difficult to justify
P. K. Agrawala’s comparison of the central figure in this relief with the de-
veloped GaneSa figure from Mathura and elsewhere belonging in the
Gupta period.” The Amaravati and Mathura specimens may or may not be
considered as examples of a Gaja-sirsa ‘’Yaksa/"* but they do not appear to
me as examples of therianthropomorphic representations of the sacred el-
ephant.

For two other examples of therianthropomorphic images with ele-
phant heads that are pre-GaneSa we must cross the boundaries of modern
India. The first of these was noticed by S. Paranavitana in a frieze of ganas
on a stupa near Mihintale in Sri Lanka. One of the ganas here was clearly
the face of an elephant, complete with trunk and tusk. While Paranavitana
believes this sculpture to be of a later period, Getty thinks that it ‘‘“may be
unquestionably ascribed to the first centuries of our era,” and she further
concluded that

as it is the only one of its kind and is in a group of other ganas, it could hardly

have struck the popular imagination deeply enough to inspire the forms of

Ganesa which appeared in India in the Gupta period. Thus, seemingly with-

out transitional stage, the most ancient representations of Ganeéa are the

completed type: two or four-armed, holding the axe, the broken tusk, a mo-
daka (or is it a jambu?), or a bowl of cakes.

The second extra-India example was brought to scholarly notice by
me on an Indo-Greek coin of Hermaeus.” On this unique coin the seated
figure is clearly endowed with the trunk of an elephant. This example may

--- Page 27 ---
Ganesa: The Ideaand The Icon 27
be dated around 50B.c. ora little earlier, and thus it remains so far the ear-
liest representation of a therianthropomorphic elephant deity, probably an
incipient Ganesa. I have discussed elsewhere in detail the gradual evolu-
tion of this type of representation in the northwest, in what are now Af-
ghanistan and Pakistan.”

Now, unlike the late appearance of the therianthropomorphic Ga-
neSa, the visual representations of the independent theriomorphic ele-
phant deity can be seen from even before the Vedic times. It is well known
that many animals are depicted on the seals pertaining to the Harappa cul-
ture with its center in the northwestern parts of South Asia. While it is dif-
ficult to say if all of the animals depicted on the Harappa seals were sacred
in character, some of them clearly were. Among the possibilities we may
safely include, along with the bull, the elephant. When the authors of the
Vedic texts began to make a note, albeit marginally, of such cult deities as
the Hastimukha, the Dantin, and the Vakratunda, perhaps they were at
that time represented in perishable material for temporary rituals and so
they did not survive to later times.” But “images” or “‘representations” of
the sacred elephant in durable materials appear to have existed in the
northwestern parts of South Asia. If ideas traveled in the Achaemenid pe-

-riod of domination over this region and extended to the Western world, it
is interesting to find on a Sicilian coin of the fourth century B.c. a deity
wearing an elephant scalp on the obverse.'” After Alexander’s encounter
in 323 B.C. with the elephants of Porus, the fascination with elephants of
the Greeks and others in the West so increased that Seleucus regarded the
possession of elephants as more valuable than that of territories; and thus,
after Seleucus’s victory over Antigonas, it is no wonder that the elephant
came to be considered by the Greeks, too, as a symbol of success. Thus
among the Greeks of Bactria, Demetrius and several other kings used the
elephant scalp as their headdress." It is very interesting that Demetrius
issued a coin type with the head of an elephant wearing a bell around the
neck.!°2 This was exactly copied later by the Saka king Maues.'® The sig-
nificance of the bell around the neck of the elephant not only confirms the
elephant’s special status but also offers a link to one of the later legends
about the origin and role of Ganesa.'™

Two other Greco-Bactrian kings, Antimachus Theos and Apollodo-
tus, issued coins with the figures of full-bodied elephants.'® In addition,
we have a series of coin types of Antialcidas showing the forepart of the
sacred elephant in association with the Greek god Zeus holding Nike, the
goddess of victory, and particularly one where Zeus is made to walk along-
side a large, full-bodied elephant with Victory over the head, which easily
reminds one of the coins of the later Kusana king Wima Kadphises show-

--- Page 28 ---
28 A. K. Narain

ing Siva walking alongside a full-bodied bull.!® Finally we have the unique
coin of Hermaeus, which I have discussed elsewhere to show how the
Greeks of Bactria and India honored the sacred elephant and gave recog-
nition not only to a local cult of the elephant deity of Kapisa but also to the
first therianthropomorphic figure of this deity. 1°”

. Theriomorphic representation of the elephant was already known
from the karshapanas (punch-marked coins) of Mauryan India.’ It appears
that before orthodox Brahmanic Hinduism recognized the sacredness of
the elephant, the Buddhists had already included it in their religious think-
ing by associating it with the conception of the Buddha. Thus, Asoka
places the sacred elephant on his pillars (dharmastambhas), and at Kalsi a
line drawing of the elephant belonging to his times is labeled as the Gaja-
tame (the best or the supreme elephant). At Bharhut and Sanci and in other
post-Mauryan monuments, examples of the sacred elephant appearing in
positive roles related to the Buddha are not difficult to find.'” Therio-
morphic representation of the sacred elephant was thus not uncommon in
Buddhist contexts in South Asia before the beginning of the Christian era.
It may be noted that in Sri Lanka, too, the Pulleyar of the Buddhists is not
a son of Siva like the Tamil Pillaiyar, but an independent devata, with func-
tions different from those of the Tamil one.'"° So also it is interesting that a
therianthropomorphic representation of the sacred elephant was made in
China, again in the Buddhist context, as early as 531 A.D."

It may not be out of place here to refer to two examples of elephant-
faced female figures, one from Mathura and the other found at Rairh in
Rajasthan.''’? They have been dated from the first century B.C. to the sec-
ond century A.D. and have been identified as the goddess Jyestha, suppos-
edly early examples of the female Ganesa, who was known in later times
by such names as Ganesani, Ganesi, and Vainayaki. Without going into
the dating of these two figures, which is itself problematical, I find hardly
any specific reason to identify them with the female goddess Ganesani or
Vainayaki. There is no justification to identify Jyestha with Hastimukha
mentioned in the Bodhayana Grhyasesasutra in the same way as there is no
reason, as discussed above, to identify Vinayaka with Hastimukha. I be-
lieve that Hastimukha was an independent laukika devata, and therefore
Hastimukha was perhaps the female counterpart of the male Hastimukha
known from as early as the Vedic times, but not of Jyestharaja (an epithet
of Brhaspati of the Rgveda) or of Vinayaka. If these elephant-faced female
figures have any relation at all to the later example of an elephant-headed
yogini at Bheraghat, the inscription on the pedestal there reads clearly Sri
Aingini.'°

--- Page 29 ---
Ganesa: The Idea and The Icon 29
IV. Plurality of Traditions and Their Convergence

It is obvious from what we have discussed above that we are dealing
with plural traditions and a complex process of interactions spread out
over a vast period of time and space. One of the traditions no doubt is the
Vedic. The Ganapati idea related to wisdom and learning, leadership or
lordship, belongs here. But it may be noted that ganapati of the Vedic
sources is not the personal name of a god. Ganapatitva is a concept that is
applied to Brhaspati and to Indra and later extended even to Rudra-Siva.
The other traditions we are concerned with here belong in fact to the pot-
pourri of the diverse non- and pre-Vedic traditions. Vinayaka represents
one of them only. This was governed by the dichotomy of malevolence and
benevolence arising out of the age-old primitive concept of fear of the un-
predictable moods of nature and therefore the necessity of propitiation for
harmonious coexistence with it. The Vinayaka tradition might be a part of
the same non- and pre-Vedic traditions to which Rudra-Siva belonged. The
third tradition relevant for us here is the theriomorphic one, which was |
also at once non- and pre-Vedic. But unlike the Vinayaka idea, this was not
based on the dichotomy of malevolence and benevolence and their resolu-
tion by propitiation. On the contrary, this was based on positive grounds.

_ Perhaps the theriomorphic concept was less primitive in origin than the Vi-
nayaka idea and dated from the time when animals, like the elephant and _
the bull, became domesticated and were assigned friendly, positive, and
participatory roles in human life and activities. This tradition recognized
the power, the majesty, and the usefulness of the physical qualities of these
animals and therefore related probably to a practice of totem worship and
agrarian rites. This tradition might or might not necessarily, at least to be-
gin with, be associated with the same non- and pre-Vedic tradition to
which also belonged the Rudra-Vinayaka idea.'* To these non- and pre-
Vedic traditions we must add the fourth of such external traditions, those
originating from the West and from central Asia at different times, like the
Greek, the Iranian, and the diverse inner Asian.

A large variety of sacred symbols, deities, and cults that belonged
thus in the diverse non-Vedic and non-Brahmanic traditions was labeled
as laukika devatas in such Brahmanic sources as those of Panini and Patan-
jali, as vyantara devatas in the Jain texts, and as devas in the Buddhist. Their
number was naturally much larger than the elite deities, and their list in-
cluded, among others, not only the various imps and evil spirits, along
with a retinue of obstacles personified (vighna) in both genders, and celes-
tial beings, but also rivers, mountains, trees, and animals (such as the bull

--- Page 30 ---
30. A. K. Narain
and the elephant). Their vitality never diminished, and their ever-renew-
ing capacity endured the vicissitudes of time and culture. |

By about the second century B.c. and onward, these traditions come
closer to each other and do not shy away from more open intermingling.
Experiments are being made in new adjustments and accommodation.
Ideas are exchanged and wherever possible even internalized. Eclecticism
and syncretism become the order of the day. Deities belonging in different
traditions are provided with equations and receive new recognitions. In all
these activities people of various ethnic and cultural origins making the
melting pot of India, and enriching it time and again, participated. The
credit goes to all.

It has already been noted that in the Manava Grhyasutra certain imps
and evil spirits, such as Salakatarnkata, Usmita, Kusmandarajaputra, and
Devayajana, are collectively described as vinayakas who were prone to pos-
sess men and women, make them failures in life, and put obstacles in the
way of their performance of good deeds. The texts also lay down various
ways of propitiating these spirits and thus freeing oneself from their pos-
session. Thus the vindyakas were known in the non-Vedic Brahmanic tra- _
dition for their dual role of producing obstacles (vighnakarta) and of remov-
ing obstacles (vighnaharta). They were thus in their own way the regulators
of order and discipline (vindya) in society by first injecting elements of fear
and then promising to remove them for an offering. During the post-Maur-
yan period, arising out of the interaction again, for the second time,!!° be- |
tween the indigenous and the newly arrived foreign elements, a move-
ment for rapprochement between the elite Vedic-Brahmanic and the folk
non-Brahmanic traditions received a fillip. A process of syncretism led to
a synthesis and incorporation of elements of popular belief-systems in the
mainstream of Indian culture." As a part of this process, the malignancy
of Vinayaka as a vighnakarta was removed, and from Vighneésvara he be-
came a vighnaharta, Ganesvara.'"’ First, Vinayaka was assigned a positive
role and elevated as a bhagavat to whom offerings could be made by those
desirous of siddhi (success), rddhi (prosperity), and pasu (wealth).'8 He
was praised as a bhupati and bhuvanapati as well as bhutanam pati.

But it should be noted that no “laukika devata’’ of the elephant group
was included in the list of the ganas of Vinayaka. Probably their number
still remained as four. Hastimukha maintained a separate identity for pur-
poses of svaha.'” In fact there is a reason to believe that the elephant-
related devatas belonged clearly in a different group. On the other hand,
either the leaderless (vi = ‘‘deprived of’ + nayaka) group of vindyakas (in
plural), or Vinayaka himself (in singular) as the lord of his group, were in- _
ducted into the team of Siva.'?' Nay, probably the elephant deity had some-

--- Page 31 ---
Ganesa: The Ideaand The Icon 31
thing to do with the very process that removed the malevolence of Vinay-
aka and gave to him a guardianship role that would be later transferred to
the Puranic GaneSa. For it is significant that in the Bodhayana Grhyasesasu-
tra, as part of the ritual of propitiation and offerings, after the visualization
of Devayajana, a hastimukha (elephant-faced) Brahmana or a Brahmana
probably wearing an elephant-face mask, was made to sit facing the south
for performing the propitiatory ritual.'2? Thus far no statement is made
that Vinayaka-Ganapati had an elephant-face or any other elephantine at-
tribute.

In the Yajnavalkyasmrti (ca. fourth century A.D.?), one Vinayaka is as-
signed the role of lordship of the ganas by Rudra and Brahma. He is sup-
posed also to be associated, rather ambiguously, in this text with Ambika
as his mother. Obviously this was to bring Vinayaka into line with, or into
the family of, the major cult deities Siva and Sakti, who were albeit of non-
Vedic origins but already well established in the Brahmanic system.
Banerjea'* rightly states that “‘this was the beginning of the very confused
mythology about the origin of Ganapati to be found in later literature.” The
so-called earliest iconographic description of Ganapati in the chapter on
Pratimalaksanam of the Brhat Samhita of Varahamihira (sixth century A.D.)
has already been considered by all concerned as an interpolation.’ If that
is so, Banabhatta (seventh century A.D.),'*° and Bhavabhuti (eighth cen-
tury A.D.)!26 are probably the earliest to provide textual references to the
elephantine head of Vinayaka,'”” though such images were being already
made, whether or not acknowledged as that of our GaneSa.

The most striking visual characteristic of Ganega is no doubt his ele- —
phant’s face. And as I have stated above, the many myths that surround
GaneSa do not appear to reveal the source for this identifying feature. The
disagreement and diversity in the stories detailing the birth of Ganesa do
provide a temptingly fertile ground for speculations, but the fact remains
that none of the Puranic accounts tell us that he was born with an ele-
phant’s head. And if the accounts agree on one point, it is that the ele-
phant’s head was a grafting done to restore or produce a new life, and that
the elephant’s head was a borrowed item. Thus, prima facie, there is a very
clear indication to posit a separate and independent identity of the sacred
elephant, on the one hand, and that of a son of Siva and/or Parvati on the
other, before the merger takes place. Courtright’s summary statement that
“there is no independent evidence for an elephant cult or a totem, nor is
there any archaeological data pointing to a tradition prior to what we see
already in place in the Puranic literature and the iconography of
Gane§a’’!8 is not so absolute as he thinks, and it need not discourage a
search for this elephant cult. Foucher is right in suggesting that ““when

--- Page 32 ---
32 A. K. Narain

dealing with a therianthropomorphic figure of Ganesa’s type, we can eas-
ily trace it back to the animal prototype from which it came,” and in stating
that ‘an objective analysis of the figure of Ganega and the convincing anal-
ogy provided by every ancient form of religion lead us to admit that he
made his entry into the world of things sacred under the guise of an ele-
phant.”!?? During the period of transformation from a theriomorphic stage
to a therianthropomorphic one, morphological compromises of all kinds
were imagined by artists and devotees.

Unfortunately, the Puranas, which record the textual birth of Ga-
nesa, do not help in the understanding of the details of the process leading
to it. While we do not have to go to Egypt as suggested recently by Y. Kris-
han to import the concept of an elephant-headed god,'*° the questions re-
main as to when and how the classic image of an elephant-faced Ganesa
came into being. Elephants are indigenous to India, and there is hardly any
historical basis to establish a sufficiently strong political or cultural link
with Egypt to produce the wanted result. And also, in the formulation of
the Hellenistic impact in South Asia, it is more reasonable to think of the
Iranian input than of the Egyptian.

It is fair to assume that a considerable time elapsed, firstly, between
the earliest visual representation of the sacred elephant as an object of wor-
ship and the earliest references to it in any literature, and then secondly,
between the earliest attempts to produce an elephant-faced deity and the
first iconographic description and identity of the elephant-faced Gane§a in
literary sources. The question also arises, as Getty has asked, ‘“‘whether
the original form of the elephant-faced deity was conceived in north or in
south India.’’?! But before we discuss this question we would like to recall
Foucher’s warning:

The almost complete absence of ancient documents relating to Gane§a is

somewhat disconcerting, for it is evident that without them no historical re-

construction is possible. Yet must one necessarily succumb to the habitual
failing of the philologist whose learned candour leads him to infer that all
things have their beginning from the time of their first mention in the texts?

Such a conclusion would be absurd, for in any given place and moment there

are always many more social facts than those recorded in writing.

It should be evident from what we have discussed above that the sa-
credness of the elephant in South Asia was first recognized in its north-
western regions. Once we leave the material remains of the Harappa cul-,
ture, the visual evidence for the sacred elephant in the northern and
northwestern regions does not appear before the time of ASoka. About

--- Page 33 ---
Ganesa: The Ideaand The Icon 33
two millenia after the earliest depiction of the theriomorphic elephant on
the Harappa seals, it is visible again in the same northwestern region un-
der the patronage of the Greco-Bactrians and the Indo-Greeks; as I have
shown in my earlier writings on the subject, the first attempt at therian-
thropomorphization of an elephant deity took place during their times and
under their patronage. In the Harappa culture the basis of the elephant’s
sacredness is not clear when it appears individually and independently on
the seals. However, the elephant’s inclusion among the four animals that
surround a seated figure, sometime called ‘‘Pasupati,’’ on a seal may in-
dicate its associative, or a subordinative, role to a major god. If the central
figure on the seal is Pasupati Siva, one may see a parallel association in the
Puranic stories of the elephant deity GaneSsa with Siva.

But the reasons for the sacredness of the elephant would assumedly
vary according to time and space contexts, and by the time the therian-
thropomorphic GaneSa receives the classic form, these reasons would
help to make him not only a pan-Indian, but a pan-Asian, god.

During the later Vedic times, inclusion of theriomorphic elephants in
the Maitrayani Samhita and Taittiriya Aranyaka in the list for gayatri invoca-
tion tells us that the three distinguishing elements of the elephant phy-
sique— namely, the face, the curved trunk, and the tusk—are sufficiently
sacred to be incorporated in a gayatri japa and treated on par with some of
the well-known Vedic-Brahmanic deities. This status of the elephant-
related deities, such as the Hastimukha, might well have been related to
totem and ancestor worship, or agrarian rites, of some of the local com-
munities outside the Vedic pale. The association of the elephant Airavata
as a vehicle of Indra had not taken place in the early Vedic period. In any
case, Indra and Airavata were not strong enough to have a cult around
them and find a place in the pancayatana.'?

The Buddhists, on the other hand, were also naturally eager to give
recognition to the sacredness of the elephant, and that resulted in the leg-
ends related to the conception of the Buddha. For in them the devas select
the elephant to herald the coming of the Buddha, at once the world con-
queror and the world renouncer, a universally beneficent role for the hap-
piness and well-being of the people. The elephant was associated with fer-
tility because of its being a symbol for rain in the form of a cloud,’ and
because of this association with fertility it could be used to denote concep-
tion.'35> Asoka not only adored the Excellent Elephant, Gajatame, but also
included Hastidasana in the pageants of divine spectacles (divyani rupani)
he organised for the inculcation of his Dhamma, which, as he claimed,
made it possible for human beings and the devas to commingle (missi-
bhita).'* Early Pali Buddhist literature contains references to the group of

--- Page 34 ---
34 A.K. Narain

people, known as the Hatthivatikas, who were followers of a belief system
(vata = vrata) that considered the elephant as sacred.'%’ A Jataka story re-
fers to a Hatthimaha, a festival dedicated to the sacred elephant.'*

In much of the northwestern regions of South Asia there is evidence
to indicate that the positive and beneficent role of the sacred elephant was
associated with the cities and the suburbia on the one hand and with the
symbols of mountains, rocks, and stones on the other. Probably the natu-
ral rock formations in that region, sometimes taking the shape of an ele-
phant, particularly the frontal part of it, helped in visualizing the majesty
and the divinity of this great animal. In this connection we have discussed
elsewhere in detail the evidence of the Chinese pilgrim scholar Xuanzang
and that of the Indo-Greek coinage.!*’ This association with mountains ex-
plains incidentally the linguistic equations of the Chinese name pi-lo-sho-
lo, the Sanskrit pilusara, and the ancient Tamil pillaiyar Perhaps the much
later tradition, according to which Gane§a, like Siva, was popularly wor-
shiped impersonated by a formless (or almost formless) stone called svay-
ambhu murti, the most celebrated examples of which are to be found in
Kashmir,'!# may have something to do with the idea of the mountain as-_ -
sociation of the sacred elephant in the northwest. There are three such fa-
mous and most powerful svayambhu murtis in the Kashmir region, which
from ancient times have drawn pilgrims to their shrines.'*! One is near the
village of Ganes-bal, in the river Lidar near its right bank. The second is a
rock at the foot of the hill Hariparbat near Srinagar. The third and the most
remarkable of these svayambhii mirtis in Kashmir is the one on a cliff along
the Kishen-Ganga known as Ganes-Ghati. '”

This mountain association of the elephant in the northwest is also in-
dicated by the later but widely spread Asian traditions regarding Siva and
Ganesa. One may even venture to suggest that when, in the Puranic myth,
Siva ordered the gods to bring the head of the first living being they should
meet with in the northern quarter, which proved to be that of an elephant,
he was probably using the expression north in a broader sense to include
the northwest.'* It may also be noted here that in the earlier Brahmanic
tradition the role models or the ideals came from the northern areas like
Uttarakuru and Svetadvipa. Mitra thought that “probably Ganesa worship
arose in the regions of Northern and North-western India which form the
habitat of the elephant.’

Thus the origin of Ganesa’s most striking feature, his elephant’s face,
must be sought in the northwest (or the north in general), where elephants
are associated with mountains (or rocks or stones). Rather than looking to
the Vedic-Brahmanic or any other elite tradition for the source of GaneSga’s
elephant face, we should look to the popular worship of the elephant in the

--- Page 35 ---
Ganesa: The Ideaand The Icon 35
northwest. This association of the elephant deity with mountains could
also help to explain the relevance of the traditions regarding Ganeéa in
southeast Asia and East Asia.!*°

Itis against this background that the coin types of the Greco-Bactrian
and Greco-Indian kings ending with Hermaeus, which we have referred to
above, should be viewed. It is indeed surprising how the coins issued by
these kings and their Saka-Pahlava successors in the northwest exhibit
several other iconographic attributes and ideas associated with the classic
GaneéSa of later times. I have already drawn attention to the bell around the
neck of the elephant on the coins of Demetrius as well as on those of
Maues.'*° This may easily remind one of the Tibetan tradition assigning
GaneSa a role of the doorkeeper of VaiSali.'*’ It is interesting to note that on
the other side of these very coin types showing the elephant’s head with
the bell there is a caduceus, showing the two entwined snakes around
Apollo’s wand.'*8 This again would remind one of the nagabandha, of the
serpent entwined round the belly, of Ganesa.'*? Curiously the ideas of
“success,” “victory,” and “‘lordship,” the well-known qualities attached to
the developed GaneSa, may also be noted from these coins. For example,
a Demetrius described as ‘‘Aniketos’’ on a square copper coin type is
shown wearing an elephant scalp.'* On the coins of Antialcidas the ele-

_ phant is shown not only in association with Nike but also as walking vic-
toriously holding the wreath by its trunk.'>! So also, finally, in the ele-
phant’s face of Zeus on the unique coin of Hermaeus the idea of lordship
acquired from Zeus is indicated; Hastimukha indeed takes over the
throne. On the other hand attention may also be drawn here to the coin of
the Pahlava king Azilises, where two elephants are shown consecrating a
female divinity. !”
V. Conclusion

The appearance of the elephant-faced Gane§Sa in history was not a re-
sult of transformation of an evil genius into a benign divinity. The ele-
phant, either as a sacred animal or as a theriomorphic deity, is never shown
in visual representations or in related textual references as dreadful, fe-
rocious, or with malign intentions. The Hastimukhas and the Dantins of
the earliest texts do not find a place in the lists of the yaksas, the raksasas,
or the pisdcas. They were tutelary deities to be invoked as part of gayatri
japa for regeneration, protection, and success. The Excellent Elephant (Ga-
jatame) is chosen to herald the coming of the Buddha and to annoint (abhi-
seka) the female divinity Sri or Mahamaya. In Kapisa and elsewhere in the
northwest it was honored as presiding over cities (nagara devata) or as a

--- Page 36 ---
36 A. K. Narain

mountain deity overseeing the highways of trade. It is well acknowledged
that the name Ganeéa is not found in any of the lists, literary or epigraphic,
of the yaksas. But curiously it is taken for granted that an elephant deity,
Hastimukha, was a vindyaka. This is not correct, for the names of all the
vindyakas are mentioned in the relevant texts, and no name indicating ele-
phantine physique is included either in the group of four or even in that of
the expanded six. Therefore, while it is one thing to recognize the trans-
formation of the evil vindyakas into a Ganapati endowed with benign qual-
ities, it is quite another to push the god of the Hatthivatikas, the elephant
bhagavat, into a process that implies two stages of development — first de-
grading it to an evil vindyaka, a vighnakarta, and then transforming it along
with the other vindyakas into a vighnaharta Ganapati, in order to create an
elephant-faced GaneSa.

This process, however, is not warranted by the evidence we have. It
is not that there are no examples of such transformations of evil genii be-
longing in the “other” group into benign and acceptable gods and god-
desses in the religious history of India, for there are such well-known ex-
amples as of Rudra and Hariti. My point is that the elephant-faced
(Hastimukha or Gajanana) Gane§Sa did not go through that process. The
transformation of Vinayaka no doubt followed the precedents of Rudra,
but the elephant deity, the Hastimukha, had already proven itself as an in-
dependent popular deity in South Asia in its own right as endowed with
positive qualities before it was identified with the Vedic Ganapati and non-
Vedic Vinayaka ideas, on the one hand as Brhaspati, the Brahmanic god of
wisdom, and on the other as Vinayaka-appointed GaneSsvara. And a new
name GaneSa, not used earlier, was coined for this new god.

Isum up as follows:

1. GaneSa did not originate in the Vedic tradition.

2. Gane§a’s origin is primarily related to pre- and non-Vedic tradi-
tions of elephant worship prevailing in the northwest, or broadly
in the north.

3. GaneSa did not start as a yaksa.

4. The sacredness of the elephant, among other things, was related
to mountains.

5. Ganesa was not a vighnakarta or vighnesa to start with.

6. GaneSa’s ganapatitva was inherited from Vinayaka, who in turn
had acquired it from Rudra after having been converted from a
malevolent status to a benevolent one.

7. Ganapati and Vinayaka did not have the elephant face until they
got one after their merger with Hastimukha to make the new god
GaneSa.
