--- Page 1 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s
Dual-GaneSa Cult
fame H. Saannford
Preliminary Considerations
Te history of GaneSga in Japan is commonly thought to have begun
with Kukai (774-835), the transmitter — perhaps better, the founder
| — of the Shingon sect of Japanese Buddhism.! However, the dating of the
Chinese version of the synoptic T’o-lo-ni chi-ching (Compiled Dhdaranis) of
Atikuta? at 653—54 and the existence of ritual texts on Gane§a attributed to
such major figures as Bodhiruci (trad. 572-727), Subhakarasimha (637 —
7395), Vajrabodhi (671 — 741), and Amoghvajra (705 — 44) makes an earlier,
Nara period (710-94), familiarity with GaneSa not unlikely. The inclusion
of several iconic forms of Gane§Sa in each of the two major Shingon man-
dalas and Kukai’s authorship of the brief ritual text, the Kangiten shidai,
(Kangiten Procedural)? simply allow us to posit the early ninth century as
a secure, not necessarily a conclusive, date for the arrival of this divinity in
Japan.

In general, and perhaps even in the case of the ritual and textual
transmissions of Kukai, we can speak of two separate provenances for the
appearance of GaneSa within the Shingon tradition. The first of these is as
a constituent deity, repeated in several variants, of the two great mandalas.
Six such forms of Gane§a are found in the various courts of the Vajra-dhatu
(Kong6-kai) mandala and one more in the Garbhakosa-dhatu (Taizo-kai)
mandala (fig. 1).4 Gane§a is, in this regard, but one of a number of Hindu
divinities who, having ‘‘converted” to Buddhism, came to serve in minor
roles as outer guardians of the courts of the twin mandalas.

_ It is in the second Shingon provenance — as a besson or ‘‘separated
divinity”’ broken loose from the pleromatic wholeness of the twin mandalas
287

--- Page 2 ---
288 James H. Sanford

and become an individual cultic figure, a divinity more nearly resident in
the worldly realm and concerned most directly with its needs and values
—that we see the Ganesa most typical of Japan, the so-called Sdshin Kan-
giten or “‘Dual-bodied Gane§sa.’”> The term besson, like its synonym tsson,
“singular object of worship,” signals the existence within Shingon of a pri-
vate, largely praxis-oriented wing alongside the more normative, philo-
sophical-doctrinal wing. The primary aim of the cultic worship of single
deities was the attainment through specific ritual procedures of equally
specific material or spiritual (usually the former) ends.
: A number of issues are raised by the existence of any besson cult.
These include, along with historical questions of origin and development,
consideration of the iconic forms of the divinity, the specific rituals used in
worship, their mythological associations or rationale, and the individual
and communal aims and attitudes of the worshipers. The venue of this pa-
per cannot provide space for a compiete treatment of the manifold com-
plexities inherent in any one of these issues with regard to the dual Ga-
nesa, but I hope, nonetheless, to provide at least a useful initial survey of
the written texts associated with the dual-GaneSa image and the, perhaps
at first glance somewhat unexpectedly intense and persistent, worship de-

_voted to it in Japan.

Much of our access to the rituals, iconography, and historical devel-
opmer: of the dual-GaneSa cult, from its Chinese “origins” in the seventh
and eighth centuries up to the Tokugawa era (1603 - 1867), is textual. It is
also typically fragmentary and scattered. Although some of the specific
fragments are of considerable length, never for the early periods do we
have a very broad range of materials to look at. Repetition of stereotyped
patterns and verbatim quotation of standard passages is the norm. It is
only from 1600 on, following the development of a powerful cultic center
of GaneSsa worsnip at Hozanji temple on Mount Ikoma near the ancient
Japanese capital of Nara, that materials become a good deal richer and in-
clude biographies, accounts of visions of Gane§a, certificates of initiation,
guidebooks for pilgrims, apologetic tracts, and so on. However, before
moving into the textual arena we first need a brief introduction to the most
obvious element of the cult, its honzon or “principal object of worship,” the
dual-GaneSa image itself.

The Dual Icon

Altogether, if minor variations in attributes and the like are taken into
account, there may be thirty or more distinguishable forms of Ganeéa in
the Japanese iconographic tradition. For most of these we find associated

--- Page 3 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Ganesga Cult 289
rituals in the manuals, and we can suppose that all of these rituals were
performed at least occasionally. Only the dual form, however, shows a
long history of ritual appropriation and the eventual crystallization around
it of a full-blown cult; it clearly occupies a special place in the overall his-
tory of Japanese religion.

There are a number of variants of the dual form of Ganesa. Of these
four stand out as worthy of immediate notice. The Embracing Kangi is the
most typical dual form. Its iconic characteristics, described in some detail
in numerous sources, are as follows. Two figures, elephant headed and hu-
man bodied, male and female, stand in embrace. The female wears a jew-
eled crown, a patched monk’s robe, and a red surplice. Her tusks and
trunk are short. Her eyes are narrowed. Her body is whitish. The male
wears neither a monk’s robe nor a crown, though he may have a black cloth
over his shoulders. His body is reddish-brown. ° His trunk is long. His eyes
are wide open. His countenance is not compassionate, but loving. His
head rests on the female’s shoulder. The feet of the female may rest atop
those of the male.

| The Embracing Kangi icon has two close variants. In the first of these,
the Shoten Fondly Smiling form (fig. 2), the two divinities look into each
other's eyes, and both smile happily. According to textual descriptions, the
male should have tight-fitting clothes and the female loose clothes, though
in some illustrations they are, in fact, wrapped up ina single garment. The
second variant, Embracing Shoten Looking Over the Shoulder (fig. 3), is
closer to the standard embracing form than the Shoten Fondly Smiling,
differing basically only in posture. Here each figure is supposed to look
across the back of its counterpart.

Orthodox Shingon makes much of the details of all three of these im-
ages, interpreting them as sophisticated allegorical symbols. Their most
obvious common feature, the bifurcation into a pair of almost wholly sep-
arated, sexually differentiated figures, is taken to mark a preliminary
duality of opposites. But the fact that these two figures are locked in an
embrace that unites them back into one is taken to signal the further, more
profound, nondual coincidentia oppositorum mode of being. That this is a
nondual rather than simply a monistic mode is further indicated by such
subtle, but sexually explicit, clues as the feet-on-feet attribute of the Em-
bracing Kangi form and the single garment of the Fondly Smiling version.
Similar interpretative clues are provided in the textual tradition’ by the fact
that the two halves of the icon, male and female, share a single name and
further by the fact that that the most common form of that name is the ep-
ithet Kangiten, “‘the Deva of Bliss.’” These orthodox Shingon interpreta-
tions, of considerable eventual importance in the worship of Ganesa, prob-

--- Page 4 ---
290 James H. Sanford

ably represent a Heian period attempt to upgrade and legitimize Ganesa.
Interestingly, these forms seem clearly to be connected to the “four atti-
tudes’ of Indian and Tibetan Tantra. Tsong-kha-pa, for instance, allows
that the ritual classification of Tantric texts as Kriya-tantra, Carya-tantra,
Yoga-tantra, and Anuttara-yoga-tantra is dependent on whether the cen-
tral divinities smile at one another, look at one another, embrace one an-
other, or are sexually united. David Snellgrove locates the origin of these
variations in Indian commentaries on the Hevajra-tantra’s Four Consecra-
tions and the attendant Four Joys as follows: Smile = Master Consecration
= Joy; Gaze = Secret Consecration = Perfect Joy; Embrace = Wisdom
Consecration = Joy of Cessation; and Union = The Fourth Consecration
= Innate Joy (Sahaja or Mahasukha).’ Since the Hevajra is itself usually
classed as an Anuttara-yoga-tantra (or a Yogini-tantra), the explicitly sex-
ual symbols in the Sino-Japanese GaneSa corpus should best be seen as an
inherent constituent of the materials rather than as little tradition accre-
tions. (The Embracing and the United forms of the Hevajra tradition appear .
to have been conflated, and somewhat bowdlerized, in China and Japan
into a single Embracing form.)

The Elephant and Boar Shoten dual form is perhaps even more pro-
vocative. In this case we have nota figure with two elephant heads, but one
with an elephant’s head and a boar’s head. This seems the most uncom-
promisingly Tantric of all the variations, since the nonduality of the mun-
dane and the Absolute is symbolized not only by sexuality but also in such
a way as to emphasize the bestial side of creation. Some texts allow that
this is the form to use if it is desired to represent Buddha and bodhi sepa-
rately. It is also clear that this form has an organic connection with the
‘“Vajra-faced’”” Kongomen-ten form in the Kong6-kai mandala. It is proba-
bly not connected with the Hevajra tradition (although the boar head does
perhaps distantly recall Vajravarahi, the ‘Diamond Sow” of the Hevajra).
It may, rather, have become part of Shingon’s set in order to keep the num-
ber of images at four once the Hevajra’s Embracing and United had been
conflated into one in the Sino-Japanese texts (or their prototypes).

Dual GaneSa According to the Early Chen-yen Masters

Generally speaking, the iconographic, historical, and popular
sources relating to the Japanese worship of GaneSga can be considered in
terms of four sequential groups. The earliest, and in many ways most im-
portant, layer comprises the Sino-Japanese ritual texts on GaneSa collected
in the Chinese Tripitaka. Most of these are gathered together in a solid
block of texts attributed to the famous names of the brief period of Tantric

--- Page 5 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan's Dual-Ganesa Cult 291
efflorescence in the Chen-yen (the Chinese reading of Shingon) school of
eighth-century China. These often quite short texts detail the iconography
of Ganesa and the mudras, mantras, and various special-purpose rituals as-
sociated with the image. Some of them also give brief folktale-like myths
that purport to explain the origins of the dual form. All of these works are
similar in style and structure. In fact, their brevity and formulaic format
suggest that they are summary digests of longer original versions from a
still earlier textual tradition that is perhaps now wholly lost to us.

Though it is not the earliest text in this group, the most widely
quoted and most nearly normative of the entire group is the Ta Sheng T’ien
Huan-hsi shuang-shen p’t-na-yeh-chia fa (Daishoten Kangi soshin binayaka ho,
‘Rite of the Dual-bodied Vinayaka, Daishoten Kangi”) attributed to Amo-

* ghavajra (705 — 74).° This piece is sufficiently crucial, yet also sufficiently
brief, to warrant translation in full. -
i

The body mantra: ‘“Noba binoyokkyasha kashitchibokyasha taniyata
on noyokkya noyokkya binoyokkya binoyokkya tarayokkya haritarayokkya
shokyakashitchi shokyakashita (senji kyara) sowaka.” [Namo vinayakasya
hastimukhasya tadyatha om nayaka nayaka vinayaka vinayaka trayaka pri-
trayaka ca mukhasti ca mukha kacita (?) svaha].°

The heart mantra: ‘‘On kiri gyaku (un soka).”” [Om hrih gah (hum
svaha). |

The heart-of-hearts mantra: ‘On gyaku gyaku un sowaka.”” [Om gah
gah hum svaha. |

il

If you wish to perform the ritual of this deva, you must first depict his
image. This can be done using pewter, brass, [ordinary] wood, or the wood
of fragrant trees. Whether one casts the image or carves it, it should be in the
form of two figures standing in embrace. These should be about five ts’un or
seven ts’un [about seven or eight inches] high and have human bodies and
elephant heads. One should not begrudge the cost of the image.

Once the image has been completed, one goes into a purified chamber
on the first day of the first half of the lunar month and there molds a more or
less round altar from pure cow dung. This can be any size one likes. Next
pour a sheng [about two quarts] of clear sesame oil in a clean brass vessel.
Recite the previously noted mantras over this oil 108 times. Then heat the oil
and place the image in it. Install the image on the altar [compare figs. 4 and

--- Page 6 ---
292 James H. Sanford

5]. Then, using a brass spoon or dipper, pour the oil over the two figures in
equal amounts 108 times to annoint them. Each day thereafter the oil is
poured over the figures in seven sessions of 108 pourings each — four times
at dawn and three times at noon, seven times in all. This ritual should be per-
formed for seven days. If you always keep in mind what you are making a
vow for, your desire wiil be answered. As the oil is poured you should make
repeated vows.

Afterward make offerings of buns made from curds, honey, and
parched flour [compare fig. 6]; of radishes; and a cup of wine." These bliss
buns should be offered with fruits of the season; each day everything must
be freshly made. Thus you will in return obtain all the good things you wish
for and avoid all calamities. The practitioner must himself eat all the offerings
presented in this ritual; only thus can he obtain their vitality."

lil

For the calling-in mudra [compare fig. 7], hook ring fingers and little
fingers together and turn them inward. The two middle fingers should be
held upright but apart. Each index finger should stand up beside its middle
finger. The thumbs should be held up near the index finger. They should wag
back and forth.'’? The mantra is “On hakyara shudateihataya.” [Om bhagata

. cudatipatya.] Chant this mantra seven times.

The mantra of praise: “On gyanahachi senchi sowa shitchi makagya-
nahachi sowaka.”’

The dismissing mantra: ‘‘On hakyara shudaya sowaka.’”’ Chant this
mantra seven times.

Mantra used to empower water to protect the body: When you wish to
perform this ritual, first chant the previous mantra over the water seven
times. First use it to rinse out your mouth; then take the water and chant over
it seven times. Then scatter the water over your body with willow branches.
This mantra is for protection. Afterward go to the ritual place in the room of
the mantra.

Ablution mantra: ‘‘On adahajiriparuidaka (soka).’’ [Om atha vajri
paryanah (svaha).] This is the mantra used to empower the water and for the
ablution.

To disperse vindyakas and call in all devas use the Tejorasyausnisa mu-
dra.” The little fingers and ring fingers are linked and turned into the palm.
Middle fingers are held erect. The fingertips are twisted together. The index
fingers are placed behind the middle fingers halfway down the first joint. The
thuribs wag back and forth. The mantra is ‘On shatorc haramadaniyui so- _
waka” [Om catru pranadane svaha]. Chant it seven times.

--- Page 7 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan's Dual-Ganesa Cult 293

If someone who chants this mantra has frightful dreams, the beasts

and evils he sees in those dreams indicate the anger of King Vinayaka." If
you want to stop such dreams you must humbly beg, “Let there be no an-
ger,” and the next day make fervent offerings of food and drink. Smear water

on the earth to make a round altar about two cubits in breadth. As big as a

plate will also do. For this, roast five kinds of cake and three kinds of radish.

Light fragrant incenses such as liquidambar and frankincense at the altar.

The person doing the chanting should sit at the west end of the altar and fac-

ing the east chant the Mahesvara mantra 108 times. When this is finished you

should confess your errors and leave. Taking the various items from the altar,
place them on a tray and leave the room. Face the west as you go out. Or
~ northwest will also do. You must then intone the mantra ‘‘Saraba yayasha ar-
anja ayui shaka sawa jyakyasha.” After you have recited this and departed,
all will be well. The mantra of Mahesvara is ‘’On bitara sani hara maridani
shindani shindani shindani hindani hindani sowaka.” If you chant this man-
tra 108 times, joy (kangi) will fill your heart— except perhaps in your dreams.
But if you recall the magic of the previous ritual, even that will turn out fine.
iv
Method of making the image. The image must be elephant headed and
human bodied. The left tusk is missing, and the right one broken short. The
head is inclined slightly to the left, and the trunk is bent outward. The image
. has six arms. The left upper hand holds a knife, the middle one a fruit bowl,
and the lower hand a wheel. The upper right hand holds a cudgel, the middle
one a noose, and the lower hand a tusk. You must not grudge the cost when
making the image. Supply whatever it takes. It can be cast, carved, or
painted.
Vv
These great secret rituals of Daishdten are known to very few. In truth,
you must not disperse them freely. Take heed of this warning.

This short work contains, in a nutshell, almost all of the key features
of the early GaneSa texts. Its overall structure is a perfectly typical example
of the genre. Analytically it can be divided into five discrete segments (un-
marked in the original). The first of these is the introductory statement of
three major, and progressively esoteric, mantras associated with Ganesa
(fig. 8).15 This is followed by a locus classicus statement of the iconography
and ritual of the dual form. The third segment begins with three general

--- Page 8 ---
294 James H. Sanford
controlling mantras used to invoke, flatter, and dismiss the divinity, then
details three subrituals: a ritual used to protect oneself from harm, a ritual
used to get rid of vinayakas (including apparently even GaneSa himself),
and a ritual used to end the bad dreams that are likely to follow use of the
second, dismissal, ritual. The fourth segment is a brief, apparently tacked-
on, section that describes the iconography of the six-armed form of the
deva. The fifth and final section is a stern admonition to keep the teachings
in the text inviolate. None of these elements, not even the obviously
stitched-together nature of the constituent segments, is in the least irreg-
ular for this body of texts.

With Amoghavajra’s Ta Sheng T’ien Huan-hsi shuang-shen p’i-na-yeh-
chia fa in mind as contextually most typical and historically most impor-
tant, we can proceed to summarize briefly the other texts of the early

- Chen-yen group and thus provide a more complete sense of the range of
their contents. The earliest of all of these texts would seem to be the Shih
chou fa-ching (Shiju hokyo, ‘‘Scripture of the Mantras and Rituals of the
Gana’’) attributed to Bodhiruci (P’u-t’i Liu-chih; trad. 572 — 727) and its
longer variant, the Ta (Greater) shih chou fa-ching (Dai shiju hokyo), both of
which were probably written between 693 and 713.'° The shorter version
of the work begins with a very sutra-like opening, “‘At that time on Mt.
Keira, Vinayaka and a gathering that included Brahma, Siva, Indra, anda °
host of lesser gods and demons. ... ’”’” It then relates how Vinayaka (al-
most certainly the word is intended as a proper rather than a common
noun) asks Siva for permission to teach the ‘‘one-syllable’’ mantra “On
gyaku kiri on ka un hattsu” for the weal of all sentient beings. Then follows
a passage on the ritual to the dua! Gane§a that is virtually identical to pas-
sage 2in Amoghavajra’s Ta Sheng T’ien Huan-hsi p’t-na-yeh-chia fa.

In the next segment of the text, Vinayaka advises 9,800 demon kings
to make a vow to support Buddhism, to have compassion, and to bring
profit to all sentient beings. He then recites a long gatha. The demons,
moved by this recitation, agree to answer the needs of all who utter the
one-syllable mantra (though they also stipulate 100,000 to 200,000 repeti-
tions as a desirable quid pro quo). A long final mantra to Ganeéa closes the
text.

The Ja shih chou fa-ching is a longer version of the same basic text, a
fact that suggests that both texts are redactions of an earlier non-Chinese
original. The longer version includes a number of elements omitted in the
shorter variant. It begins with the same opening and introduces the same
“one-syllable” mantra. This mantra is then fragmented and each of its ele-
ments associated with a part of the body. Next follows a fairly complex de-

scription of the iconography and ritual of the four-armed form of Ganeéa.

--- Page 9 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Ganesa Cult 295
This passage also includes a number of subrituals to be used for such spe-
cial purposes as attracting love, warding off wild animals, attacking ene-
mies, becoming wise, and so on. The next section lists eight ““vinayakas”
including one that has a goat’s head, a human body, and ox hooves.

Then follows a segment on the dual Gane§Sa icon and ritual that,
again, is nearly identical to that of Amoghavajra (and possibly the model
for that more familiar text). This is followed by a further Amoghavajra-like
section on bad dreams as an expression of Ganega’s anger. Next come the
9,800 demon kings, a gatha, and a vow-of-protection motif, which is im-
mediately followed by a second, detailed but new, version of the dual Ga-
nega icon and ritual. Finally there is a long expository segment that is al-
most surely the annotation of a later hand. |

The Ta Sheng Huan-hsi shuang-shen Ta-tzu-tsai T’ien p’i-na-yeh-chia wang
kuei-yi nien-sung kung-yang fa (Daishoten Kangi soshin Daijizaiten binayaka-6 kie
nenzu kuyo ho ‘‘Ritual of the Mantras and Offerings that Converted the Vi-
nayaka-king Daishoten Kangi, the Dual-bodied MaheSsvara’’), composed
about 723-36 and attributed to Subhakarasimha, contains two important
new elements. '* The first of these is the identification of Shoten and Siva.'9
secondly, it includes an origin story (translated below) that links the
“Hindu” Vinayaka king with the Buddhist Avalokitesvara (Kannon). Both
of these features seem intended to legitimize the dual GaneSa, the link to
Siva giving added general prestige and the link to Avalokitesvara certifying
the Buddhist nature of the ritual. Otherwise, the text is a self-proclaimed
summary of the standard icon, altar, mantras, mudras, main ritual, and
subrituals of the dual GaneSa. Most of these come in bare list form.

There is, in fact, a second GaneSa text attributed to Amoghvajra.
This rather short piece with a quite long title is the Mo-ho P’1-lu-che-na Ju-lai
ting-hui chiin-teng ju Fo san-inei-yeh shen Ta Sheng Huan-hsi P’u-sa hsiu-hsing
pi-mi fa yi-kuei (Makabiroshana Nyorai joei kinto nyu samaya-shin soshin Daisho
Kangiten Bosatsu shugy6 himitsu ho giki, (“Tantra on the Practice of the Secret
Ritual of the Dual-bodied Daisho Kangiten Bodhisattva, the Samaya-Body
Copenetrated by Meditation and Wisdom of the Tathagata Mahavairo-
cana’’).”° Stylistically and in terms of content, this work is somewhat un-
like Amoghavajra’s Ta Sheng T’ien Huan-hsi shuang-shen p’i-na-yeh-chia fa. It

is framed in categories that though quite familiar in the developed Chen-
yen/Shingon tradition are a good deal more sophisticated than those of the
works we have examined so far. For example, it describes the ritual of the
dual GaneSa as a procedure for obtaining four kinds of siddht: siddhi of pro-
tection, of gain, of love, and of subjugation. (The classification follows that
of the four kinds of homa ritual). These benefits, all quite material in na-
ture, come in three grades.”! The upper grade gives one the majesty of a

--- Page 10 ---
296 James H. Sanford

king; the second grade brings fabulous wealth; the third grade provides
adequate food and clothing. In parallel to the material results, there are
three levels of initiatory attainment. The highest class of adept can know
the inner secrets; the middling class can read this tantra; the bottom class
may not even pour their own oil during the ritual but must sit to one side
and let a more developed practitioner conduct the ritual for them.” An in-
teresting sidelight to this text is the amount of space it devotes to justifying
the offering of wine to GaneSa. It calls this “like using poison as a medi-
cine,” refers to wine as Kangi-sui or ‘‘Water of Bliss,”” and asserts that what
is medicine to a good man is poison to an evil-doer. This, like the text’s use
of sophisticated vocabulary, suggests that the dual-GaneéSa ritual is being
incorporated — with some effort — into a more orthodox context.”

One final, though somewhat anomalous, early text that needs men-
tion is the Sheng Huan-hs: T’ien shih-fa (Sho Kangiten shikihé, ‘Ritual of Sho
Kangiten’’) dated at 861 and attributed to one Po-jo-je Chieh-lo.** This
quite brief text describes a mandalic visualization of the dual Ganesa
aimed at obtaining magico-religious powers. A number of secondary di-
vinities including Indra, Agni, Yama, and Vaisravana” (fig. 9) are involved
in the visualizations. Interestingly from a historical perspective are the
two Taoist-type amulets depicted in this text.” It concludes with a long list
of special visualizations such as those that will bring wealth, love, and the
sudden death of an enemy.

There are two primary points to take note of with regard to these
early texts.’” The first is simply their content — what they tell us about the
iconography and ritual of Ganesa. The second is, to repeat a point, that
these texts indicate earlier, and perhaps forever lost, prototypes of un-
known provenance. Though some of them copy and repeat each other,
even the earliest seem to be translations or summaries of still earlier, pos-
sibly fuller, texts that stand behind them.

Japanese Besson Manuals and Their Origin Myths

There is in the Buddhist canon a second series of documents relating
to Ganesa that comprise a single group or genre. These are found in the
encyclopedic besson guides that emerged in Japan at the end of the Heian
period (794-1185). These works are systematic and comprehensive ration-
alizations of numerous “‘single-divinity” texts. They are usually arranged
divinity by divinity and then by iconic subforms. They include massive
amounts of iconographic and ritual detail— often expressed in direct quo-
tation and showing considerable internal repetition.” In the case of the Ga-
nesa entries, much, though not all, of the material is quoted from the early

. sources outlined above. One important new element in the besson compi-

--- Page 11 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Ganega Cult 297
lations is the inclusion of a number of “origin myths.” These appear to
have served two primary purposes. One was to further legitimate the dual
Gane§Sa’s place in a Buddhist context. The second was to make more co-
herent the relationship of the peculiar icon of the dual form to the ritual in
which it was used. These origin myths — of wholly unclear provenance —
are of sufficient centrality from Heian times on to warrant some consider-
able aitention. Below I translate four of them, beginning with the earliest,
which is in point of fact not from a besson encyclopedia, but is the introduc-
tory segment of Subhakarasimha’s Ta Sheng T’ien Huan-hsi shuang-shen Ta-
tzu-tsal p i-na-yeh-chia wang kuei-yi nien-sung kung-yang fa.

Myth One: Vinayaka and Senayaka”’
Jizai-ten is the deva-king, MaheSsvara Daijizai. Uma is his wife. These
two had three thousand children. King Vinayaka was the foremost of the
1,500 on the left. He practiced every sort of evil deed and commanded a host
of 107,000 vinayakas. Senayaka, a deva who held to the good, was first among
the children on the right side. He practiced every profitable action and was_..
the leader of a group of 178,000 followers who fostered fortune, skill, and
good. This King Senayaka was actually a transformation body of Avalokite-
Svara, who, in order to subdue the bad actions of King Vinayaka, took simul-
| taneous birth with Vinayaka so that they would be younger and elder
brother, husband and wife. The iconic shape is that of two bodies united in |
embrace. [Text continues with a description of icon and ritual. ]
The most salient feature of this origin story is its clear separation of
Siva and GaneSa/Vinayaka. ‘’Vinayaka’’ here seems to have only its most
basic sense of demon of obstruction. Good intrudes as a separate divinity,
Senayaka (probably a reference to Skanda,* identified here with Avaloki-
teSvara), whose relationship to Vinayaka is one of subjugation of evil by
good. Since the passage is followed by the standard description of the
dual-GaneéSa icon and ritual, it is clearly intended as an introduction to
them, but the fit seems very forced. Indeed, quite possibly the odd con-
junction of “elder brother and younger brother, husband and wife’’ marks
the juncture between earlier “Hindu” materials and later concern with a
Tantric Buddhist context for the ritual.
Myth Two: The Cannibal King of Marakeira*
Marakeira, again, had a king who ate nothing but the flesh of cows and
radishes. With time, these gradually became rare throughout the land, so
they offered him the flesh of dead people instead and then, when corpses too

--- Page 12 ---
298 James H. Sanford

became scarce, the bodies of living people. At this point the great ministers

and the populace raised four armies to punish the king. But he became the

great demon-king, Vinayaka, and with a host of vinayakas flew into the air
and departed.

After that, the country of the king suffered epidemic illness, and the
ministers and the people prayed for aid through the vow of the eleven-
headed Avalokite$vara. Avalokitesvara took on the form of a female vindyaka
and enticed the king’s evil heart. His heart was thus filled with joy [kangi],
and the sickness left his land and the people were at peace.

The initial paragraph of this myth seems entirely unconnected with
the origin story of Subhakarasimha’s Ta Sheng T’ien Huan-hsi shuang-shen
Ta-tzu-tsai p’i-na-yeh-chia wang kuei-yi nien-sung kung-yang fa, save that again
Vinayaka/vinayaka is a demonic figure (but apparently the living transfor-
mation of a human being). The second paragraph, as in Subhakarasimha’s
piece, identifies the female half of the dual icon with Avalokitesvara (here
specifically the eleven-headed manifestation). It also gives a rationale for
the epithet, Kangi (Great Bliss), and hints at a motif of conversion through
seduction. Mentioned, but not really explained, is the link between Vina-
yaka and the radish. The interchangeability of the radish with bovine and
human flesh probably reflects the Indian sense that the radish, like some
other roots, is an impure vegetable, and thus a fit offering for certain mar-
ginal deities.

Myth Three: The King’s Minister?

In ancient times there was a high minister at court who came to be on
intimate terms with the queen. As soon as he heard of this, the king wanted
to kill his minister. He laid out a great feast and, as was his custom, called
his many officers in to eat it. The king served only elephant meat. He called
the minister into his private quarters to insist that he eat some too.

The queen secretly worried for the man and told him, ‘‘Sir, you must
go to Mt. Keira. There is a lake of oil there. Enter it and wash your body. Then
dig some radishes and eat them. If you do not do this, your life will not last
long, because what you have eaten was elephant’s flesh. You must quickly
take this cure.”

The minister listened to her words and immediately went to that
mountain, where he cured himself according to her instructions and soon
felt bright and well again. But, as his heart was now full of resentment, he
made a vow to the spirit of the mountain to become a demon. His head

--- Page 13 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan's Dual-Ganesa Cult 299
turned into an elephant’s head; he grew a long trunk; he became very strong.
In the dark of the night he presented himself to the queen and confessed his
| lust for her. Thereupon, the queen, by the force of karmic attraction, left the
palace and, standing in his arms, vowed to be his consort. Her body became
as his in form. From that time they have always stood thus, in embrace.
This story seems to be a conflation of myth 2 and an etiological ra-
tionale for the radish offerings and oil ablutions of the dual-Ganesa ritual.
It is interesting that the radish is here a prophylactic to the dangers in-
volved in eating elephant flesh —a pattern that suggests almost a totem-
and-taboo relationship. Further, in spite of his lust, the minister is, unlike
the Vinayaka figure in the first two myths, basically a sympathetic char-
acter.
Myth Four: Avalokitesvara and the Vinayaka King™
There was a mountain called Mt. Vinayaka. This means ‘‘Elephant-
head Mountain.” Another name for it was Mountain of Obstacles. A number
of vindyakas lived there. Their king was called “Kangi.’’ Although he was
head of a limitless host, he received an order from MaheSvara [Daijizai-ten]
, to go into the world of mortal creatures to steal their vitality and block their
paths with obstacles, for at that time MaheSvara was not yet a convert to the
Buddhist dharma. Asa result, the Bodhisattva AvalokiteSvara, heart fragrant
with the sweet sympathy that comes from the power of well-planted roots of
compassion, took on the form of a female vinadyaka and went to the palace of
King Kangi. When he saw her, the king’s heart burst into flames; he wanted
: to touch the vindyaka woman, to embrace her. But she, in spite of having
taken on the form of a Mother of Obstacles, refused to receive his attentions.
The king became very despondent and approached her with [more] re-
spect. Whereupon she told him, “Although I appear to be an obstacle-mak-
ing female, I have from ages past been a follower of the Buddhist teachings.
I wear the saffron robes. If you truly wish to touch my body, you must follow
the same teachings. Can you, like me, be a protector of Buddhism until the
most distant day has come? Can you, like me, protect those who come before
you and foresake setting up obstacles in their way? Can you follow me for-
ever and foresake all evil thoughts? If you will practice these teachings, then
be my dear friend.”
The king responded, “By great, good fortune I now value your way.
Hereafter I will take your advice and protect the dharma.”
Then with a melodious laugh the vinayaka lady embraced the king, and
he achieved Great Bliss [kang].

--- Page 14 ---
300 James H. Sanford

“Wonderful!” he exclaimed. ‘From now on I, and my kind, will follow
your command and protect Buddhism forever. No more will we set up obsta-
cles.”

Thus did he come to know that the vindyaka woman was the bodhi-
sattva Avalokitesvara.

This, the fullest version of the origin of Kangiten and the dual-Ga-
ne§a ritual, is also the most ‘‘Buddhist’’ of the four stories. It is as well
probably the most Tantric in the sense that the Great Bliss that converts the
Vinayaka king to Buddhism is clearly of a sexual nature and is of such po-
tency that it even gives him his name.

The ultimate source of these rather folktale-like origin stories is not
certain, nor is it clear when and how they were connected to the dual ritual
and its texts. The setting for the action of these tales seems to be the ex-
treme northwest corner of the Indian cultural orbit. This is suggestive, but
it does not in and of itself prove their emergence in that region. Once in
place in the Japanese besson materials, these stories became a normative
part of the dual-Ganesa complex.

Kakuban’s Kangiten Koshiki

The late Heian besson texts, though fuller in all their details, represent
nonetheless a fairly direct continuity of intent with the earlier Chinese
texts; their main purpose is still to facilitate ritual concerns. There is one
important Heian text that carries the concern with GaneSa a step further.
This is the Kangiten koshiki (Ritual of Kangiten) of Kakuban (1095 — 1143).
Kakuban was the founder of the Shingi branch of Shingon and the most
important Shingon prelate after Kukai. In terms of impact on the popular
wing of Shingon and the fusion of folk and “‘great tradition” values, he is
the paramount figure. In this regard it is not too surprising that in his Kan-
giten koshiki Kakuban elevates the elephant-headed deva to new heights of
eminence and respectability. His text is too long to translate in full, but an
excerpt or two will illustrate the direction it takes.*

The merits of King Daisho Kangiten reach higher than the heavens;
the profit [he extends to others] is broader than the earth is wide.. He defends
the dharma in every direction. His Original Ground is as Lord of Universal
and Wondrous Enlightenment, a rank [the nature of which is concealed] as
if it were hidden in a spotless moon. The Manifest Trace takes on the form of
a male and female deva.* This transformation form drifts down like a cloud
into this world. It holds the unfailing power of a vow of Great Compassion

--- Page 15 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Ganesa Cult 301
that profits all creatures. Wealth and wisdom, courage and love can all be _
drawn from that vow. With it you can subjugate demons, dispel sickness,
and extend life, just as you wish. .. .

King Daisho Kangiten is the root source of yin and yang. From him the
ten thousand images are born.” He is the teaching king of the Womb and
Vajra mandalas from which all Buddhas are born. In the Mitsugon Paradise
he appears as Vairocana. ...
[In the dual form] the male deva is a transformation body of Mahe-
Svara. He drives off both celestial and earthly demons and distributes profit
in this world and the next. The female figure is a transformation of Avaloki-
tesvara’s eleven-headed form, the most potent of her thirty-three forms.
These two standing in conjugal embrace represent the union of yin and yang.
That they have elephant heads and human bodies is to show the copenetra-
tion of all ten realms.™
In this text we see the equation of Kangi not only with Siva but also
_ with the central Buddha of Shingon, Mahavairocana (Japanese: Dainichi).
Even if this is seen more as an instance of henotheism than as apotheosis
pure and simple, the elevation is striking, as is the inflation of language
seen throughout the text. Kakuban’s words are much quoted by later de-
, votees of GaneSa; indeed, they eventually reach an importance on a par
with these of Amoghavayjra. .
Tankai Shonin, The Shaman-Saint of Mt. Ikoma
Between Kakuban’s Kangiten koshiki and the seventeenth century,
mentions of GaneSa, other than those found ina few Shingon texts that are
little more than repetitions of earlier works, are quite scattered. The lack
of new materials does not, of course, tell us anything about the popularity
of the dual ritual. It may well have had a number of regular adherents all
along.*? This paucity of documentary evidence changes radically with the
emergence in the Tokugawa period of Hozanji temple near Nara. Since its
founding early in that era, HOzanji has been the center of Japanese Ganesa
worship. It has long maintained, and in recent years published in readable
_ transcription, a sizable collection of primary documents on the popular
cult of Kangiten.*° Chief among these are the various biographical ac-
| counts of Tankai Shonin (1629-1716), the founder/revitalizer of the temple.
There also appear to have been a number of popular tracts about the mir-
| acles of Kangiten produced in the Tokugawa period, but I have not myself
seen any of these and know of them only from a few snippets in quotation.
A variety of pilgrim guides and tracts were also written at or for Hozanji.
| These continue to be produced even today. |

--- Page 16 ---
302 James H. Sanford

The life and legacy of Tankai (1629-1716), also known as Hozan Osho
or Hozan the Monk, is of sufficient interest to invite a full-length treatment
on several counts— and enough materials survive to allow such a study to
be done with relative ease. Here, however, I would like only to sketch out
the life of this unusual monk with enough detail to cast some light on three
issues: the nature of GaneSa as he is perceived in this fully developed Jap-
anese cult devoted to him; the historical origins of the cult; and the style of
the biographical materials associated with this movement and its founding
figure.

The following account largely consists of paraphrase summary or di-
rect translation of some key passages in the Hézan Osho gyojé (Acts of the
Monk Hozan) written in 1697 by Tankai’s disciple, Rentai (1663-1726),
while Tankai, though aged, was still alive.*’ Though its tone may seem to
us fictive and legendary, these impressions are more the result of the ha-
giographical conventions used than of the author's distance from the basic
events of Tankai’s biography. I have for the most part, even in summary
paraphrase, tried to echo the hagiographic tone of the original text. Where

* [make analytic comments, the shift is clearly signaled.

The monk Tankai, also known as Hozan, was born in a small hamlet
in Ise province. He was artistically precocious, and because of this his par- ~
ents initially refused to let him enter Buddhist orders. Nevertheless, in

- 1646 at age eighteen, Tankai left home and went to Edo (modern Tokyo),
where he became a lay ascetic and eventually received several esoteric ini-
tiations.*? He also made extended journeys to Mount Koya and Kyoto,
where his studies included both the Buddhist tradition and the Confucian
classics. Throughout this period, as befit his ascetic nature, he also main-
tained a rigid program of fasting, chanting, and repeated pilgrimages to
Mt. Atago.

Doubtless as a result of his constant practice, Tankai, though still a
youth, soon began to experience a series of potent dreams in which he en-
countered and was advised by such Buddhist deities as Sakyamuni, Jiz6
(Ksitigarbha), Avalokitesvara, and Maitreya and such major Shinto kami as
the sun-goddess Amaterasu, Hachiman Gongen, and the god of Kasuga.
In one of these visions Amaterasu predicted that Tankai’s austerities could
not fail to bring him the siddhi he was so ardently seeking but also warned
him of the dangers that would surely come to him through the envy of his
great gifts by the worldly.

Among the divinities that Tankai had honored ‘‘from the beginning”
was Kangiten, the deva of bliss, and he too soon appeared in the lay monk’s
dreams. Indeed, he appeared in such diverse forms (though, significantly,
not initially in the dual form) that Tankai at first doubted his dreams. But

--- Page 17 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Ganesa Cult 303
subsequent omens soon convinced him of their spiritual authenticity, and,
as a result, he made a thousand-dipper water offering to Kangi. This
brought him a dream encounter in which the deva sent him to Kyoto to es-
tablish a small hall devoted solely to the worship of Kangi.

After Tankai had spent two years at the Kangi Hall his old master in
Edo, Shuko, summoned him back to take charge of a project to build a
shrine to Hachiman. At first Tankai was loathe to leave Kyoto, but a dream
from Kangiten authorized his departure, and the deva even promised di-
vine aid in completing the project. But after an early good start the venture
began to falter. At this unexpected turn of events Shuko was filled with
SOIrTOW
but Tankai was angry. ‘‘Kangi told me it would be sure to be completed
in 1666 or 1667; has the divinity now sold me out?”’ he demanded. And he
went before the altar intending to perform an oil ablution himself and had
others prepare a bun offering. Suddenly Tankai developed severe stomach
pains that rent him both physically and mentally. His followers said to him,
“This illness came on with extreme suddenness. How is it that the ritual
brings no attainments? You had better take some rest.” Tankai paid no atten-
tion to this advice, but made the firm vow, ‘‘Whether seven days, or a
hundred days, or a thousand, I’m not going to rest until either I get a re-
sponse or die first.’’® Then he took a purifying bath, changed his clothes, and
crawled to the sacred precincts.
On the night of the fourth day an old man appeared [in a dream] from
| the southeast. When Tankai looked closely, he saw it was Hachibei of the Mi- .
noya, though there was no indication of the meaning of this. At dawn on the
fifth day, Tankai dreamed that a young boy came by and placed the sum of
two hundred ryo on the altar. He had a wondrous voice that left Tankai filled
with joy: When on the seventh day Tankai left the altar to report to Shuko,
Shuko stood up in surprise and asked, “After all this time was there still
nothing accomplished?’’“ Tankai laughed and replied, ‘The deva has ac-
cepted the offering; the attainment will follow shortly.” Shuko, full of joy,
was thanking Tankai for his efforts when suddenly there was a knock at the
door. When Shuko asked who it was, the response came, ‘‘Hachibei of the
Minoya.” Just as had been predicted, he came with two hundred ryo tucked
up in his bosom. A bit later Watanabe Osumi no Kami added his strength to
the project. Unasked, he had on his own gathered a great treasure so that in
no time at all it was possible to complete the shrine.
This key passage requires us to step back a bit and look at the text
with an eye to some submerged meanings. On the surface we seem to

--- Page 18 ---
304 James H. Sanford

have, after a rather unexpected hitch or two, an eventually successful col-
laboration by Tankai and Kangiten. But just beneath that smooth surface
we can sense currents that indicate a surprisingly strained relationsnip be-
tween the monk and his tutelary guardian. Kangi is, it appears, given to
jealousy and fickleness. He claims to support Tankai’s religious goals, but
actually wants all the attention himself. Further, he is ready to punish any
perceived unfaithfulness in a very direct manner. Only increasingly elab-
orate rituals, it turns out, will keep him happy.

In response to Kangi’s growing demands, Tankai increased his ritual
observances by performing several one-thousand- or two-thousand-day
oil-ablution ceremonies. It was, indeed, in the middle of one of these—on .
the five-hundredth day of a one-thousand-day ceremony — that Tankai
was finally rewarded with a vision of Kangi’s true form.

On the five-hundredth day, the deva appeared in its true form. The fe-
male deva had the aspect of a beautiful goddess, with a human torso and an
elephant’s trunk. She was seven feet tall, with her long trunk hanging be-
tween her breasts and an unopened lotus flower standing in adornment on
her head. The male divinity was imposing and stern, like a hero. He had an
elephant head, and the rest of his body was human. Both his trunk and his
tusks were extraordinarily long. But Kangi knew innumerable other divine
transformations as well. When Tankai asked if his hopes would meet success
or not, the deva gave him a host of signs. For example, Tankai always sat in
lotus posture on a rope bed in order to keep from sleeping, but when he hap-
pened to doze off Kangiten would rub his head to make him wake up. Tankai
sketched out the form of the divinity that he had seen, then cast a sculpture
of it.*

The gift of this vision was bestowed only with some expectations at-
tached. Their nature was soon made clear to Tankai.

One night Tankai had a dream. He had cut some clothes for himself
that were exactly like those worn by the deva. Kangiten came before him and
said, ‘‘Promise to become my follower. I will quickly give you your heart's
desire.”’ Tankai answered, “‘I left my home to take up a life of austerities in
order to attain Buddhahood. Grant me entry among the ranks of the Bud-
dhas.” But the deva replied, “That is not my samadhi. I will give you whatever
you want in this life, and sovereignty in the next. Is that not enough?’ Tan-
kai asked, “Can I, then, attain the Lordship of a major divinity like your-
self?” The deva answered, “To obtain the divine power of sovereignty, as I
have, required me to perform a thousand years of meditation atop Chok6

--- Page 19 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Ganesa Cult 305
mountain.” “The life of a human,” responded Tankai, ‘‘does not reach one
hundred. How can I hope for a thousand years?” “These thousand years will
pass like a night's sleep,’’ promised the divinity. Tankai thought to himself,
“T took Shoten to be the Soverign Lord, MaheSsvara, but if he is a vindyaka and
I now become his devotee, how will I fulfill my goal of becoming a monk?”
When Tankai voiced these doubts to Kangi, the deva scowled and said to him,
“Your idea that I was Mahesvara Vinayaka was a great mistake. I ama trans-
formation of a vinayaka whose name is Daisho Kangiten. I am called ‘’Great
Lord” because the other vinayakas all follow me. My name shows that I am
unlike the other vinayakas. | distribute joy to the people of the world; Iam the
avatara who brings their deepest wishes to profitable fruition. If you do not
know this, look into the ancient books of the Mandala Temple of the Ono lin-
eage."”

Tankai still had his doubts. He told no one about all of this, but then
one day as he happened to be passing by one of the halls of Toji [in Kyoto],
he saw on a desk there a one-volume text labeled ‘Bibliography of the Ono

: Mandara-ji Temple.’” When he asked further about this, he learned that it be-
longed to the Ono [lineage’s] Zuishin-in Hall. This led him to look at the Ka-
kuzen-shd, in which he found a secret commentary on Shoten that said, “In
the Records of Chishé Daishi, the rituais to this deva are included in the section
headed ‘MaheSvara,’ but this is a great error.* This divinity’s special char-
acteristic is that of lord of siddhis, thus he is called ‘Jizaiten.’ He ought not to
be confused with any other jizai ten.’’ All of Tankai’s doubts were melted

, away by this text, but he still had no desire to become a devotee of Kangiten.

As his hesitation extended into days, the divinity continued to importune

him.

By this time in his life Tankai’s devotion had become increasingly di-
rected toward the higher goal of spiritual liberation and toward specific
reverence of the Bright King, Fudo Myoo (Acalanatha Vidyaraja). Finally
Tankai became determined to transfer the GaneSa hall in Kyoto, and its nit-
ual obligations, to his disciple Shahan.

Thereafter Tankai took the monk Ennin as master, received the Bo-
dhisattva vows, and became a fully ordained monk. The Kangi hall he trans-
ferred to Shthan. Shthan told him, “I want to continue in your footsteps and
likewise be a master of this powerful dharma. I would be most grateful if you
would aid me in an offering ceremony to Kangi to seal the transmission.”
Tankai could not refuse, but during the oil ceremony he told the deva, “This.
ceremony will mark the beginning of a long farewell between us. Pray give
your support to Shthan hereafter.” The angered Kangiten responded, “‘]

--- Page 20 ---
306 James H. Sanford

cannot say what will happen if you abandon me, but you, at least, will see a
lifetime with no tranquility.” And every hair on the deva's arm stood on end
as he scowled at Tankai with eyes that seemed full of blood. Later. . . just as
might have been expected, Tankai contracted an illness that no treatment
could cure. ‘This affliction is all because I angered the deva,”’ he realized.
‘‘Perhaps I had better show some remorse.” And he prayed, “I am thinking
that I should practice your dharma every day as I used to do. I seek forgive-
ness.” That evening Kangiten came to him in a dream and in a gentle voice
told him, ‘You think that all the troubles you have encountered were due to
me, but that is quite wrong. Although I was angry at first, my feelings have
mellowed since then. Do not imagine I could hate one who has stirred his
bodhicitta and taken the precepts. What is there to be angry at in that? I would
not interfere with the workings of karma.”

However, in spite of the pious claims made in this passage, when
somewhat later Tankai entered a period of deep meditation, Kangiten sent
in hordes of his followers to harass the monk.

Sometimes his whole body was shaken. At other times he was attacked
by disturbances in his chest. The vinayakas appeared in horrible forms; they

- came before him as beautiful women, naked and with silky skins; they came

before him in the beastly form of a herd of vinayakas. Tankai paid no attention

to any of it. He relied on the rite of Manjusri’s ‘One-line Samadhi’ and sat
cross-legged for two hundred days, never speaking, never sleeping, rising
only to eat or to go to the latrine. Meditation and yoga brought him ease until
suddenly he attained the realization that all dharmas are of one quality, that

the passions are themselves enlightenment. ,

In 1678 Fudo My6o revealed the existence of Mt. H6zan, ‘‘a miracu-
lous place that is neither a dream nor a reality,’ to Tankai and bade him
move there and reestablish a temple on a site that had long gone to ruin. In
order to mollify Kangiten, Tankai promised to make a statue of the ele-
phant-headed deva, to install him as a guardian of the mountain, and to
continue to perform oil ablutions to him. In return Tankai asked of Kangi,
“... Only that you will protect me and aid me to attain siddhi.”’

By 1680 Tankai had gathered numerous followers on Mt. Hozan and
had been able to build a temple complex, which he called ‘“Hozanji.’”” The
chief deity of the temple was Fud6, but in accord with his promise Tankai
also erected a special Kangi hall as well. But when Tankai attempted to
withdraw into silence and perpetual meditation, Kangi became angered
once more.

--- Page 21 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan's Dual-Ganesa Cult 307

One day Tankai encountered obstacle after obstacle, until finally he

took a three-pronged vayra in his hand, entered the samadhi of Kundali, and
began to intone the mantras.*! Kangiten appeared then and told him, “These
obstacles have been my doing. Stop these prayers and listen to me. When
you need something, you worship me, but when you don’t need anything
you cast me aside hatefully. But though you cast me aside, I have never aban-
doned you. And even though I gave you good omens from the outset, you
still haven’t attained enlightenment. ... When you were in Kyoto you vowed
to observe my ritual for twenty years. Next year the term will be complete.

But even if you then abandon me, I will not turn away from you. Still, it

would be best if you were to continue to worship me as you did long ago.

What profits have your bitter efforts in the search for the Inner Buddha
brought you? The statue you and your disciples have built of Fud6 will not
satisfy your needs. I am the transformation body of Vairocana. I am the se- |
cret deity within the Buddhist dharma who brings the attainment of siddhi. If
you propitiate me, all the vows you have made will be accomplished.”
. The tug of war between Fudo and Kangiten for the attentions of Tan-
kai was not concluded until around 1688, when Tankai’s spiritual resolve
finally became so firm that even Kangi was forced to give in.
Tankai considered further, ‘Although the great deva has remonstrated
with me several times, a heart set along the Way is not easy to turn back, and
I cannot accept his command. I have practiced the cereal and salt abstentions
and foresaken worldly wealth. To me, profit and fame are like drifting
clouds. Therefore, although I do not take the worship of Kangiten lightly, it
cannot be like it was in the old days. Thus | have been afflicted by the deva’s
reproaches and received bad omens. But, the deva is Daisho Gongen, the
great saintly avatara, and ama mere mortal. Even if I carry out the oil cere-
mony for him, how can such a crude offering affect his pleasure? Yet I will
see that my disciples daily make such offerings and pray that the deva will
grant me his compassion and mercy and be my protector.” Kangiten replied
with a laugh, “I must let you off. Hereafter, there will be no more obstacles.

You may practice your austerities in peace.”

The rest of Rentai’s biography is but a paean of praise to Tankai’s
(thereafter unobstructed) success in expanding Hozanji. The final para-
graphs of the biography show the now sixty-nine-year-old Tankai to be a
virtual living Buddha. |

--- Page 22 ---
308 James H. Sanford

Hozan is now sixty-nine, but due to his having taken the spiritual
medicine of Maitreya’s tantra, his face is not aged. And though he eats but
once in every ten days — and even then without enthusiasm — his vigor is
undiminished. Day and night he intones the incantation of compassionate
salvation, one-hundred, perhaps two-hundred thousand times. A mirror
moon resides in his lotus heart, where the fires of wisdom exhaust the tinder
of illusion. Due to the yoga of nonobstruction of the Six Elements, he has at-
tained the state of nyiiga ga’nyu. Due to the power of his prayers, he has gone
beyond the many and into the Singularity, ‘’A.”” The Buddha state is proven
in his own body.” His glance sees everything; his slightest thought produces
everything. For if any activity is participant in all activities, what cannot be
accomplished? If each accomplishment is participant in all accomplishments,
who will not rejoice? |

In the excerpts given above we have primarily looked at the relation-
ship of Tankai and Ganesga. Much more could be gleaned from this and the
other hagiographical accounts of Tankai, and still more from the massive
collection of other documents preserved at Hozanji. But at this juncture I

, want to press the discussion of the history of the GaneSa cult at H6zanji on
one point only. This is the continued tension between two cultural levels— |
popular and elite. We have already seen this issue within the biography in
at least two ways. One is the disparity made between Fud6 as representa-
tive of normative, “high culture,”” enlightenment-oriented Shingon, and

-  Gane§a/Kangiten as a powerful, but somewhat untrustworthy provider of
worldly benefits whose basic appeal is to the vulgar needs of the vulgar
masses. This division is echoed, unconsciously perhaps, in the biogra-
pher’s depiction of the dual nature of Tankai himself, since Tankai begins
his career as a lay ascetic, a shamanic holy man of the sort ordinarily as-
sociated with popular culture, and only quite late in his life is fully ac-
cepted and fully ordained and thus fit to fill the standard hagiographic role
assigned to orthodox temple founders.

This intriguing, perhaps dialectically creative, tension of levels per-
sists at Hozanji even to the present day. For although it is clear that pil-
grimage to the Kangi hall in order to ask for performance of rituals to Ga-
nesa provides the bulk of the temple’s impressive wealth, Kangiten
himself is still relegated to a place of marginal importance in comparison
to that of the central deity of the complex, -Fud6.* This can be seen in a
number of ways, of which I will single out only two. In spite of his eco-
nomic importance to the contemporary temple and in spite of Tankai’s own
lasting, if ambivalent, connection to him, there is at H6zanji only one hall
to Kangi, a hall marked simply, almost halfheartedly, by a single sign-

--- Page 23 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan's Dual-Ganega Cult 309
board. By contrast, Fud6 is celebrated in numerous statues that, in a psy-
chological sense at least, surround GaneSga and indeed seem intended to
tuck him entirely out of sight.

Even more telling is the parallel arrangement of the official pilgrim-
oriented souvenir guidebook of 1978, Hozanji.** This work begins with
sixty-seven pages of glorious color plates of the many halls of Hozanji, of
its major statues and paintings (including fourteen of Fud6), and of the im-
portant art treasures owned by the temple. There is in this official presen-

tation, however, not one plate of the Kangi hall, nor any representation at
all of Ganesa.* The text is arranged in somewhat similar fashion. It begins
with a twenty-five-page history of the temple and its environs. It then
moves into a second chapter of about the same length and in rather easy
Japanese, the primary goal of which seems to be to persuade the reader
that, contrary to popular belief, Kangi is more interested in bringing spir-
itual solace than in providing worldly benefits. Finally it closes with an ap-
pendix of one of the classical Japanese biographies of Tankai, a text that
must present considerable difficulty to the vast majority of its readers.

The generally tendentious nature of the guidebook’s selective pre-
sentation in and of itself makes it perfectly clear that the ordinary pilgrim
to Hozanji is indeed interested first and foremost, not in the enlighten-
ment values associated with Fud6, but instead in the worldly benefits
available through the Kangi rituals. It is also almost certain that that same
pilgrim will carry off the mountain not only the official guidebook but also
one of the small under-the-counter dual-GaneSa statues sold for home
worship in religious-goods shops outside the precincts of the temple
proper.” |

7 The brief outline of Tankai’s life given above brings to a substantial
end our summary foray into the primary documents associated with the
Japanese worship of the dual GaneSa. A full, sociologically sound study of
the living Japanese cult of Kangiten would, of course, be an added valuable
contribution. One might, for example, be able therein to trace the historical
development of an early analogue to the quasi-shamanic and nativist-mil-
lenarian movements of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries that go in
Japan by the general rubric shinko shiikyo or ‘‘New Religions.” A full study
would, however, constitute not simply a chapter but a whole volume. In
the present, more limited, and primarily documentary summary we can-
not delve very deeply into such issues. I do, however, want before conclud-
ing this essay to touch, even if a bit unsystematically, on three issues that
are not documentary per se. Firstly, I want to provide the reader with some
picture of the worship of the dual Ganega in contemporary Japan. Then |
would like to pose a speculation or two about the underlying meaning of

--- Page 24 ---
310 James H. Sanford

the unusual but ritually specified items offered during the oil ablution. Fi-
nally, I want to provide suggestions regarding the possible origins of the
twin-bodied icon.

Contemporary Praxis in the GaneSa Cult

As suggested above, a complete treatment of the contemporary prac-
tices as Hozanji and related temples would require extensive, multidisci-
plinary investigations.°” What follows is not such primary work. Rather it
is a survey of a limited number of secondary sources and is particularly
indebted to two works written by Muraoka Ku in Japanese and the one
substantial English language article pertaining to these matters that I
know of, D. C. Holtom’s half-century-old ‘Japanese Votive Pictures (The
Ikoma Ema).’’** Let me, borrowing rather heavily from these sources, out-
line a typical pattern of devotional involvement in the Kangi cult at Ikoma.

GaneSa is in Japan (as elsewhere) one of those numinosities whose
importance lies in his control of the dangerous aspects of life, aspects that
he can either inflict or withhold at will. In the case of Ganesa the commod-
ity in question is “‘obstacles.’” However, since the question of having prob-
lems is a relative one, it takes only a moment's thought to realize that to
have obstacles withheld from oneself is tantamount to being blessed.
Thus, though Gane§a’s innate character may be negative, his actual utility
can be positive. From this it follows quite naturally that devotion to Kangi
often takes on the pattern of a crisis cult.

According to Matsumoto Jitsudo, the Abbot of Hozanji at the time of
Muraoka’s visit there in the early 1970s, conversion to the cult typically oc-
curs in several stages. Initially someone is brought to the temple by a friend
who is already a member of a Kangi-oriented confraternity (k6). If at-
tracted to the cult, the newcomer may go through a long period that in-
volves no more than monthly pilgrimages to Ikoma with this group. But at
some time or other, given the normal ups and downs of life, some business
or personal problem that needs immediate help is bound to occur. At this
juncture the previously casual ‘follower will be moved to arrange for a full-
scale oil ritual.® If the problem is not resolved by this, the newcomer can
either leave the cult or find reason to try some further petitioning. If the
petitions (initial or continued) seem to work, the follower has, of course,
good cause for a strengthened association with the temple, at least on an
occasional basis, and should dramatic improvement in a situation be ef-
fected at some point, he or she is likely to become an ardent supporter and
a proselytizer of his or her friends.

--- Page 25 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan's Dual-Ganesa Cult 311

A central feature of the modern practice that does not seem to figure

. in the classical texts is the offering of ema votive placards at the outer mar-
gins of the temple. These are presented as an indication of a vow of tachi-
mono, the sacrificial abstention from some pleasure in exchange for in-
creased benefits in some other arena or at some later time. In the case of
Ikoma, such placards typically contain the word kokoro, “heart,” written in
blue on a yellow background. Through this character is painted an old-
fashioned Japanese lock to ‘fasten the heart up.”” Above the locked heart
is a symbolic representation of a particular abstention to be undertaken —
a die for gambling, a pipe for smoking, and the like. Often there is a short
text that further specifies this. I quote five of these directly from Holtom’s
article.

1. Aman of forty-five vows to abstain from betting on Mah Jong for a period
of three years, beginning May 25, 1935.

2. A man born in November of 1897, the year of the cock, vows to abstain -
from stock speculation and deceptive practices connected with stock sell-
ing for a period of three years. ,

3. Aman of thirty, born in the year of the rat, vows to abstain from women,
with the exception of his wife, for a period beginning May 1, 1929, and
ending May 1, 1934.

4. A woman of twenty-nine, born in the year of the horse, vows to sever re-
lations with men for the rest of her life, with the exception of her present
man, forty years of age. Accompanied by a prayer for health and long life,
for prosperity in shelter and sustenance, and for success in the vow.

5. A man of twenty-eight, born in the year of the dragon, vows to abstain
from meat and women for a period of one year, excepting relations with a
woman of twenty-seven, born in the year of the hare.“

Muraoka and Holtom’s reports of specific attitudes and ideas held by
devotees at Ikoma help to clarify several features of the ritual. As can be
seen from the inscriptions on a number of the ema, it is possible to ask
Kangi for favors that are of a fundamentally immoral nature, for he will
“grant boons that other Buddhas and bodhisattvas would turn away
from.” This, in turn, legitimates the expense one must be willing to bear
in sponsoring the ritual. For if one hopes to see unworthy, virtually im-
moral, aims effected, he or she cannot, in exchange for such special favors,
expect to get by with less than expensive rites and serious sacrifices. Week-
long oil rituals, complex food-offering rites, and subsidiary gifts of sub-
stantial amounts of money (to a degree in lieu of the costly images speci-

fied in the earliest Chinese texts) are simply part of the price one must
gladly pay. Further, since the benefits of the cult are preeminently more

--- Page 26 ---
312 James H. Sanford
worldly than spiritual, the insistence that devotees eat the offerings them-
selves underscores and legitimates the underlying goal of selfish satisfac-
tion. (An alternative explanation of this ‘“anamoly”’ is discussed below. ) Fi-
nally, we must note that the erotic imagery of the Kangi statues mirrors,
and probably encourages, the sexual nature of many of the vows (includ-
ing numerous petitions for revitalized sexual powers that both male and
female followers present). While few modern devotees would perhaps
want to follow the early texts’ prescriptions for invoking Kangi to provide
the death of an enemy,” the general amorality and this-worldly instru-
mentality of the cult are, in point of fact, of a piece not with the spiritual-
ized representations of Kakuban’s Kangi koshiki or the modern Hozanji
prelates’ official guidebooks, but with the basic goals of the oldest strata of
literature associated with the cult. That such “archaic” values have main-
tained themselves for over fifteen hundred years—and in spite of repeated
efforts to modify them— is a compelling testimony to human nature.
Radish, Buns, and Wine
One of the most intriguing features of the Japanese worship of Ga-
| ne§Sa is the nature of the three standard offerings made to Kangi: wine,
radishes and kangi-dan or ‘‘bliss buns”’ (fig. 6)— particularly the latter two,
since they are not only Kangi’s “favorite foods” but also serve as his spe-
cific iconographic attributes.

That the radish is phallic and the bliss bun emblematic of female sex-
uality is, I think, unarguable. Since everyone knows what radishes and
carrots look like, we need spend little time on these save to note that simply
as a locution the Japanese word for radish, daikon (‘‘big root’), is especially
susceptible to a sexual interpretation and is, further, quite similar to the
common word for penis, dankon (‘male root’’). Like GaneSa’s broken tusk,
and trunk, the radish has fairly obvious sexual connotations.®

The kangi-dan bliss buns are a bit more curious, primarily in that they
are a manufactured item rather than an object of nature, like the radish.
This ‘“‘made”’ quality in fact opens them to wider ritual uses than those
available for the radish. Ingredients can be varied in accordance with the
particular boon one is seeking from Kangiten. It is true that Japanese kangi-
dan are clearly descendants of the round modaka confections that the Indian
GaneSa loves to excess, but the womb-like shape given them in Japan un-
derscores their transformation into a sexual symbol— though a good deal
of room would be left for metaphors of consumption and insatiability by
any sweetmeat form. Together, of course, these two offerings parallel the

‘v0 halves, male and female, of the dual icon. But whereas that duality can

--- Page 27 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Ganesa Cult 313
be taken to represent a philosophical unity, the radish and bliss bun show
quite directly Kangiten’s primary connections with worldly profit, the ac-
quisition of the lower siddhi.* In like fashion, the forbidden nature of wine
underscores the radically selfish, at times antinomian, nature of the cult,
and this is surely the original reason for its use in the ritual.©
Possible Sources of the Dual-Gane§a Icon

Iconography can be of particular value in tracing the history of a di-
vinity, for certain iconic forms are limited to, or at least typical of, certain
regions and not others. Regarding the dual-GaneSa image, this is particu-
larly true of its duality —two figures that are to be construed as one—and

_ the erotic posture of the image. Erotic images of Ganesa are by no means
\ unique to Japan. There are, first of all, some yab-yum forms found in Tibet
_and Nepal. Indeed, one speculation might be that the dual Kangi of Japan
is basically a bowdlerized version of a yab-yum form borrowed from central
Asian or Tibetan Buddhism.® I am unconvinced of this, however. It is my
suspicion that the female half of the dual Kangi represents, not a borrow-
_ ing of a Buddhist form of GaneéSa, but a fairly direct amplification of or
adaptation of the attendant devi-of the boon-giving Ucchista Ganapati
form of Hinduism.

The Ucchista Ganapatya school is one of six major forms of Ganega
worship catalogued in classical Indian sources. According to Anandagiri’s
work of about the tenth century, the Sankaravijaya, this was a left-handed
Tantric cult led by one Herambasuta. The name of the group derives from
the term ucchista, ‘leftovers,’ possibly in reference to the foods left over at
the end of a ritual offering to the deity or, more likely in a Tantric context,
to foods deliberately left in the mouth in order to render them ritually im-
pure.”

According to Anandagiri, Herambasuta held several unorthodox
views.

I have become content that there is no other view [mata] that can compare

with this one. According to the teaching of the left-hand path, Ganapati and

Devi are part of one another: just as, though the self [jiva] is smaller than the

lord [isa], even so they are one. This is my view. Having taken up both ways

of thinking [the orthodox and the Tantric] I have put the marks of this sect on

my forehead and left off all other marks ... I have drunk from the well of

highest knowledge. So I am born into bliss and acquired the knowledge of
/ the three worlds.® ,

--- Page 28 ---
314 James H. Sanford

The object of meditative visualization prescribed by Herambasuta is
described in Anandagiri as follows:

They meditate on Ganapati as follows: four-armed, three-eyed, each hand

holding a noose, axe, and a gesture relieving fear, with the tip of his trunk he

sucks up wine.
Except for the wine, this form seems rather far from the dual-Ganeésa im-
age. However, Herambasuta also speaks of a second image used in wor-
ship.

The image the Hairamba Ganapatis worship is one who is seated on a great

throne, in whose left lap sits the goddess (Devi) whom he embraces while the

tip of his trunk touches her sexual organ [bhaga].

This iconic form, which moves us a bit nearer the Japanese dual im-
age, is also listed by T. A. Gopinatha Rao as one of six Sakti-Ganegsa
forms.” Rao notes especially that the icon is supposed to consist of a large
figure of the elephant-headed god who is flanked by a reduced figure of a
human female attendant. Further,

[Ganapati] should be reddish in color; he should be seated upon the padma-

sana, with a nude Dévi, and should be shown as if he is making attempts for

coition ... [and/or]... the fourth hand should be touching the private parts
of the naked figure of the associated Dévi. This god should have three eyes
and be of dark colour. He should wear on the head a ratna-makuta. The nude

Dévi should be sitting on his lap; she should be decked with all ornaments

and have only two hands. The name of the goddess is Vighnésvari, and it is

particularly stated that she should be sculpted beautifully.

Rao goes on to note that actual sculptures often do not follow this tex-
tual form. For example, in the case of the four-armed Ucchista Ganapati
statue of the NagéSvarasvamin Temple at Kumbhakonam, Rao tells us that
Ganesa

has four hands, and carries in three of them the parasu, the pasa, and a mo-

daka, while the fourth is employed in embracing the goddess. The proboscis

of the image is touching the private parts of the goddess, who is herself car-
rying a flower in her left hand and is touching with her right hand the private
parts of Ganapati.”

--- Page 29 ---
Literary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Gane$a Cult 315

Rao neglects to mention that Gane§Sa’s “private parts” are fully and
blatently erect in this statue. One might also note that the sitting posture
of the Devi, due to the scale difference between herself and GaneSa, is
hard to discern; only close examination shows that she is not a standing
figure. (This seems, in fact, to be a feature common to the attendant devis
in all of the Sakti-GaneSa figures illustrated by Rao.)

It is, however, in the Knotan region that we come even closer to the
Japariese dual forms. Consider for example the following passage from M.
K. Dhavalikar’s ‘‘GaneSa Beyond the Indian Frontiers.” ;

Another figure [at Khalik] shows GaneSa seated on a cushion with prabha-
valaya at the back. He wears a crown and jewelry on his person. The trunk is
turned toward the right and he appears to be looking at the female attendant
on his left. He has four arms, each holding a radish, a modaka, an indistinct
object and one hand is seen resting on the thigh. He wears a bluish lower
garment.”

, Though the figure has four limbs, is blue instead of red, and is
seated, the crown and jewelry, the set of the trunk and head, and the at-
tributes of this image all recall elements of the Japanese dual forms. The
move from these Ucchista GaneSa forms to the Japanese dual-Gane§Sa icon,
though not enormous, would, however, require that the female attendant

_ grow to equal size with her consort, take on his elephant head in place of
her own human visage, and shift from a side-by-side posture to one of a
face-to-face embrace. Such a process might well have been hastened if this
image were to become conflated with elements of another unusual iconic
form, that of the ‘female Ganesa,” the goddess Vinayak1i.

This ‘freestanding’ goddess has very old and apparently complex
roots. Agrawala insists, on quite defensible grounds, that this figure is not
to be confused with GaneSa’s regular human-headed consorts, Buddhi
and Siddhi. For although she is an offshoot of Gane§ga, she very early on
became a separate, if minor, divinity in her own right, across Hindu,
Buddhist, and Jain contexts.” The earliest textual reference to an icon of
Vinayaki is the second-century Buddhist text, the Aryamarijusrimilaka pa
but a richer description is that given by the sixteenth century author ori-
kumara in his Silparatna. According to this source Vinayak is

from the neck upwards an elephant and whose lower body is of a youthful

female, has vermilion-red colour of the evening, a corpulent belly, the breasts

which make the bodily frame bow down owing to their weight, and beautiful

--- Page 30 ---
316 James H. Sanford

hips; is shining with two proboscises which are (like) two great chains of

molten gold.”

Agrawala, noting especially the twin trunks of this figure, believes
that Vinayaki derives from the vertically split Ardhanarisvara form of Siva
combined with his gakti, Ambika. Srikumara’s description, though late
chronologicaily, would represent a fairly early stage of the logical devel-
opment of Vinayaki in which (as Ambika) she was still fused with her con-
sort. Eventually the two halves of the figure would have divided and Vi-
nayaki become an independent deity.”* To this reasonable, though not
proven, supposition I would like to add one more possibility. If the Ar-
dhanarisvara, or some similar semidual form, were the source of the in-
dependent Vinayaki image and divinity, it might equally have helped to
inspire a twinned form along the lines of the Sino-Japanese dual type as
well. The parallel development of such a dual form might, in fact, have
been even easier in a fairly early Buddhist, and central Asian, context,
where any emerging orthodox Hindu conceptions about GaneSa or ©
Vinayaki would carry relatively little compelling authority.” Indeed, the
nonorthodox Hairambas (or their precursors) could well have effected,
emerged from, or simply shared common ground with the Buddhist (pos-
sibly proto-Buddhist).devotees of such a dual, male-female Ganapati.

At this point I would surmise that whatever the direction and source
of the lines of transmission of the GaneSa literary corpus that eventually
made its way to Japan in the 800s, the iconography would seem to have old
roots in India followed by some particular refinements in central Asia and
that, further, the original Indian roots were part of, or prototype to, the
Ucchista school of the Ganapatya tradition.”¢ But these issues have already
taken us well beyond the reach of my own training and competence and I
can, thus, offer them only in the most preliminary and tentative fashion.
NOTES

1. This view is found alike in works as old as Alice Getty’s Ganesa: A Mono-
graph on the Elephant-faced God (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1936), 78, and as
recent as Dwijendra Nath Bakshi’s Hindu Divinities in the Japanese Buddhist Pantheon
(Calcutta: Benten Publishers, 1979), 94.

2. Darant jikkyo in Japanese. T901; 18:785-897 (GaneSa entry at 884-85). T re-
fers to the modern Japanese ‘Taisho Tripitaka’’ edition of the Buddhist canon,
Taisho shin.shu daizokyo (Great Scriptural Collection Newly Edited in the Taisho Era),
ed. by Dai :oky6 Kankokai (Taipei: Hsin-wen Feng, 1975). References to T in these
