--- Page 1 ---
“Vatapi Ganapatim”: Sculptural, Poetic,
and Musical Texts in a Hymn to Ganega
_ Amy Catlin
Introduction
Te spirited musical paean to GaneSa by the revered nineteenth-cen-
tury “‘trinity’’' composer Muttuswami Diksitar is easily the most well
known of all classical South Indian, or karnatak, compositions. A signifi-
cant percentage of the thousands of formal concerts in Madras each year
open with the “inevitable Vatapi.”? Indeed, hardly a single procession of
blaring nagasvaram oboes and penetrating tavil drums passes by without
its raucous rendition of the Sanskrit kritt, a classical pre-composed song
form that evolved from the more popular group song forms, the kirtan and *-
bhajan. Students of karnatak music learn this song in the early weeks of
study, and its fame has continuously increased for nearly two hundred
years: the ragam and the kernel of the composition have even spread to
North India.

Several factors contribute to its great popularity. It praises the ele-
phant-headed god of beginnings, who is a favorite of many Hindus; it is set
in an auspicious, novel, and relatively simple but melodious ragam, or
musical mode; and perhaps most of all, the bright and jaunty melody of the
composition itself captures the playful quality of Ganesa’s personality.

Yet, far moreso than in Western music, every performance of ‘’Vatapi
Ganapatim” is different, due to the importance of improvisation in karna-
tak music. Thus the roles of permanence, variability, and change are cen-
tral to understanding the work. How, then, can we describe the range of
variability in the different texts and performances of the work? And which
elements of synchronic variation have produced diachronic changes in the
piece, based upon the written, oral, and recorded sources available to us?

141

--- Page 2 ---
1442.) Amy Catlin |

In answering these questions, we will posit three distinct structural
levels in the composition, each allowing different degrees of variability and
change. The first, the core level, is a deep structure of tune and text and is
the most stable; the second, middle level allows moderate variation; and
the third, or surface, level supports and seems to demand a high degree of
individual variation, sometimes resulting in diachronic change.

To establish these levels, we will examine here the poetic texts, mus-
ical texts, and descriptions of early performances of the piece, as well as
recordings and contemporary performances. But first, we must turn to the
sculptural ‘‘text,”” the stone image known as the “’Vatapi Ganapati” that is
thought to have inspired Diksitar.

Sculptural ‘Texts’: The Two Vatapi Ganapatis

Muttuswami Diksitar often organized his Sanskrit compositions into
sets around a single theme (e.g., the nine planets), sometimes focusing on
a particular deity of a temple (e.g., Mayavaram Abhayamba). One unique

_ set, the ‘‘Sodasa Ganapati Kritis,’”’ is dedicated to the sixteen Ganapati
statues found in and around the enormous temple in his birthplace, Tiru-
varur. These included the Maha Ganapati and the Panca Matanga Mukha_ ©
Ganapati, as well as the so-called Vatapi Ganapati, which the present pa-
per addresses. The tradition associated with this particular statue is still
active in Tiruvarur today, and one version has been related in the historical
novel Sivakamiyin Sapatam (The Vow of Sivakami) by R. Krishnamurthy, the
renowned Tamil writer best known by his pen name, “Kalki.”

Vatapi (the name is a corrupt form of the place-name Badami) is lo-
cated in the present Bijapur District. After the Pallavas under Narasimha-
varma | (630-68) conquered Badami, tradition holds that an image of
Ganapati was brought as booty from there to the Tanjore town of Tiruccen-
gattangudi. This was the home of the Pallava general Paranjyoti, a Tami-
lian who later changed his name to Ciruttonda and became a Saivite saint.‘

The oral traditions associated with the image are questionable even
from the start, however, as there is no Ganapati listed among Paranjyoti/
Ciruttonda’s other war trophies.* According to Meister, the Ganesa was
later installed in a secondary shrine, where it now remains on the south
wall of the ardhamandapa (fig. 1). It is located in the precincts of a larger
temple that was formerly known as the Ciruttonda Ganapatisvara. Meis-
ter considers this to be a rebuilding dating from about 988 A.D.

At some later date, the idol evidently served as an inspiration for an-
other Ganapati in the Tiruvarur temple (fig. 2). There it is also called “’Va-

--- Page 3 ---
“Vatapi Ganapatim’ 143
tapi Ganapati,” although it lacks any significant similarity to the earlier im- -
age. This ‘‘copy” is the statue that Diksitar’s song addresses, one of the
many subsidiary deities of the temple. Both idols are still being worshiped.

Photos of these images have not previously been published, al-
though one drawing of the Tiruvartr idol appeared in 1946. This sketch,
by the artist Chandrasekharan, was used for the cover of the weekly Tamil
literary magazine, Kalki. It was commissioned by the journal’s editor, R.
Krishnamurthy, for the 23 June 1946 issue, containing his own article ‘’Va-
tapi Ganapati.’”°

Robert L. Brown contributes this commentary on the two images:

The Vatapi Ganapati [fig. 1] is still in worship at the Ganapatisvara
temple in Tiruccengattangudi. That it is a seventh-century Chalukyan im-
age, the one brought back by Ciruttonda from Badami, appears, however,
unlikely. Judging from the photograph, the image fits best stylistically with
tenth - eleventh century Chola representations of Ganesa. Typical of Chola

s images is the enormous body with the belly resting directly on the support
and with the spindly legs and arms. The lower arms are held next to the body
and the hands are clenched with the large fingers clearly delineated. Very
characteristic of Chola-period GaneSas is the long, thin trunk that curls
against the body and holdsa single round modaka (the om-shaped trunk men-
tioned in the song).”? Few seventh-century Chalukyan Ganesas have been

identified, so it is difficult to compare the Vatapi Ganapati with images sim-

ilar to ones we might suspect relate most closely to that brought from Bad-
ami. As far as Iam aware, no three-dimensional examples exist today from
Badami. One seventh-century example from another Chalukyan site, Alam-
pur, shows little relationship to the Vatapi Ganapati.* We might speculate
that when the Ganapatisvara temple was rebuilt at the end of the tenth cen-
tury (ca. A.D. 988),? a Chola Ganapati statue of about this date was installed
and called the Vatapi Ganapati.

The copy from Tiruvarur [fig. 2] is even further stylistically from the
supposed Chalukyan prototype, and also has little relationship to the Tiruc-
cengattangudi image. It is difficult to draw very precise conclusions from the
photograph, but because of such characteristics as the folded-legs posture
(virdsana) and the depiction of the image in relief within the leaf-shaped
stele, a date as late as the seventeenth—eighteenth century is possible. What-
ever its date, we can say that the Tiruvarur Ganapati is only very distantly a
copy of a Chalukyan prototype, and that the Tiruccengattangudi Ganapati
appears likewise to be a ‘copy’ of the proposed image brought from Badami
by Ciruttonda.

--- Page 4 ---
144 Amy Catlin

Meister’s date of 988 for the rebuilding of the temple could thus be
associated with the installation of a new, Chola Ganapati. Dr. F. L’Her-
nault has similarly identified the Tiruccengattangudi idol as Chola. Her
observations are that the four hands, in clockwise order, hold the pasa
(noose, upper night), modaka (sweet), pustaka (manuscript), and ankusa
(goad). It is located in the subshrine of the southwest corner of the yard of
the Siva temple, a normal location for a subshrine dedicated to Ganapati.
Its height is 61 cm. L’Hernault cites the Tiruvarur Ganapati as holding the
manuscript pustaka (upper right hand), the second hand resting on the
hip, the third not clearly holding anything, and the fourth, holding a veg-
etable. It is located in the gallery of the inner enclosure, also in the south-
west corner (see fig. 3). Walls have been erected between two pillars of the
gallery to form a small shrine.’

In any case, both figures resemble the Taruna GaneSa type described
by V. Ramasubramaniam. A noteworthy feature of the later icon, however,
is the rare right-curving trunk, called Valamburi Ganesa (Tamil: valamburi,
turning toward the right). Specimens have been noted in Mysore, at Val-
lam Village in Tanjore, and at Karuppathur on the Cauvery."!

Thus, the sculptural ‘‘text’’ for Diksitar’s composition is actually a
complex of history, oral tradition, and sculptural variations on the icono-
graphic theme of Ganapati. We will now see how the poetic text of the song
relates to these antecedents.

Poetic Texts

The Vatapi Ganapati is praised by only one poet-singer, the Smarta
Brahmin Muttuswami Diksitar. Diksitar is the author of more kritis in San-
skrit than any other karnatak composer, and his skill in the language is of-
ten praised. Frequently his songs are grouped, as in the sets of nine kritis
to the nine planets, five to the five lingas, and in this case, one to each of
the sixteen Ganapatis at Tiruvarur. Like many of his Ganapati composi-
tions, this song is a doxology of attributes of the god and the icon ad-
dressed. The choice of GaneSa as a subject complies with the great popu-
larity of the deity, who must be invoked by Hindus before worshiping any
deity or undertaking any important task. Ganesa’s association with song
is revealed in no less than 140 epithets linking him to music and speech;
one scholar has even cited the epithet “Ganapati” or “lord of song.””? Only
two of the more than one hundred iconographical forms of Ganapati, how-
ever, show a vind in one of his hands.

The following is a transliteration, with literal and paraphrased En-
glish translations of the Sanskrit text, based on the published Telugu and
Tamil script versions, said to be taken originally from Diksitar’s grantha (a

--- Page 5 ---
150 Amy Catlin

Tamil script designed for writing Sanskrit) manuscript, which is no longer
extant. It was prepared with the help of T. S. Parthasarathy, Sanskrit
scholar and Secretary of the Madras Music Academy, and Hartmut
Scharfe, Sanskritist and Professor of Linguistics, UCLA. They did not al-
ways concur, as the published versions are not without flaws; any errors
resulting are mine alone.

Like most kritis, the song is in three sections, called Pallavi, Anupal-
lavi, and Caranam (theme, aftertheme, and verse). When sung, the first
line recurs as a refrain after each section, all the other lines functioning as
compound adjectives modifying the noun of the first line, Ganapati. These
characteristics and attributes do not describe a complete Ganapati, but
rather they present selected physical and metaphysical qualities of the de-
ity. Some of these attributes bear explanation here. He is called “devoid of
passion,” vitaraginam in line 3 of the Anupallavi, as the South Indian Ga-

| ne§a is typically a bachelor. The “pot-born sage’”’ of line 1 of the Caranam
| refers to the sage Agastya, who was born of a water pot. Later Agastya car-
ried a pot to Siva for holy water during a drought, which Ganeéa spilled at
Indra’s request, and then restored in order to fulfill Agastya’s wish.
Hence, Agastya became a follower of Ganega.'? Following Tantric symbol-
ism, Ganapati is believed to reside in the figure of a triangle (Caranam, line
2) and in the muladhdra cakra of the human body, at the perineum; this is
also a name of a shrine in Tiruvarur and perhaps a reference to the trian-
gular stele surrounding the image (Caranam, line 4). His om-shaped trunk
is a reference to the curling line of the Sanskrit letter; the crescent moon
comes from his father, Siva; the noose symbolizes control of the bonds of
samsara, the restraint of passion."4 Finally, two mudras or signatures occur
in the final two lines of the text. One is for the composer, guru being Dik-
sitar’s mudra; the other is the name of the ragam, Harnsadhvani, which is
gracefully woven into the final line of the Caranam.
Musical Texts I: The Ragam

The name Hamsadhvani, the ragam or musical mode Diksitar chose
for his song, is usually translated as “The Voice of the Swan,” although the
hamsa is strictly speaking a ruddy goose, whose voice is traditionally be-
lieved to have a sacred character. Sarasvati, the patroness of music, poetry,
and learning, rides either the hamsa or a peacock. Since ancient times, the
term hamsa has been used for poetic meters, as well as for one of the deva-
gandharvas.'° Thus, the hamsa was associated with the arts of music and
poetry long before the ragam was created about two hundred years ago.

--- Page 6 ---
“Vatapi Ganapatim’ 151

The ragam is said to have been created by the composer's own father,
Ramaswami Diksitar (1735-1817), first appearing in 1790 in the Sarngraha
Cudamani, a cadjan-leaf manuscript by Govinda.'¢ Ramaswami’s two com-
positions in Harhsadhvani are a varnam and a laksya prabandha (composi-
tion that explains a ragam) that describe the various features of the new ra-
gam in a text praising the Siva Nataraja (Lord of the Dance) idol at
Chidambaram."

The composition sounds unusually accessible to Western listeners to
whom karnatak music often seems foreign and incomprehensible. This
may be in part due to the rhythmic underlay of the text, which stresses a
lively emphasis of beats 1, 4, and 7 in an eight-beat cycle. Accenting the
normally weak beats 4 and 7 creates a sense of syncopation, as in the “3 +
3 + 2” rhythm often found in Indian music.

Furthermore, the radgam is very compatible with Western tonality.
The five tones of Hamsadhvani— C, D, E, G, and B — occur in the
Sankarabharana meld, which is roughly equivalent to our Western major
scale. These five notes also comprise our tonic and dominant triads, the
two fundamental chords in Western music. Western influence may indeed
be at the root of this feature. Ramaswami Diksitar listened to considerable
amounts of English band music while he was under the patronage of the
zamindar Venkatakrsna Mudaliar of Manali, whose father had been a du-
bhas (bilingual, i.e., a translating agent) for Governor Pigot and the East
India Company. While in the Mudaliar circles, Ramaswami became so in-
terested in English music that he asked his first son, Muttuswami, to com-
pose Sanskrit devotional texts for at least thirty-three English band tunes,
among them ‘’God Save the Queen.” His third son, Balaswami, learned to
play the violin. Given these enthusiasms, it is not farfetched to suppose
that his ragam Harmsadhvani might have been influenced by English mu-
sic. The influence, however, would have been limited to elements compat-
ible with Indian musical sensibilities. |

Although Ramaswami's other two sons were also composers, Mut-
tuswami was the only one to compose in this ragam, and the kriti ‘’Vatapi"
was his only composition in Harnsadhvani. He otherwise preferred the
more traditional —and usually more complex — karnatak ragams. Saint Ty-
agaraja learned of the ragam, probably from Govinda’s work, and com-
posed his still-popular ‘““Raghunayaka Ni Padayuga”’ in Hamsadhvani.
Other karnatak composers since have employed the ragam, and even Hin-
dusthani musicians have composed khyal in it.!® Today’s Hindusthani mu-
sicians continue to play Harhnsadhvani; in December 1988 alone, no fewer
than three concerts of Hindusthani classical music reviewed in the na-

--- Page 7 ---
152 Amy Catlin
tional newspapers included Harnsadhvani. It is even something of a spe-
cialty of the sitar maestro, Ustad Imrat Khan.

According to the Tantric school of thought to which Diksitar be-
longed, the seven musical notes are given symbolic associations. Shadja,
the note sd, or the fundamental pitch, is said to be born of the muladhara
cakra, a center of energy located in the perineum, and over which Ganapati
presides. This cakra in turn symbolizes the prithvi tattva, whose bija or seed
is gandharva, the note ga, or the third degree of the mode, and whose con-
sonant note a fifth above is nishada, the note ni. Nishada is believed to have
as its corresponding sound in nature the sound of the elephant, another
link to Ganapati. Taking the initial consonants of the two notes ga and ni
(without the retroflex position in the latter), we have the initial consonants
of the first two syllables of Ganapati or Ganesa.'’ Since the three notes, sd,
ga, and ni, belong to Harnsadhvani, the others being pa, the fifth degree,
and its fifth, ri, the second degree, Muttuswami Diksitar may well have
had Tantric reasons for selecting Harmsadhvani for worshiping Lord Ga-
neSa.

He might also have been attracted by the unique leaping contours of
the ragam, which somehow capture the jovial nature of Ganesa. These
gaps, especially the one emphasized in the composition between the lower
pa and the middle ri, help create the image of a dancing, leaping Ganapati,

_ and give the musician scope to make sweeping ascents into the upper reg-
isters. While these observations are subjective and cannot be proven, it
seems likely that one reason for the charm and success of the composition
and ragam are their suitability for conjuring up the image of a very much
enlivened Ganapati.

Musical Texts II: The Composition

According to tradition, Diksitar wrote down his texts and composi-
tions as he composed them, laboring like a true scholar of Sanskrit and mu-
sic, and unlike some other composers who spontaneously composed
while singing. Unfortunately, none of his autograph manuscripts are ex-
tant. Nevertheless, countless Diksitar compositions are still performed to-
day, transmitted through his descendents and eleven important students.
Diksitar’s youngest brother, Balaswami, had a daughter whose son Sub-
barama he adopted.” Subbarama (1839 — 1906) learned his great-uncle’s
compositions from his grandfather and guardian, Balaswami. Upon the
urging of Cinnaswami Mudaliar, a remarkable publisher of hundreds of
karnatak pieces in Western notation, and Diksitar’s patron the Rajah of Et-
tay::puram, Ventakeswara Eddappa III, Subbarama published the pieces

— he tad Jearned, including both texts and svara (syllabic) musical notations

--- Page 8 ---
“Vatapi Ganapatim” 153
in Telugu script in the volume Sangita Sampraddya Pradarsini in 1904. The
English preface to the volume describes his initial reluctance to publicize
the tamily tradition:

Sri Subbarama Diksitar, though unwilling at first to part with what he natu-

rally regarded as a precious heirloom to be jealously guarded and retained

in his family, yielded in the end to the wishes of his master and patron, the

Rajah.?!

It was evidently the jajmani relationship between the royal and musical
families that gave weight to the argument for publication, as well as the
choice of the Telugu script, as the patrons were Telugus, whereas the mu-
sicians were Tamils.

The Sangita Sampradaya Pradarsini of 1904 is a treasure of seventeen
hundred pages, containing seventy-four musical biographies and assorted
essays On various musical subjects, as well as detailed notations and texts
for 229 kritis of Muttuswami Diksitar, and hundreds of other pieces by
other composers. A new set of Telugu type was created for the project,
which was one of the early printing ventures in the South, including spe-
cial type for the musical ornament signs devised by the author. The follow-
ing examples (figs. 4 and 5) show the title page of the work, the ““Vatapi”
composition as it appears therein,” and a Western staff transnotation of
the composition, with Roman transliteration of the text to show underlay
with the melody.

With sponsorship from the national Sangeet Natak Akademi, the
Madras Music Academy began in 1961 to republish the 1904 Telugu volume
of notations and texts in Tamil script, responding to the needs of the grow-
ing and by then predominantly Tamil-speaking community of musicians
and music students of Madras. The committee of editors also sought to
correct problems arising from the use of Telugu script for the Sanskrit
texts, employing numerical superscripts with the Tamil letters to represent
Sanskrit characters not found in the Tamil alphabet.”

The Tamil edition is arranged according to scale type, or melakarta;
five volumes have been published to date. ‘“Vatapi Ganapatim” is found in
volume 4.74

While this is the main source for the composition today, one remark-
able earlier publication contains a staff notation of a fragment of ‘“Vatapi.”
Before making Subbarama Diksitar’s acquaintance, Mr. Cinnaswami Mu-
daliar published the first two sections, Pallavi and Anupallavi, of the al-
ready renowned composition in 1896, as an issue of his serial, Oriental Mu-
sic in European Notation.*> The “‘play’’ within is described on the title page
as

--- Page 9 ---
154 Amy Catlin
Academy of the Divine Art:
A Series of Pseudo-Dramatic Musical Disputations
in 72 Divisions, Discussing in the form of a diverting
and entertaining Dialogue all the debatable and doubtful
points connected with the Divine Art, as cultivated in the
East as well as in the West, etc.

The passage on “Vatapi’’ is introduced by praising the ragam, Ham-
sadhvani, as a unique pentatonic mode with the fourth and sixth degrees
omitted. After a notation of a kriti in Harnsadhvani by another trinity com-
poser, Tyagaraja, the dialogue proceeds between Gana, ‘“A sound scholar,
fairly advanced in Music, but anxious to learn the Staff Notation,’ and Vai-
nikka [i.e., a-vind player], ‘“A Professor of Oriental Music, ignorant of the
European system.”

GANA: “If there’s anything in a name, and if the Bard of Avon be called a

Swan, surely this RAGA deserves its name — its gait, so discerning in its se-

lection of notes—and so true to the proverb that in sipping the milk it sepa-

| rates and rejects the water. [Presumably this refers to the ragam’s exclusion.
of the non-overtone notes, the fourth and sixth degrees. ]
“Here’s one more example — the popular melody of the yreat Dikshi-
tula.— VATAPIGANAPATIM:

This notation (fig. 6) is particularly interesting because of its highly
detailed depiction of ornaments, anticipations, and syncopations, usually
eliminated in indigenous alphabetic notations. Very possibly, Mudaliar
transcribed it himself by ear, after hearing someone sing the piece. A vio-
linist in his employ customarily sight-read his notations as a check for ac-
curacy, perhaps with the performer attending to make corrections. This
document departs delightfully from standard notations available today,
and, incomplete though it may be, speaks eloquently of the musical liber-
ties and style of performers at that time.

According to orally transmitted accounts of the activities of one mu-
sician of that era, the renowned Maha Vaidyanatha lyer sang ‘’Vatapi’”’ at
the beginning of virtually every performance. He repeated the lines while
incorporating his own variations called sangatis, a standard technique
used by all kriti performers today. As he was one of the most famous mu-
sicians of his time, the composition received wide acclaim through him,
and is said to have been passed down to the present day in the form he gave
it.” Indeed, the most widely circulated recent notation for the piece is that
of P. Samibamoorthy in Tamil, which contains the following acknowledg-

--- Page 10 ---
“Vatapi Ganapatim™” 155
ment: “All the sangatis in this kriti were added later by Maha Vaidyanatha
Iyer, 1844—1893.’8 It is also probably due to Maha Vaidyanatha lyer’s influ-
ence that “most concerts of karnatak music open with the song vatapi gan-
apatim.”’?? However, in response to this tradition, and also for the sake of
variety, the Madras All-India Radio adopted a policy of not broadcasting
the piece.*° Nevertheless, many performers began their radio concerts
with the ragam during the period of my research (1976-78), but then pro-
ceeded with a different, less familiar composition. Thus a new tradition
has been established within the present century: the ragam Harnsadhvani
has absorbed one of Ganapati’s attributes and is now associated with aus-
picious beginnings.

Musical Performances
The purely musical elements of the krit: to Vatapi Ganapati are per-
haps the most ephemeral of all the aspects we have examined, and they
differ most widely with each performance. We have seen how the two
sculptural images, as well as written notations of the piece, vary, and in
actual performance the renditions are even more variable. The variability,
however, can be seen in three degrees, following three posited structural
“levels’’ of the composition, which correspond to the Schenkerian back-
ground, middle ground, and foreground. In other words, the core level of
_ the composition is the most stable, and the surface level permits the great-
est degree of liberty.*!
The core level of maximum stability was found to consist of the poetic
text, its rhythmic setting within the composition, and the basic contours of ,
the melodic setting. The middle level, permitting a medium degree of var-
iability, consisted of such elements as tempo, pitch range, repetitions, and
the structural points at which improvisation takes place. The surface level
of maximum variability includes such elements as vocal or instrumental
timbre of the performer, idiosyncrasies of ornamentation, expressive fea-
tures, and other stylistics.* ,
The Texts in Performance
Just as an image of GaneéSa or any deity may be depicted in different
media— bronze, stone, wood —a kriti’s performance medium is variable.
Perhaps the most noticeable difference among the performances is the fact
that half are vocal and the other half purely instrumental, employing the
vind (lute), nagasvaram (oboe), violin, or clarinet. In such instrumental ver-

--- Page 11 ---
156 Amy Catlin
sions, the role of the poetic text is altered. Only the audience members
who already know the poetic text can appreciate the relationships between
the instrumentalist’s musical expression and the poetry. But the instru-
mentalist may only be thinking of the poetic text intermittently; at other
times, he may be completely involved in the purely musical elements of
performance. Similarly, the listener may vacillate between thinking of the
poetic text and concentrating on the purely musical performance, even at
times enjoying its variance with other performances he might have heard
of the musical text. This creates a realm of communication between artist
and listener that draws upon memories of earlier renditions and a mentally
pondered poetic text, either of which may be referred to only sporadically,
thus defying close scrutiny. Nevertheless, it is a powerful element in any
karnatak instrumental performance. Further, the devotional realm of dis-
course expressed both nonverbally and within the poetic text participates
in the basic foundation of all South Indian music and culture. This devo-
| tionalism forms yet another subtext to performances of all kritis, including
; this one.

Similarly, and as for all Hindu deities, Ganesa’s depiction may vary
in size from miniature, as found in home altars, to the larger sculptures
found in temples. Likewise, a kriti to any deity may be performed in min-
iature, following the core of the composition without extensive develop-
ment and variations, or on a grand scale. Thus, the dimensions of a per-
formance are less a result of the length of the poetic and musical texts than
a result of the performer's decisions concerning repetitions, variations, im-
provisations, and tempo. These may be mitigated by external circum-
stances. For example, the recording medium plays a critical role; a 78-rpm
record can hold only about three minutes. Another time when brevity is
normal is at the very opening of a concert, when the lord of beginnings is
worshiped in song. Chitti Babu’s three-minute vind version in a swift
tempo epitomizes the brief invocatory style of performing ‘‘Vatapi’’ at the
commencement of a recital as a tribute to the remover of obstacles. Later in
a formal concert, however, the performer lengthens one or two central kri-
tis, after warming up with introductory pieces and shorter renditions of
other kritis. The two performances cited here of ‘“Vatapi’”’ in such a central
position are over twenty minutes in duration and show how the piece can
expand to occupy the central focus of a recital.*> Here, far more time is
given to developing the ragam Harnsadhvani before the kriti begins, as well
as to improvised solfége passages and other elaborations. The creative as
well as devotional involvement of the performer is highlighted above that
of the composer of the poetic text during such ‘‘central’’ renditions.

There are two features that make this kriti to Ganega unique, how-
ever. The first is the way in which the composition parallels the deity’s tem-

--- Page 12 ---
“Vatapt Ganapatim” 157
poral and spatial position within Hindu ritual and cosmology. Just as he is
found most often at the proper right of the entrance, where circum-
ambulation begins, in his subsidiary shrine within a temple devoted pri-
marily to some other Hindu deity, ““Vatapi Ganapatim’’ occurs most fre-
quently at the opening of a concert. In both cases, Gane§ga’s unique
character as the lord of beginnings is central.*

But Ganapati also occurs as the central figure in home shrines and
entire temples dedicated to him. Max Miller has referred to this context-
sensitive propensity of Hindu deities to be worshiped separately, but
equally, as ‘““kathenotheism.” This finds a further parallel in performances
of ““Vatapi Ganapatim,” where the kriti may occupy a central position of
importance. Just as the image becomes the object of more elaborate rituals
when worshiped as a central deity, the basic outlines of the kriti are highly
developed and elaborate when the kriti is featured as a central piece in a
concert. In the former case, the “‘work of art,” the image, does not change.
In the latter case, however, the ‘‘work of art,”’ the musical and poetic text

of the kritt, becomes refashioned by the performer's devotion and creativ-
ity. The texts then function more as blueprints or designs, to be embel-
lished and filled out by an artist in the role of performer. |

The second unique feature is the depiction of Ganapati’s affective

_ Character in his mode of the jovial, dancing, and playful child, whose be-
heading and reheading created such a seriocomical problem for his par-
ents. Diksitar’s delightful and rhythmic melody, which darts about in a
manner quite unusual for the generally sober style of karnatak music, em- :
bodies that essence. Elements of the same character can be seen in some
visual images of Ganapati, as well as many dance depictions and musical
expressions. Certainly the melodic and rhythmic aspects of this kriti epit-
omize that aspect of GaneSa. We can safely say that, here, the musical ele-
ments of ‘“Vatapi Ganapatim” speak more eloquently of Ganapati’s be-
loved nature than do either its sculptural antecedents or its poetic text.
There can be little doubt that it is primarily Diksitar’s inspired music, more
than his poetry or manipulation of iconographic allusions, that has so ef-
fectively captured the imagination and affection of South Indian musicians
and listeners.

NOTES
1. The three composers belonging to South India’s “trinity” of saint-singers
are Diksitar (1775-1835), Tyagaraja (1767-1847), and Syama Sastri (1762-1827).
2. R.S., “R. K. Suryanarayana Concert,” The Indian Express, Madras, 13 Au-
gust 1977.
