--- Page 1 ---
; Images of GaneSa in Jainism
poo Maruti Nandan Tiwari and Kamal Giri
(; anesa or Ganapati, the remover of obstacles and bestower of success
| (siddhi), has been invoked at the beginning of most auspicious cere-
¥ monies, and also at several other occasions like death, in Vaidika or Brah-
. minical tradition for over two millennia.'! During the early medieval times
(ca. ninth century A.D.), the Jainas and the Buddhists also incorporated
. GaneSa into their pantheon and held him in esteem. This assimilation took
lc place only after the development of a separate Ganapati cult in the early
« Gupta period (ca. fifth century A.D.).?

| In later Buddhism, GaneSa has been conceived as the god of obsta-
I} cles in place of their remover. Hence in the Vajrayana and cognate Buddh-
4 ist art he has frequently been depicted as a subdued god being tram~led
x by Buddhist deities like Aparajita, Parnagabari, and Vighnantaka. Accord-
| ing to the Buddhist text Sadhanamala (A.D. 1165), the twelve-armed Ga-
41 nesa, riding a mouse, is endowed with three eyes and one tusk. Ganeéa,
Y potbellied (ghatodara) and in dancing posture, holds an axe, arrow, goad,
(| thunderbolt, sword, spear, pestle, bow, skull-scepter, skull, and his own
4 plucked-out tusk. Another Buddhist text, the Nispannayogavali (twelfth
4 century A.D.), visualizes him with four hands and as carrying trident,
t sweet-ball (ladduka), axe (parasu), and radish (mulaka).°

: Contrary to the Buddhist conception of GaneSa as obstacle creator, in
i} Jainism he has always been worshiped solely as the remover of obstacles
{and bestower of success. According to the late Svetambara Jaina work, the
| Acaradinakara of Vardhamanasuri (S. 1478/A.D. 1412), Ganapati is propi-
1 tiated even by the gods in order to obtain desirable things.‘ It is further
| mentioned that he is worshiped at the beginning of every auspicious cere-
| mony or new project. This tradition is still very common in the Svetambara
‘| community. The text also gives the pratisthavidhana, the proper visualiza-
| tion, of the image of GaneSa. The popularity of GaneSa is not met with in
|

101

--- Page 2 ---
102. Maruti Nandan Tiwari and Kamal Giri
the Digambara texts.° Excepting two medieval figures carved in the Di
gambara Jaina caves at Udayagiri and Khandagiri in Orissa and an earl
figure from Mathura, his representation is not found at Digambara Jain.
sites. It may be underlined here that the Svetambaras were liberal towar«
assimilating Brahminical deities into their fold, a fact reinforced by the in
clusion of several Brahminical deities and their different forms like Siva
Brahma, GaneSa, Vaisnavi, Gauri (or Ambika), Krsna, and Nrsimha, whe

} were visualized and represented in visual manifestations respectively a
Kaparddi, Yaksa, Brahmasanti Yaksa, GaneSa, CakeSvari Yaksi, Mahavi
dya Gauri (and Yaksi Ambika), Krsna, and Nrsirmhha. The episodes fron
the life of Krsna, such as his birth in prison, Kaliya-damana, and his othe
balalilas, along with the scene of Holi and also the Bali-Vamana episode ar
represented in the Vimala-vasahi and Luna-vasahi (Delvada, Mt. Abu, Ra
jasthan). :

, The worship of Gane§Sa in Jainism, judging from the visual evidence
began around the ninth or tenth century A.D. The earliest Jaina GaneSa 1
from Mathura, a figure associated with that of an image of Jaina Yaksi Am
bika and dating to the ninth century A.D. A later (tenth century A.D.) Ga
neSa is located at the Mahavira temple at Ghanerav in Rajasthan. Also dat
ing to the eleventh century are Ganesa images in the small Jaina shrine
(devakulikas) at Osian in Rajasthan. The earliest Jaina literary reference t
GaneSa is even later, in the Abhidhanacintamani of Hemacandra (ca. th
third quarter of the twelfth century A.D.), while his more detailed iconog
raphy is enunciated still later, in the Acaradinakara (A.D. 1412).

The Abhidhanacintamant refers to several appellations of GaneSa, suc!
as Heramba, GanavighneSa, and Vinayaka, and visualizes him as ele
phant-headed with one tusk, potbellied, and bearing an axe while ridin
on a mouse mount.* The Acaradinakara conceives the one-tusked and pot
bellied Ganapati as possessing 2, 4, 18, and even 108 arms, but the attri
butes of only the 4-armed variety are given in this text. According to thi
work, Ganapati rides on a mouse and makes the boon-conferring gestur
(varada-mudra) with one right hand and holds an axe in the other, while th
corresponding left hands show the safety-bestowing gesture (abhaya-mu
dra) and the sweet-ball (todaka).’

A Survey of the Images
About twelve figures of GaneSa are reported from different Jain
sites. They range in date from the ninth to the fifteenth certuries A.D. an
come mostly from western India. Among these western Indian images ar
seven figures carved in stone and fully in the round. These images fun

--- Page 3 ---
| Images of Ganesa in Jainism 103
_| tion as tutelary deities and are located at the doorframes and the basement
| | (pitha) of Jaina temples. Their absence on the main facade suggests that in
_. Jaina temples Gane§a has never been given a very prominent position.

_ One independent brass figure of Gane§a (ca. fifteenth century A.D.) from
7 western India may also be Jaina. Apart from these three-dimensional ren-

derings, GaneSa is also carved in the surrounding frame (parikara) of the

_ image of the Jaina Mahavidya Gauri in the Vimala-vasahi (Delvada, Mt.
Abu, Rajasthan). Outside western India, we find only three examples of
_ Jaina Gane§a that date before the fifteenth century A.D. Of these, two are
, carved in the Ganesa and Navamuni caves in Puri District of Orissa, while

_ the remaining one is on the pedestal of an image of Yaksi Ambika (of

. twenty-second Jina Aristanemi or Neminatha) from Mathura.

Looking now in detail at these images, the Mathura (U.P.) image is
_ the earliest example of a Jaina Gane§a, assignable to ca. ninth century A.D.
(fig. 1). The image is now on display in the Archaeological Museum, Ma-

’ thura (acc. no. D.7). GaneSa occupies the right flank of Ambika, while on
; the left there appears VaiSravana. The two-armed Gane§Sa sits with right
; leg dangling down and left folded on the seat (in lJalitasana) and shows a
: safety-bestowing gesture and a pot filled with sweets (modaka-patra). That
- he has only two, rather than four, arms points to his “early” date. The
’ Jainas have not ignored the fact that Ganesa was “‘borrowed” from the
: Brahminical pantheon; he is the son of Ambika (or Parvati or Gauri),
: which is why he has been shown with her here. The Brahminical relation-
! ship between GaneSa and Parvatt is reflected again in a second Jaina work,
: a Gauri from Mt. Abu, to be discussed below.

There are several Jaina GaneSas that date to the tenth or eleventh cen-
| tury A.D. One is from Ghanerav, Rajasthan, carved on the northern pillar
: of the closed hall (gudhamandapa) of the Mahavira temple. The GaneSa, in

lalita pose, makes with one hand the varada-mudra, and holds with the
, other three the goad, lotus (or axe?), and the modaka-patra.* Osian (District
. Jodhpur, Rajasthan) has yielded three eleventh-century figures of Ganesa.
| All of these figures are carved in the small Jaina shrines (devakulikas) that
: stand in the foreground of the Mahavira temple. Each Gane§Sa is four-
: armed and seated in Jalita pose on a throne (bhadrasana). Two are carved
: on the doorsills along with Kubera, while the remaining one is on the pi-
i tha. The two doorsill GaneSsas on the western pair of devakulikas hold spear,
| goad, lotus, and modaka bowl. The trunk in both cases is turned toward the
bowl. In one instance, however, GaneSa rides on an unconventional
| mount, an elephant. The third example, on the south side of the pitha of
one of the eastern pair of devakulikas, depicts Ganesa with different attri-

butes than those on the western devakulikas, including:an e:ephant tusk

--- Page 4 ---
104 Maruti Nandan Tiwari and Kamal Giri

(svadanta), axe, and flower in the three surviving hands (fig. 2). GaneSa,
wearing sacred thread made from a snake (ndgopavita), here is joined by
two devotees with their hands folded in supplication.

Kumbharia (District Banaskantha, Gujarat) has yielded only one
sculpture, carved on the west side of the pitha of the Neminatha temple
(A.D. 1135) (fig. 3). The four-armed and potbellied GaneSa is seated in Lalita
pose ona throne. As usual the mouse is his mount, and the god carries an
elephant tusk, axe, lotus bud, and the modaka-patra. The trunk, somewhat
mutilated, is touching the modaka-patra. GaneSa is bedecked with karanda-
mukuta, udarabandha, and the nagopavita.

Two GaneSa images have been found at Nadlai (Pali District, Rajas-
than), both assignable to the twelfth century A.D. Of the two, one is incor-
porated in the entrance wall of the Neminatha temple, while the other is
lying uncared for within the compound wall of the Suparsvanatha temple.
The former figure, with his rat vehicle on the left, has four arms, three of
which survive. With one hand he makes a gesture, perhaps the varada-mu-
dra; with the other two he holds the lotus and modaka-patra. Surprisingly,
the second Nadlai Gane§Sa (fig. 4) has only two arms, and he holds a mace
and a noose respectively in his right and left hands. This Gane$sa’s vehicle,
a ram (mesa), is also unexpected, and we must ask if he is indeed GaneSsa
or some other, hitherto unidentified, deity or an unknown representation
of Vinayaka??

The brass Gane§Sa, in the collection of the Museum of the Indian His-
torical Research Institute, St. Xavier’s College, Bombay, has eighteen arms
and sits cross-legged in padmasana on a lotus seat. The trunk turns toward
the right instead of being to the more usual left. The god’s hair is piled on
top of the head (karandamukuta) and wears a nagopavita. He is accompanied
by his Sakti, who sits on his left thigh and holds a flower and a flywhisk
(camara). Close to the seat appears his mount, a mouse. Two of Gane§a’s
hands are in abhaya-mudra while others carry spear, axe, radish, pestle, ar-
row, mace, rosary, trident, thunderbolt, bow, water vessel, goad, noose,
tusk, and fruit. H. D. Sankalia has identified this image as Jaina.!° Never-
theless, we feel there exists no clear evidence for associating the figure
with Jainism. The image, with no definite provenance, does not contain
even the usual figure of the Jina at the top to suggest its Jaina affiliation.
Moreover, the rendering of Sakti along with Gane§a is also a violation of
Jaina tradition, wherein no deity has ever been conceived with his Sakti.

One smalii figure of Gane§a is carved in the frame (parikara) of an im-
age of Mahavidya Gauri in the Vimala-vasahi at Mt. Abu (porch ceiling of
cell no. 11, twelfth century A.D.) (fig. 5). The sixteen-armed Gauri, whose
cow vehicle lies below, displays features that suggest her association with
Parvati, Siva’s wife.'! Her Saiva relationships include, for example, the

--- Page 5 ---
Images of Ganesa in Jainism 105
” Siva gana and mother goddesses (astamdatrkas) that surround her along
« with Ganesa. The four-armed GaneéSa sits in lalitdasana and bears tusk,
¢ goad, lotus, and modaka.
. The two figures of Ganesa from Digambara Jaina sites are found in
; the Navamuni (at Khandagiri) and Ganeéa (at Udayagiri) caves in Orissa.
i Both these caves, datable to ca. eleventh or twelfth century A.D., have one
i figure each of the four-armed Ganeé§a. The figure in the Navamuni cave is
# especially interesting. Here Ganega precedes a row of seven Jaina yaksis,
3 corresponding in number as well as iconography to the saptamdatrkas. The
y presence of Ganesa here is in accord with the usual Hindu convention of
m rendering saptamatrkas with GaneSa, though he is usually shown last in
4) the series. Gane§Sa, sitting in the mahdrajalilasana with the rat below on the
4 pedestal, wears matted hair (jatd-mukuta) and holds a flower, rosary (ak-
 samala), axe (parasu), and the modaka-patra.'? The figure in the GaneSa cave
ii likewise carries a flower, axe, and the modaka-patra in his three surviving
fl hands.
Apart from the above-noted figures, the icon type of Parsva Yaksa of
!) the twenty-third Jina Parsvanatha in the Svetambara tradition also has
a@ some relationship to GaneSa, at least in respect of his elephant head (with
a one tusk); sometimes he holds his plucked-out tusk. The Svetambara
N works, however, conceive Parsva Yaksa as elephant headed with a snake
4 canopy overhead, possibly on the analogy of Dharanendra Yaksa of Jina
| ParSvanatha in Digambara tradition.'* The elephant-headed Parsva Yaksa
4 - usually rides a tortoise (kurma) and holds fruit, snake (or mace), mongoose
} (nakula), and snake. In several representations from Vimala-vasahi, Khar-
§ atara-vasahi (Delvada, Mt. Abu, Rajasthan), and Rohtak (Punjab),"* the
¥  Yaksa is shown with elephant head and snake canopy. The Yaksa in four
ii instances from the Kharatara-vasahi, which dates to A.D. 1459, rides either
} On a tortoise or a peacock and carries a lotus, snake, tusk (or a stick-like
() object or a second lotus or snake), and fruit.!> Sometimes, the elephant
1 head has only one tusk (ekadanta). In case of the image of Jina Parsvanatha
‘| in Vimala-vasahi (cell no. 4, A.D. 1188), the elephant-headed Yaksa, riding
4 the tortoise, is provided with a three-hooded snake canopy. The Yaksa
(| holds a snake, vessel (patra), a second snake, and mongoose-skin purse in
4 his hands. The twenty-third Jina, Parsvanatha, was born in Varanasi, the
3 abode of Siva, and his association with Siva appears in such features as a
2 seven-hooded snake canopy and the attendance of the elephant-headed
{ ParSva Yaksa. The Parsva Yaksa of Jina Parsvanatha in Svetambara tradi-
| tion is thus represented with characteristics that reflect those of Ganesa.
| The connection of Siva, Parvati, and Ganega with the Jain tradition was
: also seen above, in the two examples — one from Mathura and one from
| Vimala-vasahi— with Gane§a depicted with Ambika (Gauri). It may be fi-

--- Page 6 ---
106 Maruti Nandan Tiwari and Kamal Girt

nally observed that the Yaksa of Jina Parsvanatha in Digambara tradition
is Dhranendra, the snake king, who, however, does not show any of the
features of Parsva Yaksa that suggest his association with GaneSa.
Conclusion

On the basis of the above-cited examples, it is apparent that Ganesa
in Jaina tradition and art has close parallels to Brahminical Ganesa. The
Jaina GaneSa never took on the negative connotations found in later
(vajrayana) Buddhism. Jaina texts such as the Acaradinakara give only two
attributes (the axe and sweet-ball) to be shown with the images of GaneSa.
The rendering of attributes like the lotus, goad, spear, and tusk in the
hands of Jaina GaneSas is guided by the prescriptions of the Brahminical
works, which invariably conceive the four-armed Ganeésa as holding tusk,
axe, lotus, and the modaka (or modaka-patra).'* A few other Brahminical

- works also envisage such attributes as goad, snake, and trident (trisula) for
four-armed Gane§Sas.”’ In concurrence with the textual prescriptions, Ga-
neSa in Brahminical art of Osian, Khajuraho, Ellora, Bubaneswara, and
elsewhere has usually been carved as riding a rat and showing the abhaya-
mudra (or abhaya-mudrd-cum rosary, or radish, or tusk), axe, goad (or
flower), and the modaka-patra. The rendering of a ram and elephant as the
mount of Jaina GaneSa, in two instances respectively from Nadlai and
Osian, however, finds no textual support.

From the foregoing discussion, it is clear that GaneSa was assimilated
into the Jaina pantheon in about the ninth century A.D. and was thence-
forth accorded a favored position in Jaina worship, mainly as a god bestow-
ing success (siddhi). In the beginning he was conceived both as two-armed
and as four-armed, but by the tenth or eleventh century A.D. he was a
prominent Jaina deity and was consequently visualized with six, eight,
and even more arms. His conventional mount, the rat, appears for the first
time in the twelfth century A.D. in the Jaina context, as evidenced from the
instance in the Neminatha temple at Kumbharia. In the Svetambara com-
munity of western India, GaneSa still occupies an exalted position and is
propitiated at different auspicious occasions.

NOTES

1. J. N. Banerjea, The Development of Hindu Iconography (Calcutta: Calcutta Uni-
versity Press, 1956), 354-55; Alice Getty, Ganesga: A Monograph on the Elephant-faced
God (Oxford: Clarendon Press 1936).
