--- Page 1 ---
JN
Vv Se
ae ca Beginnings
ba 4 j . é a ,
| * j
oon
init ‘ " . _

--- Page 2 ---
This is the first comprehensive Fulllength
study af Ganesa, the clephant-headed god,
one of the most papular and important
gods throughout india and Hindu South.
vast Asia. Part animal, part sage, his image
is found in virtually every Indian home.
Courtright explores the many and chang:
ing dimensions of this god, covering not
only the mythology but also the ritual, the
political uses, and the modern as well as
the Vedic manifestations of the deity. The
book opens with a consideration of the
various myths of Ganesa, stories of his
birth, his beheading by his lather Siva, and
his subsequent restoration as the lord who
gives, or withhalds, success in undertak-
ings. These mythic themes are then ana-
heed in relation to ritual, psychological,
and religious aspects of Hindu culture.
Later chapices explore the historical and
ethnographic context of the cult of Ganesa
in the Marathi-speaking region of India
where his worship is most prevalent. The
author also examines the role Ganesa has
played in recent Indian history as the patron
deity of seme formulations of ncotradi-
lionalist values and ideology. A concluding,
chapter portrays Ganesa as a “protean”
diety, ane having the ability to assume
many identities yet remain distinctly and
recognizably himself throughout, thereby
displaying his power to bring his devotces
into a sustaining and intense relationship
with him. Throughout the book, Courtright
illustrates both the complexity of the deity's
many roles and stories and the integrated
manner in which they come together.
ISBN: 81-208-1604-8 (Cloth) SCUIM ASA 30285]
ISBN: &1-208-1610-2 (Paper)

--- Page 3 ---
. . . renee a t :
a a * > err ote 4 a. =
= we ie -- BA '. Ae : an
Pon a 5 ~~: . . :
fox s a “r : . _ be
- 7 . -
. ' ‘ y foe ct te
: . o vot
oe “ : “ a
i . :
. F
‘
:
,.

--- Page 4 ---
_t on
ao* a
v + .
a r

--- Page 5 ---
Ganes
anesa
Lord of Obstacles,
Lord of Beginnings
Pact. B. CourrricnHt
MOTILAL BANARSEDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED @® DECHI

--- Page 6 ---
First Indian Editvoa Prethi, 2001
Ferst Edition ; USA, 1983
© 1985 OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Alt Raghts Reserved
ISBN 81208-16048 (Cloth)
ISBN 81-208-1610-2 (Paper?
Alia available at
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
236, 9th Main I1f Block, Javanagat Bangalore 560.011
41 UA. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagas, Delhi 110 007
§ Mahalaxmi Chamber. Warden Road, Mumba: 400 026
120 Rovapettah High Road, Mslapore, Cherm: 600 004
Sanas Plaza, 1902 Bay Rao Road, Pune 411 002
& Camac Street, Kolkaus 700 017
Ashok Raypath. Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Prvted we India
BY JAIND STIRA PRAKASH IAIN AT SURE TAINENTIRA PRESS
NOS NARAINA PHASED SEM ORLAE Les
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MO TILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED.
BUNGALOW ROAT DECHE UC 07

--- Page 7 ---
For Peggy, Benjamin, Jonathan,
Rachel, and David,
who taught me about beginnings

--- Page 8 ---
, rs. Tet 7s ~ 7 “
+ . ¢, ™
Ade
§ igitiz¢ the Inte rchi nd
ina ith fund O
Kal stin Fo lon
Pe ;
https://archive.org/details/ganesalordofobst0000paul

--- Page 9 ---
Foreword
This 1s a book that I would have loved to have written. From the
very moment when Paul Courtright told me he was working on it,
years ago. T envied him. A book about Gancsa’ What fun that
would be! What a wonderful bouk it would Aave to be. And it isa
wonderful subject for a book: Ganesa has everything that is fasct-
nang to anyone who 1s interested in religion or India ar both
charm. mystery, popularity, sexual problems, moral ainhivalence,
Political importance, the works One can start from Ganesa and
work from there in an unbroken tne to almast any aspect of
(nian culture Although in an ideal sense this is true of any
aspect of any culture —dig deep coough on any spot on the earth
and you will reach the easth’s center and thea out spar tu
amy other spot—some subjects offer a more imimediace and more
powerful nctwork of routes to the nese center, aad Ganesa ts
such a subject

And Courtnght has traveled on aff of these toads This
superb example of what Ciiftord Geertz has cailed “thign clesarip
don" it shines behts oa the bulky feure of Games fran so may
different directions that something vers like 6 three denensiomal
figure does truly emerge althe end Peanner think ef asthing tat
one would need te know about Geoesn that this beck woes ver icll
one: ner, on the other hand. dees a coummut the sino tebing ane
more about Ganesa than ong wants ta keow Vers tow reds hive
had such deep academe devehon aggarded to thest of South
Indian disanities. only Pati has beer so biexwsed Coy Gananatl

--- Page 10 ---
vii Foreword
Obeyesekere). [t seems appropriate that this god of scribes should
be the one to have this book-offering made to him
‘The route that Courtnght travels ts basically the philological
trunk-route with major diversions. He gives us aii the texts. from
the thin, murky orgins through the jungle growth of medieval
and contemporary folklore, and he supplements them with a
great deal of information about how people actually live with
Ganega The mythology 1s treated fairly. cach of a number of
reasonable interpretations is given its duc. and none is insisted
on. The episode et beheading by the father cries out for (and has
been given by others} a party-ling Freudian analysis, Courtright
does, indeed, sail through this particular strait. but though he
listens with unwaxed curs to the song of the psychoanalytic si-
rens, he is not seduced. He offsets the Freudian analysis with his
own striking model of the parallels between the Ganesa story and
the Hindu ntual of the imitation of a soung bos. This ntual is in
turn set in ily own context between the ancient Vedic rituals (to
which other parts of the Ganesa corpus also refer) and the con-
temporary mtual of pasa to Ganesa, as Courtright has witnessed
and participated in itn Maharashtra. The aspect of Ganesa’s
mythology that deals with his ambivalent relaionship with the
demome power of evil or mare particularly. with the battle
between the powers of good und the powers of esis thea given
@ most Munnating new context by Courtaght’s description ot the
part played by Ganesa in contemporary Indian pabtics
The reader is thus gnen an eniburray de rchesses af rehable
primary materials that Courtright himself has osganized. transmut-
ted, and presented with fs own thoughtful suggestions for inter:
pretavon. The reader may of may not accept these interpretations,
but in any case une is invited to place one’s own map over the
terrain presented hore. te ask one’s own questions of the god. to
write one’s own book about Ganesa in one’s head even as one
reads the one that Courtoght bas published bor as we feaen from
the Mahabharata Gale in which Ganest dictates the opie to Vyasa,
COCTS great book exists in tote ia the mind of the elephant-headed,
fou. and we seetbes merely scramble to senbbly dows those bits at
Wthat we can gasp. including the “knots.” the obstactes to full
compretfeamon. that the god oF obstacles throws ian purpose to
keep us on our toes and to keep us in awe ot him
Winpy Donicer

--- Page 11 ---
Preface
During the past thirty years since I worked on the research that
gave birth to this book, astonishing changes and persistent cont-
nuiues in India and Hinduism have wken place. There have been
many dramauec demographic changes in India itself from rural to
urban settings, expansion of the economy, technological wansfor-
mations in media and informauon distribution and access, forma:
uons of large non-resident Indian communiues in Britain and
North America, and the emergence of Hindu-“ism” inte the
company of the "world religions” and so forth

Acthe same time, the deepest resonances of Indian and Hindu
senstbiliues remain. The stories, mals, tesavals—whether acces:
sible on television or in the streets and open spaces: continue to
move and inspire people The notion that technology inevitably
brings the end of “religion” and its replacement by the “secular”
is not one that has wide awent im India todas Religions and
technology are partners in both the change and the connquity

For Ganeéa. in parucular, the last thirty sears have been times
of increasing vistbilit, commoedificauon, and devoten im both
India and abroad. The anoual fesavalin the mootle of Bkadrapad
takes festivity: off the charts [Conly becomes front gtande: and
grander, especially in’ Mumbar (formerly, Bambavi, where rhe
cit’s metamorphoss of a major world feancal technology, aod
media center has dramaucally changed caitural dandse apes: Pune
and Gincsad’s explosive growth commade with the spertucttat

--- Page 12 ---
x GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
excess of temples like one in Pune that sculpted a five hundred
and one kilogram modaka—sweet dish —for their gold-plated Ganesa,

On September 16, 1999, The Times of India, Mumbai Edition,
published a pullout section on the fesuval, complete with maps to
mayor locations, schedules for immersions, color photographs and
interviews with the celebrants, and recipes for festwal dishes.
Recent political contests in Maharashtra have seen candidates and
parties reaching out for Ganesa’s blessing. The Ganesh Utsav is
now a premier international media event, a spectacle of art,
exuberance, and cultural pride. Ganesga has prospered, India has
prospered; and vice-versa.

H I were 1 starting my research over now, and starting to write
a new book on this topic, | would return to India with deo
camera and work with a computer-technician to “see” Ganesa in
living color. | would tr much harder to find ways for people to
represent themselves and be subject to less interpretauon from
me My favorite moments in the original research were those when
T felt T was both seeing and being seen, [ learned the most when
people helped me sce how my understanding was mistaken.
limited, interesting, even entertaining

In the intersening vears own scholarly projects have taken me
tn other directions, but] conunue to keep alive my interest in how
scholars, artists, writers, film-makers, and theologians understand
Ganese. Since | completed my work on Ganesa, several excellent
books have appeared, in English—and probably many more in
Marat. Hindi, and other Indian languages—bs scholars, art
histurtans. and devutecs, Especially to be noted are: Robert Brown «
edited volume ol essays by disunguished scholars on svatious
Aspects oF Ganesa’s natratves, mages, ritual practices, and mean-
ings | Amenean devotes Joba Games has written 4 lticaily beau:
tal chicoumict with Ganesa and his sacred texts? Paul Marun-
Dubost las otieted a sumpiuoust vitble presentation of Ganeia's
iconograpmies’ The disunguished art Iistonan Platapaditea Pai

' Brown, Robert Gana Albany, $99]

* Grimes. John Ganapaty Album. 1995.

*Afwoun Dubos, Paul Ganesh ae Rachanter of the Three Worlds
Mumbar, 1997 .

--- Page 13 ---
Preface xi
has edited a splendid collection of Ganega art.4 Yuvray Krishan’s
new book on Ganeia is a scholarly labor of love? And photogra-
pher Stephen Huyler presents us with a visually delicious view of
the festival in Mumbai.®

Certainly the most dramatically newsworthy and curious mo-
ment of Ganesa’s presence over the past three decades has been
the so-called “milk miracle”. As 1 understand it, the story goes
something like this,

On September 21, 1995, apparently simultaneously, in Ganed
temples in Delhi, around India, London, New York, Jakarta,
Colombo, and around the world, the milk that were offered
dunng puja or daily worship to Ganesa, appeared to be suck out
of the spoons in which it was held to the Up of the image’s trunk
The media and Internet puked up the story and within a couple
of days huge waves of astonished believers and skeptics were
reacting to the “phenomenon” Crowds in great numbers over:
whelmed the various Ganesa temples around the ward. Worsbip-
Pers were described in the media as “feverish? and the queues of
people visiung temples were portrayed as “trenzied”, Shortages of
mulk in the India’s big cities were reported, and the price of milk
skyrocketed. People swore they had yeen with their own eyes how
the image drank the milk Many Hindus declared it a muracle.
“The gods are coming to earth to solve all our problems,” claimed
the priest of one Ganesa temple in Delhi In Bangkok, Indian
residents and Thais went together to the Ganesa temple One
woman from the Chinese community insisted, “If vou have faith,
you can see it with your own eves”

Nonsense!, countered the skeprics Ehes argued that the disap:
pearance of the milk was attributsble to surface tension ip che
matenal composiuen of the statue whereby molecules of mulk were
pulled from the spoon by what physieasis term “capillary action”
Therefare, it was certainly pot a mrade” in the sense of some
event that violates the visible processes of nature Secular cities
accused vight wing religious and political parties of promonoy the

‘Pal, Pratapadttna Ganesh. the Benerolent Deamthax 10

S Krishan Yuwray Gana, Cnrareiing and Prypna Delhi lau

SHluyler, Stephen Meetiig baat Piemonte of Hiety Da otter New [ven
1999

--- Page 14 ---
xii GANFSA LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
story to advance the efforts of strengthenmg the grassroots base
of Hindu nationalism in advance of the elections of 1996. One
critic pleaded,
T challenge ail thoughtful, unbiased, and intuitive Hindus
to strongly protest to this wpe of “miraclemongering”.
These miracles never happen. These rumors are almost
always spread by the conservatives to impose their beliefs
on the innocent. And sometimes it is done to divert
people's attention from other important ongoing issues.
Lev's ask the Hindu religious fundamentalist groups such
as RSS and Vishwa Hindu Parishad to object to this rumor-
mongenng. Loud and clear, Now. And let the milk be
used for the hungry children of India instead of the Gods
and Goddesses.
After a few days the milk-drinking ceased, the phenomenon
exhausted at's media value, and the ston died down
So, what ave we to make of this story? What really happened?
Miracle. hysteria, hoax? Was ita cunous and cometdent act of
physics? Was it a case of divine intenention in ways that only the
Hauhtul could adequately apprehend? Was it an omen? If so, an
omen of whak Was atthe onic and conspiratorial mampulaven
by frustiated rehwe-polineians on the right sing of the Hindu
community to provide a tonum lor ts Hindotwe propaganda?
Like all religious phenomena, what rath happened in the “oulk
mittade ts party wainatter ol whom vou ask For many Hindus the
“milk iiracle” was a updoibiguous display of how religious belet
and scentitic knowledge remtorce and undercut one anotber For
ethers the lesamany of the huthlal ttvelf was itself a kind ot
mace, a displ of the persistence of religious commutments in
The face of the cromens brought on by moderna and the global
nutkeiplace of knowledge and valuc
Fot mes as a boo Mindy and noudndian, whe nevertheless
beteves Hhatiny categoues of knowing and seemg do not exhanst
ali posable wars of knowing and sceing. Ganesa was ati again

--- Page 15 ---
Preface xiii
The “mitk miracle” was a moment in his play with the wortd over
which he presides as giver and remover of obstacles He was
“there” in the images taking in—or refusing to ake in—the pure
offerings of bis faithful and bewildered devotees, admirers, and
skeptical bystanders. We will probably never know for certain what
really happened, or whether what people say they saw 1s all there
was to sce. In the meantime, what we can do is continue to be
watchful, to be gracious to one another, and to keep a sense of
humour about things. Ganesa is large. in all respects.

But then, the sages of the Rg Veda knew this. They expressed
it most poedcally in the Tenth Mandala. My rather free translation
aulempts to convey what I understand to be the sense of the
perspective of the text.

Who really knows? Who will speak up?

How all Uns has appeared?

All this was already here when the gods arrived

In the highest place, the one who measures it all out,

Cenainly, that one knows, or... not (RE 10.129 6-7)
Adanta Pact B Courter
January 1, 2000

--- Page 16 ---
;
- ¢€

--- Page 17 ---
Acknowledgments
This book has grown from secds planted during my first visit to
Incha twenty-years ago. when [ was privileged to enjoy the hospi
tality of many Hindu frends and acquaintances who shared their
lives with me and taught me about thew Lord Ganesa. | hope
what T have written here about Ganesa will be at least a recog:
able portrast of their beloved deity

Many colleagues and frends have contributed enormously to
inaking this book possible In India. Mo 0 Chaudhen. MON
Bopardikar. DK Kharwandtker, and PS Jacob pave gener
ously of ther time and knowledpe while T collected materials and
observed religious practies in and arcued Atmadnayar in
Pune. SG. Tulpale and Gudrun Buhnemansa toad portions of
the manuscript and corrected numerous error: Espent tans one
joyable hours reading Purana stones af Chanesa with the hate
Mrs. Maitres) Vinod Her love of Ganesa and Sonsint [tcrature
inspired my work |

A special word of gratitude poss ta Wends  Donicer
O'Baherty. who aot only shard her wisn anowlede of Pura
hteratuce and Hindu mythology and made many salable surges
ions on several drafts of Bus book. but sc irises Muy ander tan
ing with her nexhausubly cathusiasa: ae contdynce in ily tilue

To my colleagues and tacos who toad 1 er porbons af 1h
book aad made helpful suggestions especuilly Heros Alper
Alan B. Anderson, Richard Brubgiker, Dasic Mek Crosoy Anne

--- Page 18 ---
xvi Acknowledgments
Feldhaus, Janet Varner Guan, John S. Hawley. Norvin Hein. Alf
Hiltebeitel. Henry Samuel Levinson. Charles H Long, Charles D
Orzech, and Mary K. Wakeman—l extend my deepest thanks

These splendid individuals deserve whatever ment may accrue
from this book, However. they are absolved of any consequences
resulting from its defects: those are mine alone Unless indicated
otherwise. all translations from the Sanskrit and Marathi are
mine 1am deeply grateful to Job Thomas. who provided me with
several photographs tor the book. and to Jeffrey Patton. who
drew the map.

basher versions of parts of this book have been published in
the Journal of Religious Studtes [Pauala]. Purdna (Benares}. and
Gads of Flesh, Gads of Stone The Embodunent of Deinity un
India, edited by Joanne Waghorne and Norman Cutler in associa
tion with) Vasudha Narayanan (Chambersburg, Pa Anima
Books, 1985). Thanks of another sort are due to the American
Counal of Learned Societies. the National Fndowment for the
Humanities, the Excellence Fund, and the Research Council of
the Cawersty of Nonh Carolina at Greensboro for providing
financial resources at various stages in the research and writing of
this book My father and mother, Harold and Norma Courtright
generously gave moral and financial support at many critical mo-
ments. [am grateful to Cynthia A. Read of Ovtard Uarersits
Press for sceing the manuscript through the publishing process
wath such sustaining humor and goodwill

Finally. speci! words of gratitude betong to Peges ome wife
who lived with Ganesa and me through mans obstacles ind be:
ginmings. and helped in a thousand ways lo gn bet and lite to
this book
Greensboro, North Carolina PBC
January 1086

--- Page 19 ---
Foreword vii
Preface ix
Acknowledgment xv
Abbreviations *xix
Guide to Pronunciation xxi
Chapter 1 / The Making of a Deity 3
Who Is Ganesa” 4
Two Kinds of Origins &
Ganesa and the Study of Hinduism 13,
Chapter 2 ' The Mythology of Gapesa 17
Sources and Methods 17
Flephant Sympohsm in Indian Culture 21
Donors of Gunesa’s Head) Gayssura. Crayendrs. and
Auavala Ut
Ganesa’s Birth. Substance and Technique 4
Leke Father. Like Son 46
Churning the Disine Body st
The Severed Head and Broken Task 62
The Head 62
The Task 74
Chapter 3 / Ritual, Psychotogical, and Religious Themes in the
Mythology of Ganesa 91
Sacrifice and Intuation Breaking Up and Making
Whole = g2

--- Page 20 ---
wiii Contents
Father, Mother, Son. and Brother 103
Father'Mother 105
Mother-Son 107
Father/Son tig
BrothecBrother 122
Gagesa and the Demons 129
Obstacles and Thresholds 136.
Chapter 4 / The Worship of Ganpesa = 160
Moments of Danger and Power 167
Ganesa Catarthi, “Gagesa’s Fourth” 178
Domestic Worship 172
The Public Festival 1x5
Chapter § / Gaveda in a Regional Setting: Maharashtra 202
Maharashtra as a Cultural Region 202
Sacred Centers to Ganesa 206
Sacred Persons and Traditions. The Ganesa
Sumpraddya 217
Ganesa and the Lokamanya Rehprous Symbols and Politica!
Conflict 226
Chapter 6 | Gapesa: The Protean God 248.
Appendix ¢ The Sri Gugapati Atharvasirja 282
Bibliography 255
Index 265

--- Page 21 ---
Abbreviations
TEXTS
AB Auareva Brahmana GP Ganela Purana
AP Agni Purdya GarP Garuda Parana
ASS Asvaldyana $rauta H Harivarsa
Sutra J Jdtaka
AV Atharva Veda JB Jauminiya
BAL: Brhaddranyaka Brdhmana,
Upanyad (Talavakara)
BOP Brhaddharma KP Karma Purana
Purdga KSS Kathdsaritsagara
ARGS RBaudhavana Grhsya iP daaga Purana
Sdsra Maou Manav adhurmatistra
BGps Baudhavana MatsyaP Manva Purdgqa
Grhyapansisia MudP Mudguta Purina
Sutra MBh Mahabharata,
BhG Bhagaved Gisd Crntcal Edinien
BhP. Bhagavaia Purana Mh ik620 0 Muhubharata,
Bhav? Bhavisva Purana Bombay Ruiton
BrP Brahmanda Purana MBbP Muhdbhagayata
BVP Brahmusanarte Purana
Purana MGS Manavugrhyatutra.
Chu Chandogya Dresckn’s
Upansad Translation
DP Devi Purana MI Matungaiia
OBP Devibhagavata budgerton’s
Purana ‘Translutan
GB Gopatha Brahmana MP Markuadesa Purana
GG Ganeta Gita, MS Martravane Samhita
Yoraus P Purana
Transtanon POS Paraskaraerhvasuig

--- Page 22 ---
xX Abbreviations

pp Padma Purdna TA Taittirlya Aranyaka

R Ramayana Tandva Tandya

RV Rg Veda Mahdbrahmana

SB Satapatha (Pancavimta)
Brahmana TB Tawttriya Bréhmano

SkP Skanda Purdna u Upanyad

SP Siva Purana VamP Vamana Purana

$P Dh Siva Purana, Vare Varaha Purana
Dharmasamhud VayuP Vayu Purdna

SRK Subhdguaratnakoya, vP Vignu Purana
Ingalls’ Ys Yapias atk yasmrn
Transtation

$v Saftkaravijaya of
Anandagirs

PERIODICALS AND SERIES

AA Amencan Anthropologist

ASS Anandasrama Sansknt Senes

Bib. Ind — Bibliotheca Indica

FRE Encyclopedia of Relgian and Ethics

Hos Harvard Onental Series

HR Bhistory of Religions

JAAR Journal of the Amerwan Academy of Religion

JAOS Journal of the American Onental Societs

JAS dournal of Asian Sucdirs

JGINRE Journal of the Ganeanatha Jha Research Insetite

JRAS Journal of the Royal Aste Soren,

WZKSO Wiener Zeuscnedtt sur Aevude des Std umd Ostusens

--- Page 23 ---
Guide to Pronunciation

Sanskrit and Marathi vowels are pronounced as in Italian, except
for the short a2. which ts pronounced bike the a in the English
word “but”. the long 2 ts pronounced bhe the a in “father”, ¢
and o ate always long. cin Sansknt 1s a vowel and should be
pronounced Ike the coin “ring.” Consonants are pronounced as
in English. with the tollowing cases being noted: ¢ as in “church”
tor words in Sanskrit and Marathi, although there are some ex:
ceptions in Marathi. such as Cracved and caurang. in which the
ts pronounced is. the 7 ts pronounced as tn "yoy", and sand 3 are
similar to the sound sh in “shine” The aspirated consonants
should be pronounced distinctly fas in “hothouse”: pit as in
“top hat’. gt as in “doghouse”. and dé in“ lubhouse ~ For
Sanskrit and Marathe terms, which may be emportant to special
ts, TD have used standard diacribeal natations (eg. Gagesa in
stead of Ganesha) To asm ocediess confusion. the names of
Places and historical persons are used without discrocal marks
and follow comments rovognized spellings fe po. Bombay instead
ot Mumbai and Tilak rather than Tilak) TE have adopted the now
common spething tor the city of Pune. formert: spelled Poona
although the latter form appears in queted mateaats using that
spelling and in the Bibliography. where the old spelling was used

--- Page 24 ---
fg

--- Page 25 ---
os

--- Page 26 ---
me

--- Page 27 ---
le
rye . .
The Making of a Deity
Anotber beat the head cf an biephant. and vas call’d Ganescio
They say nen the Son uf Mabaveu. who heding hum ong day with
Parsete his vite, Bul his own Father. and not keowing who de
was kili'd tint out af ieglousie cuttiag off bs Head, but aller:
wards undersinding that de was bs owN Son, he repented hem of
fas error and resaled to bring hiny to ble again) Wheretore meet-
ing wit an Eicphant fas he bad purpos'd te do wath what he frst
happend upon. he cut oft his Het. and plied ian the ecad
Son's Shoulders Whereupon Ganescn revs 'd, and theacciorward
liv'd immortal with an elephant Head
Bul f dogkt not that, under the ven of these Publes. there une
crem Sages have bid trom the suigur many secrets. cuther of Nut
gralor Maral Philosophy, and perhaps also of Uistors and | bodd
for cestain that all ef these so monstrous Ngures hase surety
seme More rabonal sanieauons. though expres ei thes ungenth
manner (Detia Vatle, Vol 2. pp 72-74)
‘This descripnion of the Hindu god Gagesa was wetten by the Telia
traveler Pictro Della Valle in 1624 Della Valle. ike most other
Westerners who would come to India in subsequent generibons
was astonished that people conceived of a deity who took the form
of a being with the body of a man and the head of an clephant The
appearance of this and other deities seemed bevond Detky Valle’s
2

--- Page 28 ---
4 GANBSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BRGINNINGS
comprehension: yet, he made an important concession in the midst
of his astomshment He admitted that these “monstrous figures”
concealed more “rational significations.”

Repulsion at the form of the deity with an clephant head and
suspicion that there may be more gomng un than meets the (West-
ern) eye, is a good starting point for gur inquiry into this unusual
deity, What is eur reaction to be when we learn that for Hindus
this particular dewty 1s the most popular and universally adored af
the reputed 330 million deities that make up the Hindu par
theon? Pictures and statues of Ganesa are everywhere in dadia 19
shops, on family altars, beside the toads. at intersects. in
shrines at the entrances of villages and temples, inside the covers.
of bouks. He os prassed at the beginning of ceremorics of worship
and at marnages and other important rites of passage. and songs
of devotion to him break the silence as the dawn of a new day
begins
Who Is Ganesa?

OC the Iegions of Hindu gous und goddesses whose unages adorn
the wally of temples. shops. and homes. Ganesa iy the castes! to
recognize He as the one with the elephant head Although there
are same variations in his iconographic representation. which
may be of mterest to histonans of Indian art he ws useails: de-
picted either in a standing, sitting, ar dancing posture with his
face looking directly forward, His elephant head wy messing one
tusk. a piece of which he sometimes holds in one et his tour
hands In one hand he may hold a hatchet [parase]. itis said that
Parasurama used to cutoff the tisk when Ganesa refused to
allow tim inside bis parcats’ fedreom, bul iis abe a ssmbol toc
the qutaee awa of Huston and fake teaching ta another hand
he holds a vead jendinal Ike that used fy ad clepaaar inanes,
ssmbohving the log that cuts URcourh ibustan. oa anethee a
Roo. Tpasa] used to restrain the wild elephant aad representing
The resteint ad passtens vind desires Sometames ane hang ges:
Later tgankessness and reassurance [iuredahastamudea] and
ahother hetds ang of The sweciaeaG [aredudel] for which Ganesit
oad te fase a alutlonaus sandness Around his pathelly be
Wor oper tas an sacred thresh His tatsa is masculine but

--- Page 29 ---
The Making of a Deity 5
sufficiently pneumatic in appearance to suggest the lower limbs of
a child or a yaksa. one of the dwarfish guardian troops. that
Protect and serve the gods and their shrines. The overall impres-
sion one gets from this image is comic. His manner suggests
benevolence behind the obvious strength and stamina conveyed
by the elephant head (see Arhartamid $7.58: Banerjea. pp
384-61; Getty. pp to-66, T A. Gopinatha Rao. vol 41. pp
38-37: AJM. Shastri. pp 1730 074, see also pis. 1.2)

There are many myths of Ganesa’s origins and exploits to be
found in ancient and contemporaty sources No single version of
the myth of Ganesa contains all the elements found wy all the
variants, For our purposes. however, we may summanze the
most frequently attested aspects of his story as follows

Once when Siva had Jett bis wile Parvati for along time ia order

to meditate on Mt Kauiase. she became lonely and longed tu have

a son whe wauld gine her lve and protecttan She rubbed the

unyguents on the surfsce of her limbs and out of this material she

tubbed forth a being in the shape of a young mun She breathed
hum to life and ptaced hom at the doorway of ber bath. insteucting
him to admut ro one

Meanwhile. Siva returned from bis long meditations and armed

at Parvatiy private chamder, but the young man blocked the way

and refused to let him in Not knowing that thus guard way

Parvau’s creation. Siva became angry and. after a battle cut off

the guard’s head Overheanng the cammotem outstdy. Parvati

came out When she saw what had happened. she way overcome
with grief aad anger at what Siva had done She told him that
unless he restored her son wath a new head she would bring the
universe To destruction So Siva seat his servants esearch eta
new Acad As thes Uravele!} north, the auspricus direction hes
fouad ao elephant and cut off ty head and teturped te plage it on
the vacant shoulders of Parvati s guardian son As the son resied.

Siva prawed hum and gave him the name ob Ganest, made hum

lord of bis (Sieg se Owe group of devotees Jews]. ead adopted

him as his ven son

Siva then fold vl the guds and geudosses wt hal asscintled
there That Gangs must be owantipped befor an underokinys or
these wll cee Te rant Gangs tBea ym, tee bard at lst
cles and placed Rone ts agin! all whoo ch ob te wen en

he became thy Lore al Bepimerigs ne prvupht saecess teal 0

remembered him From thar time on Garey hay pbecd ane

moved abstates from toc paths ot ped) oners ad ba os

--- Page 30 ---
6 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACT ES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS

In mythology and iconography Ganesa finds hs place initially
within the world of Siva and Parvati, the crouc-ascetc lord and
his benign-fearsome wife. Gagesa is said to be Siva’s son. al-
though bis sonship 1s of a peculiar son. Like Siva, Gagesa 1s a
dancer, a destrover of demons, the one wrapped in serpents His
elephant head 1s tike that of the demon elephant Gajasura, whom
Siva slew and made is skin inte a garment as he danced on its
head. Ganesa 1s the leader of Siva’s ganas. the dwartsh denizens
of the twihght—camic. horrible, and erouc. Itke the marurs of the
Vedic Indra.

Ganesa 1s also sard to be Pavati’s son. mulded hy her from the
substance on the surface of her limbs and fashioned into the
shape of a manchild. He is the guardian of her private chamber,
ber shone. Most of the myths about Ganesa tell the circum:
stances of tus birth, his change of heads. and how he became the
lord of Siva’s ganas From these beginnings. Ganesa moses out of
the shadow of his Ulustrious parents and gas his own unique
identity He is the creator and remover ot obstacles. the euardien
at the entrances to all achions and places. whose presence can
avert cvil infucnces that would bring undertakings to rum He os
the gad to be worshipped first, before all others. in ceremonies
hoth povate and public He ws the Lerd of Bewanings. the guar
antor of success Indecd. in Marathi. an idiomatic expression for
making » beginning is srigunesa Ausate, Ulery, “te make bord
Ganesa.” and gunapatiee hele. “lo conceive ehild ”

Like other Hindu detties, Ganeso fis moose names. at least
thousind Among bs more commonly known names. many de-
scobe has appearanve. Gapumuaha er Gadngaa the elephant
headed one Bhadanta tbe singie lusked one. V akrilunda—the
oor having the twisted trunk, Eamboxlara the potpelhed one
Other names reter to bes cole or tungtien un thy divine scheme ot
things Sidchadata the Bestower of success. Virthnaraza- the
Lord of Obstacles, Vinavaka the remover. Ganesa. Ganapate.
of Gansdbipa- the lord ot Siva’s eartas fn South India. he us
most widely recom fs bry Tamu name. Pilaisar—the son or
the young elephant

fo contemporary (india. thiadus generally revard Ganesa asa
benign and belptul deity. cae who brings success and. assures
worklly well-boing Yor. whatever success he cuatnbutes to hu-
man undertakings is understood to come in response to the boner

--- Page 31 ---
The Making of a Deny ?
paid him by his devotees. Beneath this strong and helpful guise,
there lies a more ambivalent tendency: if he 1s not worshipped.
he may withdraw his support and cause undertakings to fail tn
Sn Lanka Ganega is worshipped in extraordinary modes of ce-
static experience As one contemporary anthropologist describes
him. he as the “Rerce cuptain of wild elephants He possesses
mediums and inflicts severe punishments an any who dare ignore
his immanent manifestations” (Pfaffenberger. p. 107}.

One would expect a ubiquitous and popular deity of such
unique appearance to have received a good deal of attention
from both Indian and Western scholars of religion and mythol-
ogy But, except for some attention paid hin in general studies
on Hindu mythology. ritual practice. and iconography and some
speclahzed works dealing with Siva. only a modest handful of
Mmonvgraphs and arucles have been desoted specifically to
Ganesa and his significance within the Hindu universe. ‘The rea-
sons for this lacuna are probably several. Ganesa makes hts inal
appearance in the Hindu pantheon rclatiely late. during the
carly Puranic period te filth century sv). and this fact has ded
many Indolugisty to conclude that he ny foo derivate of other
demes, particularly Siva. to ment special inquiry Lacking the
clear aura of Vedic roots, Ganesa has languished on the sutclines
To seme, his thenomorphic torm suggests that he iy too “prime
Uwe” emerging trom Jawer classes or abonginal communities
into reluctant Brahmiameal recognition, aad therefore lacking (he
mythological auhness or wwonngraphie sephisication lo bea
worthwhile focus of sustamed studs bor athens Gagesa ts simply
too mundane. be as merely a pad concerned with worldly augcess
and material well being Eeceptin the eves of a small croup: of
devotees for whom he is the embodiment et ternsceadeatal real
ity [Arahman|. Gancsa has hy ieel phinted bemby oa the grouad
inthe midst of this world To dhose whe iook fo Hraduasm prainir
Vy for us mysticism and spictustity Gonesa dees sot scem te
embody profound rebgiaus sinminy cree other Re appears
tainted, trivial, perhaps ever sulin Carnes hicks the crote and
Ivtical appeal of Kiana. the ascete and casmie teroe be eh Sint
the hero majesty oF Rama. oe the pom creat sy inl ite
structive power of the Goddess In short Gonesa ns tne ordinary
Scholars have teadca to apaore his obvicus populaits anmeng
Hindus and tailed) te look bexand the mater seacttits hers

--- Page 32 ---
R GANFSa: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
beheved to bestow for the sources of his appeal In this study 1
hope to redress some of this imbalance. Ganesa deserves more
attention than he has received

There are some brief discussions of Gunesa im most antholo-
gies of Hindu myths and decnptions of Hindu behefs and prac-
tices, Ganega’s iconography has received the most sustained al-
tention from authors wrung in English (PK Agrawala i976
Banerjea, Getty. T. A. Gopinatha Rao. HK Sasin. 1y78).
Some Indian scholars bave tended to concentrate more on the
history of vanous forms of Ganesa worship (Aravamuthan,
Bhandarkar, Ghurye: Hetas; Kane—sols 2. $0. Mitra,
Ramasubramaniam, UV. Rao). However. important prelims
nary work has been done on the myths and texts devoted to
Ganesa (ec g.. Buhnemann i984. Courtrebt 1974. tg8e. Hazra
1948. Herbert, Rassut, Stevenson, Varadpande, Winteraiz, Yo-
ron). Sume hase focused on the theelogival dimensions of
Ganesa’s meaning to Hindus (VS Agrawats. Damelou. Heras:
Navarainam) Gadgil’s impressive compitation of Ganesa lore in
Marathi) stands out among contemperary works written in Indian
languages: the rest are Largely guidebooks to shrines and simpli.
fied summaries of mviths and instructions ter ritual performance
Two Kinds of Origins
The ong issue that has revenved a good deal of atteaten pe the
question of Ganesa’s historical organs: Gonesa sgems to make an
abrupt and dramatic appearance ite the mvthelogs and won:
ography of Hinduism in the past-Fpie ar carly Purine peried.
around the htth century ab. bringiae with hind ants a tow (aint
{hives ot bes possible pron whereabouts, and ana scholars have
staked aut vanous claims ay to his origins.

Vhe scareh for trices of Ganesan in thy cadhest btcrature has
hiened up a lew items ob significance ith much of ther mean:
nes da dispute The Ry Veda contuins an imvoqiton: prayer stds
dressed to deny named Caingpats We call yped seu. uped the
bests. the Trader of the hosts (OG ynapatid [Catantaes fa gatupration
havamuite|) (RN 2 yet Devotees of Games port to this
Pravet as the sous dor then dels ’s oustenee un the most ae
ergot, sagsed. gad uihontite of scaptures Scholary consen-

--- Page 33 ---
The Making of a Deity 9
sus. both Indian and Western, however, takes the view that this
Vedic text refers not to Ganega but to Brhaspati. the divine
pest. and that gana refers to the assembly of the gods (¢ g . see
Bhandarkar. p. 149) In other Vedte texts the name Ganapau
refers alternatively to Indra (RV 10.112.9) of Sia (AB 1.21). A
more promising lead 1s to be found in the Maitravani Samhita of
the Yajur Veda. A brief prayer is addressed to “one having a
trunk [karaia|” or the “one with the elephant head {hastimukhal”
or to the “one having a tusk [dantin|” (1B 10 15). Lous Reaou
believes this reference contirms a Vedic ongif for Gapesa but
also points out that “it is part of a Itany. a redrayapa. and comes
Precisely in the place im the Yayur text where there ss an invoca-
tion to Rudra [satarudrtva)” (p_ 273) It may be that these refer
ences to a being with clephantine characteristics pertain to Siva
as the slayer of the elephant demon, whose head and tusks he
took as trophies of conquest. rather than to an clephant- headed
deity. In either case tt scems hkely, oa this evidence, that
Ganesa’s ongins are inesticably linked with Siva so tar as the
Brahmanic sources are concerned. A similar invocation in
another Brahmanie text addresses “the one with the twisted
unk [vadkratendal” (TA to .s}. abo leaving at uncertain
whether tas Ganesa or Siva who as being addressed. These Vedic
and Brahman references are slim evidence on which to establish
the histoncal angins of the god. Nevertheless, they are vitally
important to the later Waditien of Ganesa worship because thes
link Ganesa with the Vedie corpus of Hlerature aod lead hun the
aura of its immeasurable authority

Origins of another sort may be found in texts and monagraphy
from about the second to ftth centuries 6p) Dharmosutra teats
mention a class of hemngs called Vinavakas eh possess people
and require ritual propitiabon None af these Vinayakay ty de
scribed as elephant headed, but thes we spoken eb is creating
obstacles Jeonographic sources fres this period provide a tow
suinply carved vadses, Gwarhsh gasiden hares with elephat
faces (Coomaraxeamy rg2s. pooja and rack po Gers pes
plo 227) These seures offer a prohimirans: picture ob Goires.cy
malevolent: stde and his conngenes with tae sur Pay attse
suggest that Ganesa’s ortpins mov welt be onside the Brakmane
fold) Recent evidence from: fade Greek cerns ensured! by
AK Narain sugeest that an elephant dey Tar wis ae

--- Page 34 ---
10 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
shipped as early as 4 0. $0 in northwest India. This hgure seems
to represent strength and royal authority, both dimensions of the
later Ganesa, and is redolent of the elephant symbolism of South
and Southeast Asia generally.

Many scholars bave been inclined to read the mythy of Ganesa
for clues to the history of his worship and the origins of hes cult.
‘The pitfalls of reading mythology as fistory wnitten in erypuic
form are well known, but the efforts in this direction, however
misguided, give us some idea of the avenues pursued by scholars
Getty and others have seen the story of Ganesa’s controniatioa
with Siva and his subsequent restoration and adoption as the lord
ot the gagas as a commentary on the process by which Ganesa
was elevated from obscurity into Brahmanic recognition. Ouiers
have suggested that Ganesa's ongins are to be found among the
aboriginal tubes whose toteme emblem was aa elephant Chatto:
padhyava (p. 141) speculates that Ganesa’s adoption by Siats a
“reflection of the process by which some tre. oryanally bearing
the banner of an elephant, eventually established ity supenornty
as a victonous state.” The Brahmaaie tradiion esentually assim:
lated the worship of this oubsicer. as thes had done with Sug. Cut
cclegated him to the categery of demon. that is. Vinayaka. the
one who was defeated and then transformed into a devotee of
Siva. Ganesa’s powers are delegated to him bs fis conqueror
The same process is at work in the myth of Siva’s defeat ot the
glephant demon and Keyna’s deteat of the river seepent, Kubwa
(sce Hospital) Ganesa’s ambisalent character —both benevolent
and malevolent, one whe both makes and removes obstacles
mas reflect. itis argued. a histoncal process in which he was
onginally cogacded as an outsider and threatening hgure bul later
was rehabilitated by his Seheading and aduptien ue Sway inner
circle In this way be became acceptable to Brahinanie sensibih
es ind therefore bencheent. This precess of rehabilitation at the
level ef mythos seen te parallel a sociokistoncal process in which
toibal. South Indian, of lower caste groups were assemnatod into:
the caste bierarmy as parol the Berhmante senthess after the
eclipse ot Buddiasmt in India. It was during this period that the
carh: Puranas and the temple architecture of the Gupta dynasty
flourshed

In this scureh tons histonicaborgsa tor Ganesa. some fave sug
gested prowise fosutioas outside the Bratimame traditia South

--- Page 35 ---
The Making of a Detty ir
Indian tribal traditions (Getty. p. 2), the Pilliyar caste of Tamil-
nadu—presently a cultivating community with strong Brahmanic
influences (Rassat. p. 24). the Mundas—a tribal people of central
India (Risley, vol. 2, p. 113), the Gajas—a Naga tribe in the north
eastern region of India (Heras. pp. 201-203), an animal cult
(Crooke, vol. 1. p. 184). the Naga cult of western India (Kosambi,
P. 24). of lower or outcaste sectarian groups that were gradually
granted Brahmanic acceptance (Ghurye, pp. $1- 90), These histori
cal locations are intrguing to be sure, but the fact remains they are
all speculations. vanations on the Dravadian hypothesis, which
argues thal anything not attested to in the Vedic and Indo-Furo-
Pean sources must have come into Brahmanic religion from the
Dravidian of aboriginal populations of India as part of the process
that produced Hinduism out of the interacuans of Aryan and non-
Aryan populations There is nu independen: evidence for an ele:
phant cult or a totem, nor ts there any archaeological data poinuing
to a tradition prior to what we see already in place in the Purdpic
Itterature and the iconography of Ganesa

As long as speculations of Ganesa’s origins are being scattered
about, I will add my own. for which there ts no more compelling
evidence, but acither os it any less plausible. Tt may be the case
that Ganesa emerged ay a full-fledged figure, the son of Swa and
Parvati, the obstacle remover and doomeay guardian, during the
evoluton fram Brahmagie traddions of sacrifice to Hindu pat-
terns of temple worship, which saw the establishment of perma:
nent shrines requiring constant maintenance ol riual purity and
Protection from malevolent forces, With the adveat ot these
shrines atter the ture ot the nulleamum, imperial unagens coe
placed the more martial imagery of the cacher Brehm tad.
tion, Although Siva himsclt may be rn ascetic, the temple is bis
palace where he rales as the monarch of the uNErNE AS hes sor
Ganesa is the commander of his traops and ay it were. hes ber
apparent. The association ol elephants with Ganesa may rellest
not a tribal totem but (he ceremonial and milan ase of ck
phants by unperial dynasties of this and later penods ot [ncn
history Reading Ganesa’s mythology one pets the impression
thal we are encountering an cluboraty cotonabadties los ace cer
vented” deity. rather like the ola cake asout the camel fering a
horse that was designed by a commutes Its onlckeoy het serie
assemblage of Brahman mythographers uncrted Ganesan a

--- Page 36 ---
2 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLAS. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
self-conscious manner. It is not so implausible, however, that
symbols of the elephant, obstacles, the need for progeny to do-
mesucate a wild ascetic Siva and his childless wife Parvati into a
veable household, and the obligation to protect sacred temple
enclosuses trom polluvion and hostile forces may have coalesced
into the figure of Ganesa. This was in response ta the new rel
gious situation of early Puranic Hinduism in which the sehgious
life of the tradition was increasingly onenting stself around large
and complex ceremonial centers [tts impossible to say just how
Ganesa came into existence or whether there was a distinct
Ganesa before he appears in the modes he does in the Brahmanic
sources. Indeed, mt may be that he was always a Brahmanical
deny. The point to be stressed is that we aeed not invoke a
Dravidian or abonginal hypothesis to create a theory about
Ganesa’s origins; there may not be any compelling evidence for
Ganesa prior to his emergence into the Brabmanic fold simply
because he was never there

The issue of Ganesa’s orgs takes ona very different character
when we look al the mythological tradifun of Gages in terns ot
Its OWN assUMpuONS uAd purposes. Here we ste not concerned
with onyins ia the historical sense. The my thologive: teats account
for where Ganesa came from by means of stones about his
mother, Parvati- -dorming him by cubbing a substance on the sur-
face of her bodv—or of his genesis fram fis tathers isuebh The
Puranas are concerned to determing Ganew’s peacalogs , his pede
gree. The tevts are aware that there are satant aad incampanble
accounts of hay birth, and thes account for this incensistenes hy
Placing dittereat varuunts in chiffereat eyeles al cosmic time Be
cause ot the distinction between eras” the And Prrdna insts,
“ihe story of Ganesa’s births told in ditterent ways According to
ong aegount he as born from the great lord [Siva] When Sua
looked at ham lus head was culoffand replaced with an elephants
head [BVP 3.20 62] Now we tell the stars at Gamesa as it hap:
pened io the wete Aaima when the merettut Siva cut ott his head
(SP2 gts 62.7 The Hindu cyckteal structure ef finie allows the
mythagraphers Fo Mao My Vareants Fy assigning cach toa
ditfereet ons while mantunimag the eserall integeuy of the story
that is understaod to he vahd eternally

The Pursiie tests are Gancerned with determining Gagesa’s
engins cad estabhstiag chem within the framework of Sivas

--- Page 37 ---
The Making of a Deity ty
cycle of myths, giving the elephant lord full recognition and au-
thonty under his father’s umbrella. The texts stress that Ganesa’s
capacity to remove and create obstacles comes from Siva—
through the adoption or initiation of Ganesa as leader of Siva’s
circle of gaqus- and that Ganesa’s elephant head is the emblem
of that authority, just as the elephant is the symbol ot a king's
authority in the world of human life

This Puranic way of thinking about ongins offers a helpful
point of departure for our inquiry into Ganesa’s religious mean-
ings, especially in view of the limited and ambiguous matenals
available about bis origins in the histoncal sense For our pure
Poses itis sufficteat tor Ganesa to make bis appearance in the
carly Puramic period. the era that saw the rise of the Gupta
empire and jarge permanent ceremonial centers for the worship:
and service of Hindu demies There sy no clear way of determin:
ing which of the many vanants of his invths are prior to athers
We shall sumply treat them asa package The same applies to the
analysis of ntuals associated with Ganesa. Some ntual instruc.
toms are contained in the Puranas along with the myths, the
latter sometimes being presented as etiological explanauions for
the former. For us itis more important to trace the thematic and
Metaphor connections belwcen the myths and mtuals than to
trace the Aistonsal desclopmeat of ritual practices. Structural and
thematic stumes of this tradition are more promising accas of
inquizy because they Uo not depend foe ther expligatary power
on own abinty fo praparet precise Aistancal settings The limita:
tron of ths approach ss that the myths and rituals appear to be an
free tall, suspended somewhere oa the hastociecal process without
clear and speeiic contests Ibus prise the anterpreter more 1
conse to read contemporary inieipredse cameceny nto the bests
The betorical contests aire ubpartentae panciple, tas sanply tie
case that there is Hide te po en and thet merce intesesting
conversation with the meters of thy tradiian ys tong towne at
thematie. structeral and thealoy cas areas
Ganesa and the Study of Hinduism
Dam atlempting to focite my ingen y colo Gaines in The Coptest
of the study of Hindunan as a rebgion Such an etlart ge quires at

--- Page 38 ---
ta GANESA® LORD OF OBSTACLES. [ORD OF BEGINNINGS
least a provisional definition of rehgion as a world of its own—a
reality that endures through time and human community and 1s
maintained and transformed by stories, atuitudes. and behefs that
are acted out in rites, dramas, and festivals It shapes and is
shaped by the feelings. ideas. and behavior of thase who practice
it. Its essential for us to recogmize the multifaceted character of
the data and the comples interconnections among its sanous
components For example, myths about Ganesa are frequently
told on ctual occasions and presented ay explanations for why
Tiles are performed according to certain putteras Rituals may
commemorate episodes in the myths. When Hindus celebrate the
annual festiwal on the fourth day of the month of Bhadrapada
(August September), they paruicipate in the process of Ganesa’s
coming into being as the Lord of Obstactes. just as in the festival
of Divali they recall the return of Rama from hes victory over the
demon Ravana and Sita’s release fram her capusity The ntuals
do not reenact the myths as though they were scripts. the connec
tions between myth and ritual are less direct

In the festival process in honor ot Gapesa. celebrants parucs
pate in a symbole and sucial sequence ot eprodes that tithes
them through phases of relate destrugturing marked oy pubin
dancing, parading. and the relaxation of ordinary sovtal hiecarety:
cal behasior— toward remtegration and the reasseruen ot normal
social roles, with traces of feelings of cupharia at having pursed
through the festival process together Ganesa’s annual teste al
complex —comprising domestic and temple worship: [pra] fol-
lowed by a publle processton and celebration [atseia]  locuses
on the shaping of a clay emaue of the god and bringing it ta lite
ritually by the rovestiture of vital breath [prdea| an order to wor
ship Ganesa in the home tora penod of several das afer which
hes taken uo processian te aver ar other bads of water lo be
immened. bron formless Chis Gunes emerges untae icone farm
his disperseu Cosme presence os condensed inte recognizable ab
Jectificatian ot the Boyinming of the testival At the close of the
pubhe procession, marked axatos by mereymaking and oc sions
at-eestahe behavior by same porticpanty, Ganesa’s form ta the
Image is fedstearbuted inte its constiucnt clements as it dissolves
in the waters into whick at has been so lovingly placed bs his
desotcus A simular process takes place in the myth when Parsate
forms Ganesa out ob ber boutly substance, ber dirt. and brings

--- Page 39 ---
The Making of a Deity 1§
him to life; there is the process of condensation of power and life
into incarnate form, When Ganesa confronts Siva and, after bis
beheading. receives power and authority from Siva as lord of the
kagas and overcomer of obstacles, his power becomes again dis
Persed. but this ime into universes of action, the beginnings over
which be rules. Myth and ritual alike move through cycles, bead:
tng trom chaos to condensation into order and then to distribu-
Gon of that order back inte the cosmos in ways that assure the
dewty’s continuing presence. The cycle ss repeated again on
another time frame. whether it is a cosmic eon, as with the
myths, or the annual festival thal comes around predictably with
the ritual calendar There is not a one-lo-one correlation between
the myth and the mtuai, rather they both move im similar direc:
dons, supporting cach other within the larger framework of the
unwene of Hindy assumpuons and practice

A suman process of condensation and distribution appears to
take place at the social level in the fesuval ints Mabarashinan
fous. Various groups of celebrants, of maydals, move toward a
heightened sense of genene bonding within the group and be-
tween groups as all converge on the worship of the deuty ax their
common effort This geaens unity, what Victor Turner (1969)
terms communuas, contriputes lo an enhanced sense of the co-
hereace and bonding of all the participants. particularly during
the Jong hours of procession that mark the concluding epiode of
the festsal The festival serves to codity, condense. ind restate
the paradigmatic process embodied in the myth and domestic
ritual (puja) as tacts out the passage trom chavs to order to the
distabuhon of that arder throughout the cosmos The mytis, the
rituals performed in homes ard shrines. and the public testisais in
the towns and cies in Maharashine are together the interlocking
elements of & religious pation ef lite having Ganesa as ots center

Ttas not my purpose Co deselop a thearetieal modet of religion
Into which F then press my Gunesa date to validate it. nather nw
theoretical concerns remain suburdinate to Uhe goal ol rendering
the myths, rites. ad fosteval comprehensible it an inte rceaneeted
way. Theories of relon are helpful in attempting to identity
what is significant ina partcular test or ntual but if semetnies
happens that the sources one studies weil pont to something sig:
oificant that leads to abandoning or revising the theones Chere
is no magical protection that prevents an observer. on a partir

--- Page 40 ---
16 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
pant for that matter, from interjecting his of her own more or
less subjective reading or yudgment. Hopefully. through the pro-
cess of careful consideration of the sources (be they texts or
fieldwork) and with the judkiwus guidence of vanous theoretical
models that seem best tu At the sources. one can come up with a
teading of the religious tradition that is far and faithful to its own
self-understanding and that contributes usefully to widening our
understanding of the phenomenon of religion. Because this 1s
done in the context of scholars criticism and discourse. there is
hope that others will see clearly what | have seen only partialls
and thus the process of understanding wil move forward

The following chapters witl take up the princepal mvths. nites.
and cuitic traditions that set Ganesa apart from the othes desues
ot the Hindu pantheon. In exanuning cach of these dimensions of
the tradition, it ws hoped that the relations between them will
begin to display themselves and that the overall coherence of the
tradition will become apparent

--- Page 41 ---
2
¢

The Mythology of Ganesa
Sources and Methods
Whatever foreshadowings of Cianesa appear in the Vedie and
Brahmanic sources, it is in the Puranas that the elephant-faced
lord makes his unequivocal and dramatic debut In these vast
encyclopedic collections of sturtes of gods, ntual instructions, ab-
struse metaphysical and theolugical arguments, cosmogome the-
ones, and practical moral advice. we find many varuuons of
myths about Ganesa’s birth, beheading, and restoratian and his
exploits among the pods, demons. and humans We shallexplore
ax many of these myths as possible. for there ate not a great
number and many ctther have never been translated betore or
only one variant among several significantly ditlerent versions of
a particular myth is available Phe purpose of this chapter ss to
tell Gagesa’s story as the texts themselves tell it

A note about the chronology af these texts as in order Only the
roughest approximation of dates can be seatured There ore nota
nously difficult problems tnvolyed in dating the Puranas The texts
represent compilations of shitting orai traditions thai rellget vart
ous sectarian allegiances, with frequent itterpolabons of later ma
terials into carher strata of the teats: This likely that some ot the

ia

--- Page 42 ---
1B GASESA: LOD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Ganesa myths are among these later interpolations, as are the
myth of Gapesa and Vyasa and the wating of the Mahdbhdrata (as
we shall see). Stories about Gagesa appear in the carly Puranas
the Brahmanda, Matsya, the Systikhanda of the Padma. and the
Harwamsa (c. 4.0, 300-500) In al least one case the same myth
(urns up in almost identical verssons in two different texts from this
period. More detailed accounts of Gangesa’s beheading are found
in the middle and later Puranas. the Devi, Linga. Siva, Skanda.
Vamana, and Varaha (¢ 4.D. §00-1300), with some sectarian
elaborations and additional materials in the two Ganapatva
Puranas, the Gagefa and the Mudgala (c 4.0 (300-1600) A
number of Gagesa myths are also contamned in the Tamil Purinas.
which probably were contemporaries of the later Sansk:tt ones
Little more can be said with confidence about the histoncal loca-
tion of these myths. Fortunately. our approach dacs not depend
on determining which myths are prior to which others: We shall
treat them ali—including the non-Purdme miths drawn from folk-
Jone sources from a more recent penod-- 4s corsutuung aa oage-
ing Wadition of story belonging to an evolong otal and textual
tradition. Our approach depends on peteming patterns within
and among myths, thei themate elymenms. and tinaliy. their
meanings [tis reassuring to recall that the Puranas themselves are
not partcularh iterested i Jocating thew methalowcsl materials
in relation to histarical events: the stories of the gous and the ritual
and moc prescriptions are tineless and always sald in their ap:
pheabon to particular situations.

Whea we tum aside trom the (isted alleys at hestorical devel
opment to the more fruitful avenues ot the thematic. structural
and interpretive dimensions in these miths, 2 numer of ques
tens of method or approach come te the tore We begin out
analysis of the Ganesa cvele of meths conmdest thar these mths
have many meanings and that thes reftest a protean torm af
Narrstve geing mse to molople simultaneous jaterpretations
OPaberty dopa. poe) charts four levels ot meanioy possible in
any piven myth First. there ts the marrative level, thy story itself
im all us versions. Second. the metapharic devel in which the
themes in the narrative level link one particular myth to others in,
the same or different cycles: In the case of Ganesa. the themes of
divine berth, beheading. sacritice. thresholds, and clephaats are
metaphors that lok his mythology to other stones in the Hindu

--- Page 43 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta 9
tradition that also make use of these metaphorical possibilities
The metuphorigal clements in the myth also be it to the third
level of meaning, that of cosmme law and metaphysics. At this
thord level exist implicitly the more abstract notions of Karma,
and power relations in the universe expressed. tor example, in
the tension hetween croc desire and ascetic restraint Fourth
are the social and psychological dimensions of the myths. theit
meanings for human life and action. In the Ganesa myths the
subtle but powerful ambivalences within marital anu tamuly reta-
tions play an important part. To the four levels suggested by
O'Flaherty. we shail add a fitth: the evological level Many of the
Ganesa myths ink narrative with situal practice and answer such
questions as why Ganesa is worshipped first before all: other
deities and why he got his broken tusk. hrs elephant head. and so
on. The euological evel joins the narrative. metupaorical, und
sogiopsycholagical levels in the immediacy of the image and the
ritual actions to be performed in response tou. Hes impertani to
note that these levels of meaning operate sumultancously Any
adequate treatment of the myths’ possibilities for interpretation
must take them all into account

This approach to the mythology of Ganesa 1s eclectic. but nec:
essarily so to account for the mulovecality of the myths them-
selves. For example. the story of Ganesa’s beheading ty simulta:
neously (1) an cexplasation” of hes elephant’s head (etiological)
(2) an account of the ith of a god (narralise). (27 a Sartalion Gn
the theme of sacrifice and expiration (metaphorical), (4) an cx.
pression of the mediation between the forces of samsarn attach
meat and the release of moudse (coymological metaphysical). and
(shan explorauon of the ambisadenee iaesitable in the relations
among tathers, mothers, and sans (ocepsychologteai) Lo rgnare
some of one ol these interpretive possibilities un the pursuu ct
methodological or deologicai purty ys to reduce the uns ths be Tess
than they are. depriving us of access t7 saine facets of Uie righ
ness of their meanings No douht there are many more mening,
than the ones seen and presenied bere Pernaps the igader w Ul
be led to discover same of thent in response to tie meanings that
have been noted

tas parucularis difficult io know how to proceed: frum the
paint at which the various myths in ther sarin: versiens are
assembled in the lush Jandscape of the Puradie levis (ae dares

--- Page 44 ---
20 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
tive level) to an interpretation of these myths We could start
almost anywhere and work our way around, examining each
theme and metaphor unot all the myths are accounted for in a
network or tapestry of meanings. My way out of this welter of
Possibilities 1s to seek the clements in the myths that are most
common and recurrent or most striking im their uniqueness. to
hegin with these and thence be led to other myths that shed
hight on the first ones. The most striking. and obvious. recurrent
element in the Ganesa cycle of myths is the elephant head
Hence our analysis begins with an inquiry into elephant symbol-
ism and mythology and its relation to the Ganesa story. The
elephant head in turn leads to the myths of Ganesa’s birth.
beheading, and the receiving of his clephant head, which in turn
leads ta myths of his beheading Beheading connects his mythol-
ogy to the larger metaphorical universe of sacritice. dismember-
ment, ininabon, and theogony. Because it is Ganesa’s father.
Swa, who beheads him, the story is ued to the cycle of Siva
myths and to the issue of father-son relations This opens up the
possiblities of psychoanalytic interpretations. centering on the
oedipal complex, The beheading also links Ganesa’s story to the
tales of others beheaded by Siva the demans. for example
and therem les another set of myths and thematic possibilities
Finally. Ganesa is the Lord of Obstacles. a ttle and cole given
him by Siva to compensate for his losing his original head and
gaming the elephant head. which nes together a nctwork of
elephants, sons, demons, and obstacles. [tis impossible ta con-
sider one clement without, at least impheitls. including them all
Fortunately, not all the myths stress all the interpretive possitilt-
Hes equally, some myths are more about family relations, others
more about theelogs, and secon. The interpretatian of the
msths is nota lacar movement fam one element to the next
rather Wow a network. a fibre. an whieh the pursuit of ane
thread of meaming doubles back unto others as ut proceeds far:
ward, knitting the whole cioth together as it ges alone Its
csv to Recome confused and drop wostiuch Bur the myths carry
there owen tascinubon and. it ws to be hoped. compensate tor
feaps oF atissiag Hoks inthe fabric of my onterprefaton

A remark tegarcune the form an which the more than seventy
envths included tere are presented woinorder [thas been neves:
SUS HL dany Cases Co seemmanze d mvth. rather than translate it

--- Page 45 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa a
in its entirety, Many of them in the original texts mnclude long
digressions into ntual instructions, theological elaboration, and
hyperbolic descnptive detail, which would distract us from the
locus of our inquiry Where possible, | have retained much of the
dialogue. to give the excerpts a meher flavor of the text’ Where
identical or closely similar variants appear in more than one tex:
tual source, | have so indicated in the citauion. To facilitate fur-
ther research, other related myths offermg intriguing compart
sons are also noted
Elephant Symbolism in Indian Culture
Ganesa’s most striking characteristic is bis clephant head. It
makes him stand out from the crowd of other guds and serves as
the occasion for many myths in the Puranic literature. ‘The, van-
ous stories disagree as to how Ganesa came by his curious cle-
phantine form: some myths say his parents. Siva and Parvah,
transformed themselves into clephants and made love “im the
manner of elephants” and so brought him forth: others relate
that Gagesa’s elephant head was a matter of curcumstance. as
when his father. Sea, beheaded him and then to restore him to
Ife sent servants to find the nearest available head, which hap
pened to be thal of an elephant: Other myths assign the clephan:
head to a spectfic elephant, such as the demon Gajasura, in an
earher epoch Siva had defeated and then danced bis terrible
doomsday fandave dance on Gayasura’s elephant head and
wrapped himself in its bloody skin (see pl 6p. Sull others tell us
that Ganesa’s head once belonged to [ndea's mount, Auravata,
who was defeated by Nandin. Sivas bull vehicle, or that tf was
the head of Gayendra. the elephant king saved by Vigau from tbe
clutches of the demon albigator (sce pl 7) Tie sures of the
head and the circumstances leading Co its acaqusitien by Ganesa
are topics of great interest in the myths of Cranesa’s orginy we
shall look at each of them in detail later The rmportunt port
however, is whether the elephant head casne from a sprsie ete
phantine creature or from no particular donor Symooheaty
Ganesa and elephants are mextricably linked

‘The elephant has enjoyed charismatic status ta South Asia
from the earhest times, and brs representations m stony and

--- Page 46 ---
22 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Painting are ubiquitous. The Indus Valley seals depict the ele
phant in graceful aspects standing over a manger. creating the
Impression that it was alicady a domesticated animal and of artis:
tic and possibly religious importance (Zimmer rss. sol 2. pl. 2
boo) The Vedic poets were tmpressed by the massive strength of
the elephant. as when thes sang of Indra. fled wih soma,
smashing the cites of his cnaemies “as a wild elephant rushes on
this way and that. mad with hear” (RY 164 7) Huge and eres.
the elephant also resembled the dark clouds of retreshing and
violent rain that fed and replenished the parched Jand Another
name for Amivata. Indea’s clephant schivle was ADhramu of
Abhramatanga, “who knits or binds the clouds” (Zimmer 1yso.
P 106).

The association of elephants with ratn and water pads expres:
sion in the myth of the annomung of the goddess Laksmi
(Gajalaksmi). wite of Vignu and ever of well-being. at the aime
ot the churning of the ocean of milk As Laksmi tose aut ot the
ocean sealed on a lotus.

Ganga und che other sacred sven stood there perlormiog gba:

bons And cig elephants ot the guatiers et the she took up their

Rute waters in orden vessels and pourey Bem over the goddess

the queca of the universe (VP tg tot. sce plot)

The connection of ciepbunts with water and) rau ois tuetber
emphasived in the oy thologs at india. who rides the clephant
Amasati whea he defeats rene This might. elephant reaches
down bis truok inte the waters urdembarld sucks up its water
and thea sprays inte dhe slouds which Indra then causes to rain
lorth cool water (MBA § gt 7-8. MatwaP ps 18-20) thereby
Tinking the waters of the sky sath those of the underworld Al
though there appears to be po direct assacniian in the «hassel
texts betwcea L shoot tnd her clephant aad Ganesa. thy cones
Gon tas net Seen lostin contemporary Hinduem as indicated bs
a pupular lithograph Chat depicts Ganesa aad baksam emanguay
eubat the same totus (see pion hes are lieked by the comman
hywe of the elephant, but thes share another important tears
Both ore bringers of well-being. demtes to whom Hindus turn ia
sechang the fuihilment et there wishes and goats

Vhe reltianstiy ot clouds god can to elephants reflects more
than the tact Cit clephaee ure round and grey and massive. like

--- Page 47 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta a
the grey monsoon clouds. and can spray water out of their
trunks, like rain. The monsoon clouds bring both nounshing
water and the possibility of destructive flouds. the elephant sym
bol is equaity ambtaleat This ambivatence springs trom the op-
position of wifd and tame The tame elephant, the paradigm of
power domesticated. clears the wild jungles so that human habi-
lations may be Out: He carries the king in battle and ceremonial
Procession: he is. in short. the symbot of order It as this order
creating and auspicious clephant. yoked tu a golden chariot, that
a king may offer ceremontoush to the gods as a great gift
[hemahasthimahdaddaa| amt so earn entry inte the ccalm of Visnu
inthe hfe to come (MatssaP 282) The wid elephant, however.
driven by heat of sexual desire or burning fever of disease, can
create awesome destrucuion Thy ambivalence of wild and time
in the behavior of clephants 1s refected in a qumber of myths

“from doth Hindu and Buddhist sources The wild side comes out
in one Buddhist story:

Ome wher the Bodhisatiz lived with a ereup of fve hundred
manks i the forest. one af them ngmed Indusimanagotts had
petclephant: When the Boghroera instructed him. to give up his
Pet Indasamanagatta sa he would be usable to live wathat him
“You wll five to regres 7 the teacher sand ‘Then one day when
all the monks went int. the forest lo gather ood and were gone
for wsesal days the clephunt fell into a trenes when laughed By
wind from the souls Theo he tore up the hel smashed the water
Jat and killed: his master Indasamanagotts Vehen the Beckssatts
learned of all thes from br disciples, he sad “We stata not nave
any dealings wath coil otes  Cindasamangxotts J yn 16g]

Here the mad elephant represents attachment to desire The
disciple who could not give up fis pet clephant was anally de-
stroyed by him) Although the clephant in the sane the Tesi
one” with whom one should avoid contact the bhaene shuts fram,
the elephant to the south wind, the wind That vames trom the
inauspicious direction, the whode of demaas The conclusian of
the story seems ta be that a persan’s allrchme nt fo vesure is bike
owning a veld elephant that will in the ingsitatle coun’ ct
things. turn. en the one whe holds and desour hin The Bodh
satta’s advice. to renounce (he clephant would hese spare
Indasamanagotta bis life

In anvther Buddhist stury we are presented with tbe other side

--- Page 48 ---
4 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLFS, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
of the clephant's character, that of virtue perfected, in an account
of the Buddha in one of his previous lives as a white elephant:
Once there Jived a magnificent white elephant in the Himalayas
who was surrounded by eighty thousand females and his mother
who was blind When he gave the other elephants food to take to
his blind mother, thes kept it for themseives. and neglected her
When he beard about the disregard for her. the white elephant
took he mother to a cave in the mountains and stayed with her.
taking care of her Then oace a man from Benares became host in
the forest. The clephant saw hum and. hfting him onto his back.
led him safely out of the forest: The king of Benares, whose royal
elephant bad just died. fold all his subyecis to report any sudable
elephants they might sce Phe man then told the hing about the
splendid elephant who saved him when he was last, and the king
sent his trainers to bring the elephant ts ham at once. When the
clephant had been brought to the king's palace, he refused to cat
and began to wither away But when the king learned of the cie
phant’s longing for his mother and bis worry over her well-being

he had a new city built for the elephant and hs mother Later.

when the mother died. the elephant sweat eeay ty live ina monas-

tery (Mauposaka J [no 4§1])

Un this story ob asceticism and of devotion of son to mother, one
theme we shall sey playing an important part in Ganesa’s mvthol-
ogy the virtuous white clephant docs only pood deeds. He cares
for his mother. he leads the Jost man from Benares to safety. he
fists until he can be reunited with hes mother, and he lives a pure
monastic hfe free trom passion Fingily. this seyal and virtuous
creature, although surrounded with moumeruble concubines satu:
cated wath crobe desires, remains chaste and dutitul to bis mother
and after her death lives the remainder ot bis life as a monk The
character of the blind mother being :n the Gave may suggest evoca
bons of the poddess (Parvati) and fink thes tale with the mythology
of Ganesa These two Jafaka stones present the extremes of the
clephant symbol the wild and murderous reyection of the master
and the self-renouncing devotion to the mother The Jdtakas. ale
though deeply Buddhist in there homes and organization of narra
tive materials, nonetheless draw heal on Indian folktales and
carry into them many geatrahctary views, including highly am
bivalent attitudes toward the elephant

Another way ob expressing the ambi alonce of wild tame in the

--- Page 49 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 25
symbol of the elephant appears in a myth about the origin of
elephants in a medieval text that details methods of care and
training:

Formerly clephants could go anywhere they pleased, and as-
sume any shupe. they roamed as they liked m the sky and on the
earth In the nosthern quarler of the Himalaya Mountain there Ws 4
banyan tree which has a length and breadth of two hundred
Feagues On it the excellent elephants alighted (after Aying through
the air) They broke off a branch (which fell) upon a aesmulage
place where dwclt a hermit named Dicghatapas. He was angered
by this and straightaway cursed the elephants Hence. vou sec, the
clephants were deprived of thee power of moving, al will, and
came to be vehicles even for mortal mea (ML 111-12}

In this story the elephants get their wings trimmed. just as
Indra tims the wings of the horse (MBh 1.16. 34-35) and cuts off
the wings of the mountains (R § 1), forcing them ty remain sta-
tionary on the earth, however, un this msth itis the word of the
ascetic rather than the sword of the king of the gods that succeeds
in domesticating the elephant. The elephants lose their formless-
Ness and ability to fly hecause they have inadvertantly disturbed
the meditations of the ascetic, much as Kama’s wings—along with
the rest of him—are burnt up by the fire of Siwa’s third eye when
Siva’s meditation is interrupted (BYP 4 49.40-82)

Another tale of the domestication of the elephant appears in
the famous story of the Buddha's encounter with the mad cle-
phant seat by tus cousin Devadatta to destray the enlightened
one: °

He [Devadatral let loose on the highven the lord at the ey at

elephants who rushed loward the Tatnamats walks pense Ike thy

thunder of black Gloucs af the dvomsday and wath the bese of thy
wind on 42 foonicss meht Verth murder in Ais heart tbe ok phone
rushed toward the Buddha and the peuple cred out and thie up
ther arms But wathout hesitating the Lend wearer, coltectod end
unmoved, and with no feching ot all wil Hi benesolenye tide
him compassionate toward ll living beengs and the yeats foitow oh
devotedly close bebind him So even thal great erephant had vat
the power ta touch the Sage who calimy went cn Aw wes The
monks who had folowed the Buddaa fled in rotor while the le
phant was still a long way off. and only Anand: remanicd wk the
Buddha But as the elephant came quite cess tne Sape’s spinel

--- Page 50 ---
26 GANESA! LOKD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
power [prabhdve] brought the beast to his senses and made him
lower his body and place his head to the ground, like a mountain
whose wings had heen shattered by + thunderbolt, The Sage
stroked the head of the lord of etephants ay the sun iouches 4
dloud with its rays (Suddhacarita 1% 40 $3, Johnston 1915. pp
36-40)

Rather than a warriors sword or a sage’s curse. it is the
Buddha's “spiritual power” that tames the raging beast as his
hand strokes the head in what may be @ faint ccho of a gesture of
decapitation, The point of the myth ts to draw aticntion to the
magnificence of the Buddha, who with kindness can lame even
the most featsome ot wild animals [he sory contnucs as it
consequence of the elephant’s domestication, ifs witdness 1s trans:
fered to Desadatta. the instigator of this assassination attempt
and catapults him “te the regions below, hated by all equally
whether they be kings, cizens. Brahnuns. of sages” (Buddha a-
ria 18 62) This account of the taming of the wild elephant al-
ludes to the “thunder of black clouds at the doomsday” and
likens the defeat of the wild elephant to the “mountain whose
wings had been shattered ~ These associations echo the myths af
Indea’s domestication uf the water demon Vitra and hes curing
the wings off the mountians. The wildness of the starm. the see
pent. and the elephant are connected through these myths snd
constitute a mutt im the mythology of Ganesa. who. like the
clephant and the gods, must he tamed wath offerings of toud and
Propitated with kind words Gay we shall wet

His role as a guardian and proteetor en anothers importaat die
mension of the symbol of the elephant. thay is the lame side of hrs
character In Fpig and Purame cosmologies, elephants. having
heen brovehe forth out of the cosmiy egg bs Beahma at the begin:
ming of creation, stand as guardians of the four diresens and the
four intermediate duccetions Aiasata The guardian at the cast
wothe teaver. gust as Indra es the Ieader of the gods These
elephant guardians [did pads or dagearasy. ike The serpent guards
dos [uermages| and dwarnsh protectors [vad sas]. hold the world ol
the gods on there backs and shoulders They stand guard over the
pain ot entry and present amy ese or polluting forces fram
cotcsay the world of the gods Phis array of mythological guard
eos Tecewtes Usual cxpreswon i the great temple compleves ot

--- Page 51 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 27
both Buddhist and Hindu India. Rows of clephants, along with
ndgas and vaksas, can be seen carved in {neces along the lowest
levels of these structures. and clephant statues frequently stand
as guardians of the temple thresholds

The duty of the guardian figure is to protect the purity of the
inner shrine: he must keep out those who would seek to detile
wt. To the devotee seeking entry into the inner sanctum, the
guardian of the threshold is the first obstacle to be overcome If
one approaches the shrine and pays homage to the guardian,
indicating sincenty. and offers the appropriale gestures of sup-
Pheatian to the ‘deities inside, then the guardian will grant entry,
But ut one is insincere or neglects the guardian in haste to reach
the toner sacred world. then the guardian will place obstacles 10
the devotee’s path and render worship fruitless. The guardians
stand on the threshold between the profane world outside the
shrine and the sacred terntory inside It is thus symbolically
apposite that they are bemgs whe themselves inhabit: wo
worlds. the yadjus live in the underworld as well as in the realm
of the gods. the nagas move both in the water and on land. The
elephants. as we have seen. once inhabited the sky ay well as
the earth and, like Auravata. their trunks reach into the pether-
world of the demons in order to steal thew water, which they
then deliver to Indra ‘Through us symbolic associations, the
elephant also straddles the boundaries between the wild and the
tame, chaos and order

In his role as Viehnassara. the overcomer of obstacles, Ganesa
appropriates much of thi guardian symbolism tn the sacred cuts
of Kasi (Benares), the presence of Ganesa in this guardian capac
ity as fully expressed The ctty ts teed aut as a model or the
cosmos. In seven conceatnie circles Bach cirele has a shrine ta
Ganesa at the four directions and the four ittermediate pouty
just as on the cosmic level. the drevayas (clephant peardians)
stand watch over the regions of the sky

Ganesa assumes a protesting aad euardien tole us ie ban od

Obstacles.” Vighnefa, who reas at tbe threshold imjssing ied

removing obstacles ay he sees bt There are 18s Gaines.

Kas. poxtioncd schematically at the erent she eget erep es

POINTS an seven concentne res spreading ob toi the tree

Uhundraya Ganeda located at the center acer Ving scare Isnt

--- Page 52 ---
28 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
the pilgrim must pass through one chain of these threshold guardi-
ans after another as he approaches the center of the city, (Eck
1978, pp. 178-79)

As it is in the casmos, and in the temple and the sacted city as
earthly embodiments of the divine paradigm, so also does this
pattern appear in the human world of the king and his subjects
The elephant ts the vehicle of the king. who ts the Indra among
humaas, just as the divine elephant Airavata supports the Indra
of the gods. The Vedic Indra mdes a bull when he defeats the
serpent Vetra. but in the Epic and Puraqic periods Inora ndes an
elephant, perhaps partly because of its connutations as the reyal
conveyance The elephant, moreover, not only resembles the ser-
pent whom Indra has slain and thus domesticated. but in other
mythic contexts the name Arravata itself refers to the king of
serpents (KP 1 40 10). Elephant trunk and serpent share certain
undeniable characteristics and carry associations of force and
power, both political and sexual.

On the most basic level the elephant 1s the quintessentralls
appropriate royal anual. The largest ot beasts. if ty as suitable
for combat as a tank. Lavishly decurated. the elephant ws a mag:
niticent ceremonial vehicle for kings In processions But the royal
elephant also takes on symbohe meaning The king's elephant is
an expression of the people's weltare and the king's virtue Kings
denied nothing tor the comfort and well-being of elephants in the
royal stables. When the royal elephants were honored, the king:
dom prospered, but woe to the king who toolishis gave aways his
elephant) Many stories tell of the drought and famine that befall
the kingdem whose ruler Cals to keep tis clephants sunably
(Kurudhamma J [no 276]: Vessantara J ja <gc])

The association of elephants with rovalty and auspicious events
ts reflected in the tale of the birth of the Buddha Just after the
Buddha s mother and tether, Queen Masa and Kang Sudcého-
stoma. had made love. the queea had s dream that “a white king
elephant seemed to enter her body. but without causing any
pain.” and she concened (Buddhacaria 14) When ber ume for
delivery had come, the Buddha “came forth cut of his mother’s
side, without qausing ber any pamer injucy Hos bith was a
miracke, hke those of Aurva trom the thigh, Prthu from the hand.
Mandaaty. the equal to Indra. from the head. and Kaksivat bom

--- Page 53 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 29
the armpit” (Buddhacarita 1.10). These miraculous births recall
that of Ganesa, who was born when bis mother nubbed her limbs
with unguents and formed him from the residue.

Along with the ambivalence of wildétame expressed in the
stones of the mad and domesticated elephants, there ts a sexual
ambivalence in the symbol of the elephant. In the myths, cle-
phants are male the elephant guardians, the white royal elephant
who is also the Bodhisatta, the elephant demon whom Siva de-
feats, the elephant-king whom Visgu saves, Airavata. and, fi-
nally, Gapesa himself The male attributes of the elephant are so
obvious as to need no comment. Not only the (unk but the tusk
has phallic associations in some of the Ganesa stories. The myth
of the elephant guardians annoinung Laksmi >y spraying water
over her seemy the fullest expression of male ferulity surrounding
female fecundity. As O'Flaherty has shown, moreover, rain tends
to be associated with male seed in the Indian tradition, whereas
rivers appear as symbolic expressions of the feminine aspect of
water (1980, pp. 20-21)

Despite these overwhelming associations of masculinity with the
elephant, there are also distinctly feminine dimensions to the sym-
bolic use of the elephant in the Indian context. According to the
sexual taxonomy of Varsvayana’s Kamasutra, womer. with large
sexual organs are “elephants” to be paired with males with more
than adequate members. termed “stallons” (Kamasdira 11 3)
But such a parr <s an unequal one, with the larger temale express-
ing the “dangerous imbalance ot pawer between ao man and 4
woman ard tie necessity to contral thes imdalance © 1O' Flaherty
Ig8o, pp 247-68) The Dharmasastra admonishes a man to “wed
a woman tree from defects of body. who has an agreeable name
and the gait of an clephant ura goose, moderate bodily barr, small
limbs and tecth” (Mana 3 to) The poe! Bhartghart made use of
the erotic posubiltes taherent in the elephant storm. companng.
the thighs af a woman to an elephant’s tunk and writing (ast her
breasts “which swell like elephants temples eco a splendid resting
place for pearls” (Miller, p87) The hora thick sapling score
tion oozing trom the elephaat’s tempies dure the season of mat
ing. 1s a pervasive aymbui of the clpar of erotiy desire Eiat rite gy
cates the bees buzzing around itso thar thes foolishhy cast aside
and disregard all nsks As the Sanskrit poct Acta caaresses 1
(SRK 115, [ngall’s trans |

--- Page 54 ---
yp GAMESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Forgetful of the lotuses
and disregarding what the ear-stroke of the elephant will
do,
this honey-gatherer desires the pungent ichor.
Fre on craving
that costs the addict bee his life.

Closely related to these erotic images of the elephant are those
involving wildness (as we have already seen). Sensual desire. the
mortal enemy of ascetics, is a raging elephant in rut and must be
brought under control as the mahout controls the clephant with
his goad and hook. This symbolism comes through powerfully in
another of Bhartrhari’s poems in which he tells of the wildness of
the mind filled with desire (Miller, p. 93}.

Though f search the tiple world
through all us mundane passages
no man has met my sision’s field
or come within my hearing’s range
who could really bind

to. @ post of self-restraint

the raging elephant of his mind
with its drunken deve to court
the world af the sense.

We have seen that the elephant is a complex aad bighh inclu.
sive hgure Associated with clouds and storms. Itke the horse and
bull in the Ry Veda: standing at the threshold between the wilds
ness of the jungle and the order of the kingdem: annomnone
goddesses, and bearing gods and kings on his back as thes charge
into battle. the clephant is a quintessential Neure of fealty and
order, He as also linked to the complex of erotic imagens because
bis movements are gracelul hke a Woman's and his temples. hie a
woman's breasts, give torth a different but av less desirable Hud
His moods are unpredictable, when maddened ia cut. he ws the
eamation of destruction From these aspects of bis expansive
character no single sexual role can be weatihed for the elephant.
unlike the bull, stallon, cow. or mare Depending an the con-
text, he can be wild oF tame. male or temale Throughout the
history ot Indian culture the tendency has been to see in the
elephant the emblem of the cosmos iself, containmng all dichate-
mics within bis more than ample torm, Gagesa embodies many of

--- Page 55 ---
The Mythology of Ganefa 3
these oppositional characteristics. The elephant-headed god is
also a guardian of the threshold, at umes under the control of
others but someumes beyond the reach, and he és unpredictable
in his movements He is the son of Siva and Parvati, although
clearly male. he moves toward the feminine pote with his ten-
dency to identify closely with his mother. [a tis iconographic
representations Ganesa’s masculine features are subordimated to
his dwartish. vudsalike form, thereby leaving his gender less than
Precisely articulated

Dowors oF Gant Se's Hao: Gasasura, Galespra, AND AIRAVATA
The sources and circumstances behind Ganesa’s clephantine form
have engendered much interest in Hindu mythology, and many
eaplanations are given for how he came by his appearance. In
some mths Ganesa comes into the wortd already having his
elephant form, in others—ane they are the majority he acquires
his head trom an elephant after losing his own in bloody canfhet

In one Seuth Indian myth. Ganesa asks hes father Siva how tt is
that he has the torm of an elephant and his parents do not Siva
explains:

“fan the company of Pansat, retired once to the forest an the

stopes of the Himalayas to enyoy cach other's company We saw

there a female elephant making herself happy with a male ee.
phant This excited our passwony and we desired to enjoy ourselves.

in the form of elephants ] became a male clephaot, and Pasar

became a femae one. and pleasce ourselves. ats result of which

you were horn wih the face of as elephant (1 A) Gopinath:

Rao st. pp 44-48. cf Ziegenbalp. pp 49. 61 62)

This story tone of the [ew in which Ganesan produced through
the sexual union of Siva end Parvari. but only atter thes have put
on their clephant forms to “picase themsctyes” as the <'cphants
do. Here tas Sivaand Parat rather than Gaoesa who andere a
change. This sanant makes no reterence to ans beheading of
Ganesga as the prelude to his basing the form of an elephant: He
always was an clephant: Ina tclated story. Ganesa s crephuatine
origins are told with some intriguine sanavons

One day Siva and his wife went to eid the audience hall af the

gods ‘Two paintings in that hall attracted Una y attentian They

depicted two sacred syllables She asked her husband what the

--- Page 56 ---
32 GANeSA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNSNGS
paintings meant, and Siva said that one of them symbolized
Brahma, Visnu. and Siva, while the others represented ther three
fakus. When Swa had explatned this to her. she desired ta become
a female elephant and for him to assume the form of a mate
clephant, just as such figures had been painted on the canvases
The husband and wile then wok the forms of the male and female
elephant, respectively Them union produced an infant whose head
had the torm of an elephant. (Dessigane et al 1964, pp 1s: 16.
see also, Zeigenbalg, p. 59)

This story requires some explanation When Siva and Parvati
were in the celestial audience hall, the pamtings thes saw on the
walls represented the two sacred syllables a and uw. which together
resembled two elephants in embrace forming the famous ssilable
aum. This sylluble has special associanons with Ganesa. and
devotees of the god point out that the syllable resembles the face
of an elephant: with the a depicting the head
and belly. the & resembling the trunk and the 3 wee

ON
anusvara (the m) the plate of sweetmeats “~~

[ptoduka] offered to him. Hence this story of

Ganesa’s angin is ane of movement from abstract sound and

calhgraphic form to embodied cxuisteace. an Todisa example of

the word made flesh (MY. Joshi. pp. 2h 34, see also Dantelou

Igog. p. 293)

In some myths Ganesa is created in he elephantine farm In
others be backs a head for ong reason or another, aevessiteting a
search for a new head: the unfortunate clephant happens to be
closest and so ts calicd on ta donate brs own head to complete
Ganesa's creation The first type of story ws represented Py the
accounts of Ganesa arising out ot the sexual Suids of Sia und
Parvati afiee there bath. but outside Parsates bods (WV amP 28 @4-
66), of accounts of Parvate creating Ganess bs cubbint the sub-
Stances off the surface of het body

Then she cubbed «cated cal ive with powder over her beds and.

tabhed the litt off inte a buman teem which hed the head of an

elephant: Parvats plistully threw (nat son into the Ganges where
be became so large thas be extended binself ay big as the world

(MatsyaP ig4 602-4. PP Sptkbanda 48 446 477
Here the stan is the deommaat one of Ganesa’s origin fram the
mubbing ot Parsat’s lunhs When she throws him ime the water,

--- Page 57 ---
The Mythology of Ganefa 33
he immediately grows as great as the universe. recalling myths
about Siva’s tiga expanding to the heights and depths of the
cosmos faster than Brahma or Visnu can catch up to ats limits.
Parvati's gesture of throwing her son into the river calls to mind
the myth of the creation of Skanda (SP 2 41-42) In most other
variants of Ganesa’s birth story. hts creation by Parvati out of the
rubbing of her bodily substances 1s followed by his beheading and
testoratian with the head of an clephant. [In this version, how-
ever, we see the two stones collapsed together into a single cre-
ation narrative patternes after the creation of Shanda, with
Parvati plaving’ the male rule by providing the engendermy sub-
stance, the seed. and the river playing the female role by provid-
ing the womb out of which Ganesa emerges fully formed with the
head of an elephant

One intriguing variation on the story of Ganesa’s clephantine
beginnings appears im the Skanda Purana. As Parvati tubs the
substance off her body, she discovers to her dismay that she lacks
enough rubbing material tu complete her creation. the maternal
Necessary to make Ganesa’s head Urgently she cally out to
Skanda

"Quickly bring back some more rubbing material far a head so

that tts son of mine might become your breather, one who wd) be

difficult for any enemy tu conquer” fy searching for the materia.

as Parvati had asked, Skanda saw a super cicphant in rut. and he

cul uff his head and josned at tu the body which had hrea made out

of the rubbing material “Bar, son this hezd wil) be tow large

Where did you find 7° Parvati said But esen as sne cricd out

“Don't, dont’ the head became jorned lo the body by the vt tar

of fate (SkP 7.3 324 8)

After a frantic search Skanda comes to the rescue with the
head of an clephant to complete the creation Parvati had ander
taken, but she rejects this huge head from an animal ine rutted
wild state as too large tor the body she had made However. fate
seals the head to the bousy--as karma fastians bores according
to previous deeds in the transmigration process to the astanish
ment of the mothers ‘Thy myth appears to appreciate the unlikely
combination of head and body. and it leases respensility for Ue
merger to the inexorable and emgmatic mosement of fate

An unidentified clephant becomes the donur for Ganesd’s aca

--- Page 58 ---
34 GANEGA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
in yet another account of his ongins. Siva sceks entry into
Parvati’s bath, only to be barred by her new son and guardian,
Ganesa Siva cuts off the youth's head ina fit of anger. Parvati.
outraged at her husband's act. assembles her troops of sakns and
brings devastation to the gods. Seeing that he will be unable to
conquer her, Siva says to his gana attendants

> Gouin the sorthern direction and whatever person you incet first

cut off his head and fit it onto this bods “(SP 2.4 17.47)

Although the particular clephant who is made to give up his
head that Ganesa might be revived is not named, the text Goes
speerfy that he was found in the north, the auspicious direction of
regeneration. Further, this clephant had only a singe tusk, as
though the head had already undergone mublavion in preparalion
for ity transter to Ganesa, The single tusk is the subject of a num
ber of myths its own night and will be Gaken up later in the
discussion about Ganesa’s beheading Once the bods is joined ta
the elephant head sod sponkled sith appropriate water and holy
speech. Ganesa comes ta life as Gough he bad “amakered trom a
slecp.” a process Dike that which likes plave ritually in the sastalle
tion of Ganesa’s images during his annuel tesayal (SP 2517 s61

Other myths are speeihe ay io the deanty of the cleppant
doror and thereby hiak Ganesa’s ong:n mth with other elephan
tine msths already current in the tradition In eae instance Way
the demon elephant. Gapasura. whase head Si lakes fo restore
Ganesa Just after beheading Ganesa al the doors ta Pansat s
bath, Siva fortuitously

sow the elephant demon [G.pasut stindsne there Ws seen as be

shim Re struck all bis Read and tepk place g lon the hid

wham Ponte bad vreated [a thes was he Giinge tm te arise

(SRP 42002 20-200

The presence of the demon elephant os the denor for Ganesa'a
head recalls the myth ot Saves dete at Gaisuna. the sen of
Matiya

Garnuer. the clephant bord of the Danasas. remembered how bis

father, Mahisya. bad beea shun by Durga After performing ascot

cise [laps] until ay head xorehed the heavens aed seat all the
yeds runoiny to Braden doc rotuye Gviasura resend ¢ boon
from Brahma that Ae would become anvincitle over the gods and

--- Page 59 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 35
could not be defeated by any man or woman overcome with lust
So he conquered all the gods and took up residence in the palace
Visvakarman had built for Indra Arrogant in bis power and ne-
glectful of dharma, bis mind was filled with evil thoughts. Finally,
the elephant demon came to Kas) where Siva ved Then the gods
told Swa about Gayasura’s evil deeds and the lord agreed to help
them in destroying the demon Aller a herce battle in which Siva
deicated Gajasura, the demon praved Siva and begged him to
wear his skin and be known as Kyttrvdsas. “the one wearing the
skin.” Siva agreed. anu praising tus former cival, he transtormed
his body into a faga and established uf on the spot where they
fought. upon which the shrine called Krttisasesvara now stands
(SP 2.6 $7, ct BrP 4.98-101, KP f yu 16-22. yee pl 4)

This myth not only supplies the background for the demon ele-
phant who gives his head to Ganesa but also suggests a model for
the Ganesa story in other ways. In this myth the demon elephant,
motwated by revenge for his tather’s dismemberment at the hands
of Durga. exchanges his ascene actuevement for a beon from
Brahma that protects him against all creatures who have desire
After threatening the gods and siolatng dharma, he and Siva
confront one another over the ternlory of Kasi (Benares), the
place Siva loves even as he loves Parvati When Siva defeats the
demon, he transforms bim into a devotve and through the act of
wrapping the animal's skin around bumself and taking the form of
the eclephantskin-wrapped faga. Siva insures his immumate union
with his former rival. A different serston of the story says Siva
tecerved the elephant skin “with head attached and dopping with
far” ay a wedding gift (rom Indra [PP Srsukhanda 46 azay A
similar battle takes place between Siva ond Ganesa In thes story,
Siva and Gagesa quarrel over the tertory of Parval’s private
chamber, which like Kasi 1s sacred to Siva Ganesa is defeated ond
mutilated at Siva’s hands. then the lord restores Ganesa, keeping
him close by as thé leader of tus (Siva’s) ganas and giving him
Privileged access to all devotees’ offermps as the ong worhipped
at the beginaing of all undertakings In both the Ginisuza and
Ganesa stones. the comman theme ts the taming of the adversary
of the god Siva through the process af dimemberment and resto
ration to divine mumacy. Each myth displays the power of Suva as
both the lord of destruction and ¢reabon

Another variation on the battle between Siva and the cicphant

--- Page 60 ---
36 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
adversary and on the source for Gapesa’s head draws on the
categories of Samkhya philosophy:

Once there was a battle between Siva and Ganesa which had gone

‘on for a tong time without interruption When the unconquerable

Siva, mounted on an elephant. saw that Gagega was made out of

praket [matter] and filed with avidyd [ignorance]. he knocked him

down along with the elephant on which he was nding. Then

Parvati praised Siva and asked him for a boon that he should

restore her son whom he had just killed So Siva yoned the head

of the elephant to where Gagesa’s head had been and pulled out
one of his tushs and gave it to him for his ascetic’s staff (SkP
1.1.10.29-38)

In ths story Siva’s elephant vehicle gives up its head for his
master, and the single-tusked form is accounted for by having
Siva remove one tusk and give it to Ganesa for his ascetic’s staff
(yogadanda). The myth links Siva’s conquest of Ganesa to
GaneS$a's ascetic aspect. and the scene resembles an inivation
into yogic discipleship We shall return to this suggestive myth
later, when we examine the theme of dismemberment and castra-
hon in the conflict between Siva and Ganega. to compare it with
other myths about the broken tusk. The imtiatory symbolism of
the ascetic’s staff may also be seen in the rite of upanavana, the
sacred thread initation, in which the gucu gives the young man a
stick to symbolize his chaste mendicancs. which stick os abso
called a yogadanda.

According to anuther Puragic source. itis Indsa’s elephant
vehicle, Auavata, who unwillingly surrenders his head so that
Ganesa may be made whole Siva orders his companion, Nandin
the bull. te po to the north and find a suitable head

Nandin wandered ever the tnple universe unui he sae Auavata

lying down with brs head lacing north As he stated te cut off

Arrsvata’s bead the elephant gave out a loud roar, and Indra come

there with the othee gods Then Indra and Nandit: fought fercely

until Naodin defeated bi and cutoff Auavata’s bead as the gods.

Inoked on bewildered. (BDP 2.60 50 -§2)

Like the account of the clephant-skin wedding gift, this mvth
variant cleatly inks the mythologies of Siva and Indra in the
cucumstances surrounding Gagesa and Auravata. who play analo-
gous roles as their lords’ servants: Atravata, the elephant-king

--- Page 61 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta ky
vehicle, and Ganesa, the lord of the gayas. As in many myths in
the Puragas about the conflicts between Siva and Indra, the as-
cence Siva easily overcomes the herow but thick-headed Indra
through his proxy Nandin As the elephant head makes tts transi-
tton from the body of Airavata to that of Ganesa, it loses one of
its tusks, causing Ganesa to be known as Ekadanta, the single-
tusked one. In the severed head and the broken tusk we sce that
Gapgesa’s new badily parts get rimmed; the myth emphasizes that
Ganesa become a great yogi like hus father (BDP 2.60 105). Indra
1s consoled by Siva, who tells him to throw the headless body of
Aifavata into the ocean of milk, trom which he can churn
another elephant mount, and the king of the gods receives an
immortal bul! from Siva as compensation (BDP 2 60.93-94).

Another myth recails the story of an unfortunate incident in-
volving Indra and Airavata and the trascible sage Durvasas, an
incamation of Siva in his destructive form as Bhairava:

Long ago. Indra. intoxicated with wine and Just. made love with a

beavuful nymph named Rambha in the forest Then Indra. whose

mind remained Alled with crotic passion. saw the sage Durvasas
who was on his way from Vaikuoths [Visnu’s home] to Kailasa

[Siva's home] filled with ascetic fire Indra howed to him and the

sage gave the kang of the gods a pdrydia flower Indra then placed

the flower onta the head of Airavata, who was transformed into
the form of Visnu by the touch of the Hower Atravata then abai-
doned Indra and ran into the forest: Durvasas became enraged
that Indra had dishonored the flower and cursed him to bose alll lis
powers (DBP 9 4ni-26, sce also BYP 3 20 41 62 and Dessigane

el al. (960, pp. ff.)

This story also concerns the sivalry between Indra and Siva,
who here takes the form of Durvasas The powers of the sage
make short work of Indra’s wealth and sexual prowess. The
paryata flower is an emblem of nches and crotie power, one of
the flowers from the five coral teces that arose out of the churn-
ing of the ocean at the beginning of the cosmic cycle In another
story the goddess gave this flower to Dutvasas who in turn gave it
to Daksa, who became so aroused by the scent of the flower that
he made love to his daughter Sati “in the manner of a mere
beast.” This shameful action drove her to burn her body. that 1s.
commit sail, and provoked Siva to such a rage that he beheaded
Daksa (DBP 7.30). In thus myth Durvasas curses Indra to lose his

--- Page 62 ---
38 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINBINGS
powers because Indra had failed to honor the gift of a sage Ina
Jarger sense, however, the sage’s curse represents the power of
ascetic control over erotic pleasure. When the magic flower
touches Auravata, he becomes wild and disappears into the
forest. In another vanant, Amavata makes a more dramatic exit,
which in turn leads to an important connection with the story of
Ganesa's clephantne ongins. Here the parguia Nower 1s said to
“remove all obstacles... wlever wears it shall be worshipped
as the best among the pods” (BYP 3.20.53-$4}

When Indra placed the flower Durvasas had gwen tim oo
Anravata’s head,

Ihat powerful clephant forcetully threw Indias down fzom his head

and ran off into the dense yungle There. being infatuated with

desire. he forcibly made love with a femsic clephant Its the
nature of femuies to desise plessure. and so the female clephant
yielded ta the male's paswon And there cn the forest she gave
burth to many young ones Meanwhile. Vignu cut off the head of
the elephant dwelling there and put ion the shoulders of Ganess

(BYP 3.20.57-61)

Through this indirect route Ganesa receives a head consecrated
by the touch of the obstacle-removing flower. which orginally
came from Parvali’s own hand Auravati's abandonment ot Indra
alter the incident of the paryata flower ws sembolie ot the latter's
more general loss of power As a consequence of Durvasas’s
curse, Indra must wander an anonymous beegan ain the work!,
seeking finally a boon trom Brahma that leads to the churning ot
the ocean and the Poxmniag ot a new cosmic cvele

As the donor ol Ganesa’s new head. Aravate contributes all
the powers formerly belonging to Indra as the king of the gods
And all the assoviauiens of the elephant with rovally and power
are tansterred to Ganesa ay the new lord ot the divine ranas
attendant on Siva The story assumes that Ganesa’s power, like
his physical fora. could not have come trom nowhere but had to
be taken by force of arms, as with Nandun’s beheading of by the
power of the sage’s curse, which caused Auavata to become wild
and subsequently to be beheaded by Viyou. $1 the stories of the
Auravata cycle. itis Siva, acing through tus alter egos of Nandm
and Durvasas, who stcals the power from Indra and makes it
available to his newly adopted son Gagesa

--- Page 63 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 39

According to another variant of the story of his ongins,
Ganesa’s elephant head appears through the courtesy of yet
another divine elephant In a text showing strong Vatsnava influ-
ence, Viygu is present at Ganesa’s beheading—this ume per-
formed by the sage Sam, or Saturn (the lord of suicides), stand-
ing in for Siva—and sees Parvat's distress at the mutilation ot her
newly created son:

When Han [Vesqu) saw alt of them in such distress, he rode
Garuda and went in a northerly dtrection toward the Puypadhadra
River There he saw Giajendra, the king of the clephants, lying
down in the midst of the forest. The elephant. surrounded by bis
calves here and there. lay faint from exhaustion trom lovemaking,
with bis head turned toward the north Immediately Viygu cut off
the beautiful head and Jad the blood smeared head on the back of
Garuda The dead bods of the elephant fei] onto hiy mate. who
awoke and began lo cry loud laments slong with her chikdren
Viyou consoled the griesing clephant and cut off the bead from
another elephant and attached a to the first animal's body and
brought him to hfe Then be came to whete Parvath was and,
taking the child ito his lap. he properly jomed the head ta the
body Krsna caused life to come into him by shouting the mantra
“him.” (BYP 4129-22, sec pt 7)

Ganesa recenes the head of Gajendra and sow made whole
But Gapesa’s restoration is the cause of Gayendra’s muulation:
Parvati's joy is paid for with the grief of Gayendta’s widow Viynu
comforts the widow by restoring Gajendra with the head of
another elephant. thus passing the acon on down the chain of
karma, as it stinging heads on a thread or fowers fora garland of
beads fur a rosary This variant recalls the tule in which Visnu
beheads Asavata after he had abandoned Indra It tinks Gunesa’s
head with that of Gajendra. the lord of the elephants: Gaycadra
appears to be a distinct character from Arravata, although they
nearly merge in this sequence of stones The unportant myth of
the Gajendramoksa. the release of the elephant lord, is tukd ia the
Bhagavata Purdna

Once. the king of the elephants. along with his wises end children

came to a splendid garden at the foot ot the mountain that was

surrounded by an ocean ke the ocean of milk With musk dud
ovaing from his forehead, with bees swarming sraund at the cle
phant plunged ito the ocean ta cool hunself He sprayed water

--- Page 64 ---
ao GANESA; LORD OF ORSTACIES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
over the females and the females and young ones bathed and
drank Then a mughty alligator. who had become angry at this
intrusion into the ocean. seized hold of the elephant’s foot and
held it fast in tis jaws When the wives of the elephant king saw
that he was being dragged further and further into the ocean, they
tned in vain to pull him hack out. As the alligator and the ele-
phant struggled with une another the elephant became increasingly
weaker while the alligator grew stronger When he saw that be
could not free himself from the trap of the aliigator’s jaws. the
elephant called out to Visnu for refuge. When Vignu saw the cle-
phant’s plght. he came these and pulled the clephant and the
alligator out of the water He transformed the alligator back into

Haha, the celestial gandharva who had been cursed by the sage

Devala [Narada] because he had been sporting in the water with

some women when Devala wanted to bathe When Huhu pulled

on Devala’s teg he was cursed to take the form of an alligator. only

to be rescued from ut by seizing hold of the leg of an elephant

(BbP 8.204)

In this myth of conflict between the alligator and the elephant.
we see some similarities to the myths of Airavata and Durvasas
At the conclusion of the myth, we learn that the alligator is really
a disguise of an crotic gandharva, who had been cursed by the
ascetic Devala for touching him while he was bathing. much as
the flying clephants had been cursed by the sage Dirghatapas
when they brushed aginst the tree under which he was stung
By transforming the gandharva Hahd into an alligator. the ascetic
teverses their rules, for now the alligator ts the one whose walery
terntory 1s invaded by the elephant: His titng the leg of the
elephant echoes the theme of beheading. which we have seen at
work in other myths ‘The conflict between the alligator and the
elephant surrounded by his entourage of cows he the conflicts
between the sage and the gundharva, between Siva and Gayasura.
and between Durvasas and Indra—draws on the important theme
in Hindu mythology of the tension between the powers of crow
cism and asceticism The tension between the allgatot and the
elephant cannot be resolved, and so thes both edge their way ta
destruction AL this despetate moment the myth turns to the
solution of bhaku. The intensity of the clephant’s devonon to
Visuu frees both creatures from their animal incarnations. and
Visou's grace gets the two animals past there impasse in spite of
whatever previous karmic injustice put them there The elephant

--- Page 65 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta a
king's mutilation and near annihilation in the jaws of the alhgator
provides the setting for his liberation, just as Nandin admonishes
Indra as he gets ready to cut off Airavata’s head, “Give up hope
for Airavata and go away, for one is better suited to give lite’s
breath to the son of Siva than your Airavata” (BDP 2.60.56-57).
This turn of events echoes another widespread theme, that of the
curse of the god that provides liberation to his enemy; salvation
by damnation. For the other elephantine characters who un-
willingly give ther heads to Siva for Ganeéa's resuscitation, the
consequence of their dismemberment is restoration to a better
situation in the inner chambers of the god’s circle; the loser wins.
The clephant head is Gsanesa’s most readily identifiable charac-
teristic, his trademark, and the most frequent motif in the stories
of his creation. [t suggests all the symbolic associations of the
elephant’ wildness and domestication. phallic masculinity and
feminine grace. and the protective guardian functions at the
threshold In addition, however, the mythology of Gapesa makes
use of particular elephant characters who serve in various con-
texts, both as supports for and as adversaries of the gods. In
taking their heads, GageSa also takes their powers and aspects of
their functions into his own composite identity Like Gayasura,
Ganesa continues to be an adversary of Siva and the other gods
in some myths—more often indirectly through clever deception
than by force of arms Like Arravata, he remains loyal to his
father and master Lake Gayendra. his near destruction through
conflict with Siva or as the consequence of a curse ieads to the
intervention of the deity—in Gagesa’s case that of Parvati -and
to his hberation into full recognition and status in the world of
the gods as the Lord of Obstacles and the guardian of the divine
threshold So Ganesa has more in common sith these elephant
beings than simply a similarity of form Each of them contributes
something of himself along with his head: much ay at the creation
of the goddess Durga. cach of the gods contributes his power to
help kindle the sacred fire out of which she ts born (MP K2 8 (1)
Ganesa’s Birth: Substance and Technique
Besides myths having to do with Ganesa’s elepharit form, stones
about his substance-—what he was made out of and how he was

--- Page 66 ---
a2 GARESA? LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
made —have captivated the imaginations of the mythmakers
Some variants have Ganesa come forth from hts father’s mind,
identical to him in form, only to be cursed by a jealous Parvati to
be ugly and have the head of an elephant Most vanants. how-
ever, place Ganesa’s orngins within the substance of his mother's
body, the dirt, unguents, and residue on their limbs What is
common to all the myths of Ganesa’s origins 1s that he ts never
born from the sexual union of hix mother and father in their
divine forms as Siva and Parvati: Often one or the other of them
creates him unilaterally When they are both involved in this
engendering. Ganesa emerges out of thei seed only after it has
become leftover substance, mixed with the water of them bath. of
when they have ansiormed themselves into elephants. as we
have already seen.
A This unnatural ong for Ganesa ts not in itself particutarly
a strange. as many Hindu gods and goddesses are bora in an un-
usual manner and sometimes unexpectedly: whether out of the
cosmic ocean, sacrificial fire, spilling of seed. dropping of blood.
the thought of the progenitor, or by some other means Why ts
this type of birth story appropriate for Ganesa? There are two
mythic explanations tor this First, Parvati wants to fulfill her
maternal longing for a child: second, she wants to have a san who
will protect hee fram hee husband's intrusions Both accounts
reflect excessive maternal fechngs that seck to deny the father’s
role altogether
According to the first (pe of myth, once when Panati was
feehng the desire for motherhood parucutanly strongly. she
Pleaded with Siva to make Jove with hee and convene a son im
her. But he replied
*K “Daughter of the mountain, | am oot a houschotder, and | have
no aced forasen This wicked group of gods gave vou to me aya
wate, but a wile ws surely the greatest fetter tor a man who is
wilbout passion Besides, progeny are a noose and a sluke House:
holders need sons and wealth. and 4 wife is necessary to obtain a.
son. aod sons are necessasy tor making atterings fo The aacestars
But {de not dic. goddess, and so why de Panecd a sont Where
there ws no disease, what ts the need for medieme > Come. vou are
wwoman and Lam aman bet us enjoy berg the causes from
which children arise and rejoice in the pleasures between men and
women, without progeny.” (BDP 2.60. 10-14)

--- Page 67 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta “a

Siva states the classic ascetic argument: sons are tor those who
are caught in the net of desire and rebirth. For the houscholder a
son is a sousce of comfort and enjoyment to his father, and in
death and thereafter a son will see that the father receives the
appropnate sraddha mtuals and ancestral otfenngs to grant him
safe passage into better rebirths. As Siva has no death, he has no
heed of such rites nor of sons to perform them, The logic of his
position takes him away from the involvement with worlds or
sons. he is purusa, detached and free But Parvati is the Mother
of the world, and how can she be the mother without sons? She is
prakra: and must seck fu fill the world with torms (SkP 1 1,10,27-
36). Although he refuses to give Parvati iis seed in order that she
might conceive a son. he does cagerly desire for her crotic sport
For Siva is not an ordinary ascetic misogynist: he values highly
his erouc play but does not wish to transform it into instrumental
activity by placing it under the goal of conceiving progeny. He
wants to make love but retain bis seed, Whatever sons there are
to be between them will not come from their sexual umon and
Parvati’s womb

Another variant gives us a different reason for why Siva and
Parvati should not canceive a child. This story is set in the con-
text of the confhet detween Siva and Indra. which, as we have
already seen. ws a theme tn the background of many Ganesa
myths

When Rudra was engaged in sevual pleasure the worlds shook

wwlentl. und the sesen oceans breame sucred up and the pods

became hiled with fear Then the gods, together with Indes, went

to Brahma, saving. “Uhe word is greatly disturbed) why the

Brahma said tw them “Siva isin the amidst ot fovemaking Cm

sure) When he becomes possessed by it these worlds became agi

tated “Then the gods said to Indra, "Came. les go: before at
comes to an end If thes lovemaking 1 consummated. that child
which shall be born as a resull of then union will be unperishuble

He will certainly deprive Indra of his postion as kang of the gods

(VamP 28.41-35)

In this myth, as in’ many others in the Puranas Indes attempts
to shore up his deteriorating positian as king of the pods by
interrupting Siva and Pan att. preventing them from concen ing a
child who would displace him itis a theme common to many
myths of the births of gods and heroes: there appearance in the

--- Page 68 ---
“ GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
world threatens the comfortable order the established gods or
kings enjoy. Any child bom of such illustnaus parents would be
so exceptional as to cause all eyes to look at him, leaving Indra in
the background. But beyond Indra’s own self-interest, there fs
the larger threat to the gods. for the appearance of a child born
naturally to Siva and Parvati would combine their respective
powers Such concentrated power would bring the universe col-
lapsing in upon them, giving Indra and the gods no place to
stand. The gods’ well-being lies in keeping the two divine movers
neither too close together nor too far apart—difficult and dehcate
work at which they are not always successful. A similar theme
appears in a slightly different context, a devotional nte to Siva in
Bengal, Siva-gdjan. Here the goddess (Parvati) arrives in the
form of a water vessel but is not allowed near the image of Siva
even though ail the celebrants recognize her to be his consort
The devotees explain that “the combination of the gaddess with
the main deity of the locality would be too much for mortals to
bear; the combined force or power that flows from the union of
Siva and Durga would destroy the people who want to share in
this creative energy” (Ostor, p. 120)

Although Indra 15 momentanly successful in interrupting the
divine couple and in preventing Parvati from conceiwing a child.
later on the fluids from their lovemaking come to bfe on ther
own in the bath:

Mabni [Parvati's servant] began leaning and cubbing the goddess’s

golden hmbs with her hands. using gentle and fragrant unguents.

as Parvati reflected on the quality [guna] of her own sweat When

Malin left Parvati made an clephant-headed mao out of bet dodily

dirt [malu], one who had the chest of a bull, four arms. and all

auspicious marks When she made him and stood him on the
ground, she sat again on ber throne Thea Siva arnved and took
his bath while seated on bys throne Relow him sat the one born
out of Parvatt’s bodily dirt The sweat from Siva and Parvaty mized
together there on the wet ground, and out of thal union came the
one having the clephant’s trunk. blowing au through wt Then the
tord of the unnere became content cecagmzing him to be his
own son, (VamP a8 $7 50, 64-66, ch Caturvargacintamant

2.2.359)

Another vanant of this story has Ganesa born from a drop of
blood shed at Siva and Parvati's intercourse, thus accounting for

--- Page 69 ---
The Mythology of Ganefa 4s
Ganesa's characteristic red color (BhavP 2.4.31-33. cited in Gad-
gil. 1.48). As with other versions, Gapega arises out of the sexual
fluids of Siva and Parvati, but outside their bodies.

Two birth narratives appear to be collapsed together here: one
tells of Parvati's forming Gagesa out of her bodily residue; the
other relates how the sweat (symbolizing sexual fluids or seed)
from his parents’ bodies is mixed together on the wet ground of
the bath/throne room and spontancously gives rise to Gapeda.
The latter version of the story suggests the context of the shrine,
where the deity functions as a royal presence and 1s also bathed
in the same location by the priests. In that holiest of holy places
the residual substances of the deities, their firtha (batbwater), is
of such potency that it can engender new beings outside the
deities’ bodies The fecundating power of firtha is well known
among devotees of shrines. So powerful is the engendering qual-
ity of Parvati’s residue that (in a different version of the story)
when a female demon drinks the unguents mixed with Parvatl's
body rubbings, she becomes pregnant and so gives birth to
Ganesa (Getty. pp. 6 7). In this story, like the one in which Siva
and Parvati transform themselves into elephants in order to con-
ceive an elephant-headed son, GageSa comes into being from the
union of his two parents, but in this extracorporal manner.

Parvati’s need for a son 1s as compelling as that of Siva not to
have one Her childlessness 1s her greatest sorrow (BVP 3.2 24)
On one occasion she pleads with Siva to conceive @ child with
her. absolving him of any paternal obligations

“When you have conceived a child. you can return te your yoga,

great lord I wall bring up the son and you can be a yogr T yearn

painfully for the kiss af 2 son's mouth. and since you took me for
your wife you should grve me a son Your son will get desire
marnage for himself. if you hke. so you will not have a son

grandson, and dewendents ” (BDP 2 60 (5 18)

Her argument tests on maternal desire She willingly concedes
all else to Siva. He can return to his medilations without any
further obhgation, and brs son can be as averse as bis father to
mariage and procreation. Yet, engendering a son by natural
means would be contrary to Siva’s nature. and whatever sonship
Ganesa is to have to Siva will be fraught with obstacles, which (as

--- Page 70 ---
a6 GANESA: LORD OF OASTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
we shall see) the elephant-faced onc is capable of overcoming to
the astonishment and conversion of his father

Another myth gives the opposite reason for Parvan’s desire to
have a son, not to join with Siva but to keep him away:

K Once when Parvati was taking a bath. Siva threatened Nandin.
who was guarding the doar, and went into the house. When that
beautiful woman, the mother of the world. saw him arrive without
warming. she stood up embarrassed. Then Parvati decided to fol-
low the advice given carher by a frend, thinking to berelf. “1
should have a se;vant of my own, 4 man of accomplishment who
witl be favorable to me and obey me and no other, ane who will
not wander even a hair's breadth from my side.” As she was
thinking in this way. she rubbed out af the dist of her Sods a
young man who possessed all goud qualities handsymc. well
bodied, sturdy. well-adurned, and most valurous and strong She
gave him many garments. ornaments, and blessings “You are my
Very awn son, There 1s no one else here whe belongs only to me.
she said. (SP 2 4 13.15-32)

\ This inyth reverses Parvatr's relation to Siva. Instead of want-
+ ing ty seduce Siva to concenve a son with him, she needs to keep
Siva away, to protect hee autonomy. [tas she who refuses his
advances, whereas before he retused hers. In both cases the fun-
7 damental structure is the same, Siva and Parsats are to have a son
x without Aaving a sun Their child comes ite beng through un-
natural means. This contradiction tans like « thread through the
sanations of Ganea’s buth stones One of both af the pareatys
will be surprised by tay bith appearance. one will repoot: and
deform him. and his restoration wsil be in the form atone who ts
i both split and fused
Lint Farner. Like Sow
Most of the myths of Ganesa’s ongins tell us that Purvatt created
him and Siva beheaded him, one story, howeses. & important for
the ways in which It inverts clements of the dommant myth
Formerly. all the gods and sages who were rich in asceticism
underlook winous yclions and were successtul in them ‘Then later,
those who were on the wrong path were successful in there actions,
white these an the OPht path schteved success only in the face of
gfeat obstacles Se the pouds and the ancestors worned greatly and

--- Page 71 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta a
eiiesd exgetiet chant bem fury enght Ureest the secure ul hoe
he cet am thn oman pert. | fey toyrtber. (ene Gecitens of
im taytn Carewe evaded ls ge in Radios. tac netic one 80 they
amng wt Bade mm M4 Kalas and. bemeng before hum. wm! 10
fm eerie ©) lhewe ped bored be ride the trident, you
Grad Len ntaties os are for evereune eithaul exception.”

Where tx gdh bed qputnen bee men filled wild the greatest Oy
stat Sentoe dot Limes with am wadlinkang ove As he wat looking xt
fart om pocranes wf tht pink he thought to hinwelf. “Why »
tere sw nore Ame in tee ake”? | have form in certh, a:r. fire. and
ener eet ere A Cone ot me In space? As he wan ihinking this
themghe tn leeghed. ands mun somk term cul of the force [Sekt]
A ten Cammendyge. an Brahe hud predicted Amused at this. the
teed weed “hee ene mat hese quarter parts of him made up of
rma ot tee etorments © Then a ureature look form. glonous, witha
stng les pemthy WHO cmensted Ighl on ail duections. He
Soot vra'le hic Sma endereed with all the same qualitics Ay
owt we Pe ek horn the med one Captivated all the gous with his
beauty. form, and radiance

Wire ly eee ws cryuenels formed roble child she looked
mma OA on wermiinting cre Ae Siva saw her fickleness. which
te the swtita! cemintem ot women he became angry thinking thes
Nr wateint wemth Ws he deluding to the cyes So the lord cursed
Cegete seg oO Lithe how. sou Shall have an elephants head
ye redeets Phen the rd whe had become filled with rage.
Feae ep erth tev beds shaking and as he shook welcr spewed out
fein oe fades Of aw fait end (ell to the earth. springing up in
vate me vung.aber wih clephant neath, biack ay tomula lees and
atts megan Vhen the tord became conluved Saying “What
we wang cm’ ‘Then the yoda said iu him You have just per:
fated 2 weal and unparalleled mirace Ver the be the ectons
the eb med from you Lets gather around him [ig Genesal.
bret ata der he come from! While the gous were wundering
oar thay the ang.akas began to shake the earth wiolzatly
Deer Boake the fourtaced one jumped onto his unequalled
wetanle ane Med You gods hese been Meswd by this three-cyed
tune ate, hee ech an ausprious [sve] form Siva hay fevered
som request by makiny en obstacle to sour cnemies © Then he
saws te Sica Succ thus ged oreaxe oul of your mouth fet him be
tee ecader of Ihe vingyakas, and they will be his followers Chis
one ete wae born trom you and whe hes laaen fori ta the four
cements on the vey os the been which you gave ty the gods
(VarP 24 3-25)

--- Page 72 ---
a GaANESaA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS

The story opens with a familiar Purdnic situation. the gods are
losing out to the demons because their efforts are being thwarted
by obstacles. They beg Siva to redress the balance by creating a
being who will set up obstacles uniformly for everyone, appar-
ently in the confidence that piven an even break the gods will
prevail. Acceding to their request, Siva looks at Parvati “with an
unblinking eye.” suggestive of erotic desire for her. He cannot
take his eyes off her. Then he reflects that there is no pact of him
that is made up from the element of sky or space jdkdsa,
vyoman|. According to the doctrines of Saivism, all the elements
of the world are manifestations of Siva, To rectify the smbalance
of powers between the gods and demons as well as the incom-
pleteness of the cosmes owing to his absence in one of its cle-
ments, Siva “laughed” forth a man made up from the power of
his mind, a man who stood there before his eyes [saksat] in
person, indeed identical to his father. Here Ganesa springs from
the fourth element—sky‘space rather than from earth. as he usu-
ally does in those variants in which he ts wWenttied as Parvati’s
child. On a different occasion Siva created another lookalike.
Virabhadra, out of his mouth in order to behead Daksa. He fater
threw this lookalike unto the sacrificial fire and then restored him
by giving him the bead of a goat (VayuP 30 128-9) The notion
that the child is brought inte: being from the father’s daugh ot
breath, that 1s. proceeding forth from the mouth, has a precedent
in the Upaniyads. where it ts said that the husband, in inter
course, breathes the power of procreative life inte his seed (BAU
6a..l.ef Tangva 16145) This notion accords with the more
general Vedio and Brahmagic traditions in which the sacted
speech chanted by its hnowers in the context of the sacrifice
brings the world of meaningful or real experience ante being for
the benefit of the atual cheat and those whom he represents.

Once Gayesa is created tdentical to his father, the difficuluies
begin. Siva sces Parva looking at this laugh-porn clone of Siva:
she regards his new double with an “unblinking eye.” just as Siva
had looked at her. The veiled hint of incest contamed in the
exchanve of looks sends Sia into a rage, and he curses Ganesa to
be ugly. with the form of an elephant with a potbelly to his
predictably excessive manner, Siva generates more elephant.
faced creatures, called vindyakas, out of his sweat, that fiery
liquid that. ike blood and seed. creates unilatcrally—as when

--- Page 73 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 49
Stva creates demons out of his sweat and destroys Dakgsa’s sacri-
fice (MBb 12,274.45; VamP 44.41-43: cf O'Flaherty 1980, pp.
33-40). These new beings created out of Siva’s rage are the
answers to the gods prayers, Gagesa receives lordship over this
new army of elephant-headed vanayakas, and the restoration of
the cosmic imbalance 1s reassured, at least for the time being.

Ganesa’s creation from Siva’s mouth through his laugh 1s remi-
mscent of Brahma’s creation of the Vedas and rys out of his
mouth and mind (MP 4§.20~24) The same pattern occurs in the
myth of Durga’s emergence from the collectiwe energies (tejas]
that the gods $pewed forth from their mouths into the sacrificial
fire like oblationy (MP 82 8-11). As with the goddess (Parvati),
the purpose of Ganesa’s creation is to save the universe from
destruction by the demons who had greedily diverted the flow of
sacnficial power and its benefits to themselves

A number of the themes central to this story appear in inverted
order in what we may take to be a variant. This tale appears in an
early nineteenth-century English translation and is also attributed
to the Vardha Purana, although it does not appear in cuher of
the Purana’s two published editions Whether itis a translation of
an authentic Sanskrit source or not, 1 does conform to the larger
logic of the myth:

Siva lnaked at Parvat. and whilst thinking how he could effect the

wishes of the gods. from the splendor af bis countenance there

sprang into existence a youth shedding radiance ail around. en
dowed with the ygualities of Sima, and eswently another Rudra,
and captivating by his beauly all the female inhabitants of heaven

Uma. seeing brs beauty, was ceated with jealousy, and in her

anger proneunced this cure Chow shalt eatoftead ay sght with

the torm of a beautiful youth, and therelore assume an elephant 5

head and a large belly. and thus shall all thy beauties vanish

(Kennedy, p 383. cf Dubow, p 637)

In thes story. as in the earher one, Ganesa emerges aut of
Siva’s “countenance” —1n # manner not clearly spectticd -to help
the gods Bul Parvate sees that hep beautiful and that the other
women in heaven also appreciate his fovely form and, out of
Jealousy, she curses him to be ugly This is in contrast to the
carher myth im which Siva curses bim because he sees that Parco
finds him beautfui. The intently of Parvatr’s anger meght be
interpreted as a reaction to her deelings of lust for Gagesa. tel

--- Page 74 ---
50 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS.
ings that are both incestuous and adulterous. Common elements
emerge in the (wo versions of this myth: Ganesga is the creation of
his father alone, in appearance indistinguishable from him, he
causes conflict between Siva and Parvati, which 1s only resolved
at his own expense: and he receives a curse and changes his form
so that he will be easily distinguishable from his father, Although
there is no explicit beheading in this story, the curse ts a sort of
verbal beheading that results in Ganesa's transformation into
an elephant-headed figure. Elements in this myth recall the
Brahmanic tale in which Indra created Kutsa from his thigh.
making him identical to himself. Kutsa then slept with Indsa’s
wife, who could not tell him apart from Indra. Indra cut off
Kutsa's hair, but Kutsa then disguised himself as Indra Finally.
Indra curses him to be a low-caste Malla (JB 4 1gy-200: cf
O'Flaherty 1976, pp 334-35) A similar predicament arose ac-
cording to a South Indian tale, when both Brahma and Siva had
five heads, which Parvati resolved by cutting off one of Brakma’s
heads so that she could distinguish him from her husdand
(O'Flaherty 1973, p. 127)

In another story in which Siva creates Ganesa as a favor to the
gods, the conflict between Siva and Parvati is absent: but other
nobons about the father’s role in the creation of children are at
work. The gods. led by Brhaspat. bring ther complaint to Siva

Bybaspa) wad. “We have come here desiring a hoon fram vou
You never pot cven a single obstacle before what the demons ash
of you. Those who harm the gouk senply prav ta you and get their
desires fulfilled So you should bless us instead with an obstacle to
these who harm us © When he heard this, Sra. the bard who
cums the prndka how, took the torm of Ganetvara Then all the
anus worshipped him. and Pacvat welcomed the elephant ted
lord. and all the other Uwellers in heaven rejoiced at what Siva had
done Then this boy who had come out uf the (eo of them. the
embarkment of tector aed suypicmusnesy stood there dancing

This gentle san of Siva and Pirate bowed to by father and

mother Siva performed the notes appropiate for the buth of a

son, bolting hint in hes aroiy and kissing him oo the head, saving

“You are my son, who has been born to destroy the demons snd

bang help to the gods and Brahmins who teach the Vedas Stand

there io the path which leads to heaven and create obstacles in the
rites of anyone who has sacrifices performed but fails to pay the

Prests’ fee [daksega] (LP 105 4-22, cf SkP 6.214 47-06)

--- Page 75 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta Ail

There appears to be some confusion in this story as to who
created Ganesa and how it was accomplished. First the story tells
us that Siva “took the form” of Ganesvara (ie . Ganesa), yet
jater it says Ganega “had come out of the two of them.” This
may be less a matter of confusion that it would appear. The story
reflects the ancient Indian view that a father reproduces himself
in his son, thereby saving himself from death by passing a re-
mainder of himself on to his offspring. The wife serves as the
field in which the seed is planted and from which at is harvested.
“After his wife conceives, the husband becomes an embryo and 1s
born again from her” (Manu g 8; sce also AB 7.13: BYP 3.2.37;
Shulman, pp. 223-67}. [tis said that Prajapati saved himself trom
being devoured by Agni by making himself into another, which
he then threw into the fire as a food offering. thus sparing himself
from death (SB 2.2.4.9, O'Flaherty 1980, pp. 24-30). This notion
of creation by splitting off a part of one’s self complicates the
relation between husband and wife. for she becomes the mother
to the husband who as now her son In the patriarchal traditions
of Hindu society the son resembles the father in all socially and
ritually significant ways. He takes his father’s name, caste. privi-
leges. obligations, and inheritance. at death the son gives new
birth to the deceased father through the performance of funeral
nites [§raddha] that make the father's rebirth in a favorable diree-
tion possible. Siva’s creation of Ganesa evokes the alder Vedic
tradition according to which the creative process resides with the
father as the one who contributes the engendenng power and the
codes through which the son will be located im society and the
cosmos

The more pervasive versions of the myths relaung to Gapesa’s
birth, however. place Parvatr in the spotlight as the source of his
substantial body and form) These elaborate and fascinatingly
subtle stories probably reflect the later tull Puraoiw tradition in
which the goddess figures more prominantly as an independent
character
Craurninc THe Diving Bopy
In the cycle of myths in which Parvaty makes Ganesa out of the
substance rubbed off the surface of her body. the conflict be-
tween the gods and the demons that caused Siva to create Gages

--- Page 76 ---
§2 GANESA’ LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
is exchanged for a conflict between her and Siva. Father Siva is
too far away, as when Parvali makes Ganesa (o relieve her loneh-
ness during his long absence, or he is tuo close. as when she
stations Ganesa at her door to keep him away These myths vary
in important detarls, but they all draw on the older myth in which
Skanda (CGianesa’s elder brothers) is created out of Siva’s seed.
which he spit into Agni’s mouth when the gous interrupted bis
lovemaking with Parvati Unable to contain the hers seed of
Siva, Agni threw it into the Ganges, where 1 impregnated the six
Pleades [Krttkds] who collecuvely gave birth tu a boy with one
body and six heads (MBh 3.213-10, SP 24 1-22. Arenura-
sambhava 9.10: ct. O'Flaherty 1972. pp 261-77)

Accarding to one myth. Siva and Parvati bad beea meking love
on the Himalaya mountain for a long ume wath all comforts and
diversions Then Siva left her to attend to his meditation on Mt

~ Mandara:
| Parsate remained wub her father. feeling lonely Then. ater a
V long time had passed, she [elt Ihe desire le have sen Aloge with
the company of ber fnends. Parat made a game with dels

[ketimaputraka, Wterally, ‘iittle sens that were fasmianed” | ts rubs

bing sceoted unquents miacd wuh powder over her bods and rub.

bing out the dirt lo form a man whieh had the bead of 4 ene phant

Parva playfully threw that son inte the Ganges where he Resa

so large that he eatended bintsell as bug is the ward At thst

moment she walled out te hen. osen.” aad ashes him te vem) to
hee Bur the goddess Ganga called him son amd ss be hay come

to be known by the name Ganges Masa Isa gor des) PP

Srytthhanda 45 443 40)

When Siva deaves Parvati to bike up hay ascetic Ife, she takes
consolation in making a soo bs rubbing the dace [nada] trom her
limbs and Gistoning it into the elephant headed shape at son
Here she plavs the male role Hee bodily substunce a substitute
for secu. giving mse lo Ganesa ina manner similar to the was
Skanda was made by Sit casting his seed into the Ganges, where
ilas cased by the Ratokas Parvatés male role is turther sug:
gested bs ber competinon with Ganga over which of them mas
call Ganesa “son.”

fa another cose von, Parvati and Ganga were the daughters
af Mena and asin Each wanted to be the mother of Siva’s son.
and both pracoced austerites (o gain his attention (VamP 25.6-

--- Page 77 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta 33
24; cf. Kramrisch 1981. pp. 342-43). This earlter competition lies
in the background of the story lold above; here Parvati first
makes Gapesa and then Ganga recetves the child made from her
residue, just as the Krttikay received the seed of Stva to create
Skanda. The myth attempts to conceal the confict between the
(wo mothers, by giving the child two games, Ganesa and
Gangeya. When Parvati throws Ganesa into the Ganges. he imi-
tates the action of bis father’s Gaga, which extended above and
below the world faster than Brahma and Visnu could reach its
limits (SP Dh tot- 23: c& O'Flaherty 1973. pp. 130-26). In this
myth Pacvat creates Ganesa more in the manner of a man than a
woman and functions as a father in Siva’s absence; indeed, when
Swa does return, he bas to engage ina contest first with Ganesa
and then with Parvati before he will accept fatherhood, The sym-
bobhe maleness of Parvali’s seed-dirt, her lecundating bodily resi-
due. ts further underscored in this story when Gagesa emerges
from the ver “us big as the world " Phe rver is the womb and
Parvati acts as the giver of the seed Here Ganga ws Parvati’s alter
ego. taking her place ay mother just as Parvati takes Siva’s place
as father: Ganga is the mothering figure. the nourishing cow She
complements the androgynous creatrix Parvati, who lakes Siva's
male function during his absences from the world) This method
of creation echoes another ancient India aoven invalyed in the
myth of creation by the male, us when the sages churn Vena’s
thigh and bring forth the noble king Prtha (BrP 2 46 127-227) oF
when Prajapaty is sae to have breasts and a womb the full
complement of androgynous charactersiics and capabilites
(O'Flaherty tgko, p. 28)

Some Puranic sources Matntain that demons and humans have
come from the divine rectum (BhP 265. LP 1 70 tay. of
O'Flaherty 1976. p. 140) One psechoanaly tically onented scholar
claimed to have found a tolktale an North Tadic in whieh Gane sa es
produced from the cxeremeat of hry mother, althouyh such a vee
ston has not been located in tne Puranas (Berkeley Hilh pyar
Other folktales tell that the carth was lormed trom the feces ot the
god, which, when thrown into the water. immediatcis dried up to
form the world (ivwin pp as. gah a sequence recalliny the berth of
Skanda Such “earth diver” tales of anal creation may Be EAptes
sion to unconscious male envy of the procteatwe powers of
women. both human and divine (Dundes. pp toat-4o)) The

--- Page 78 ---
$4 GANESA! FORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
stories of Parvati making Ganesa by rubbing the residuc off of her
limbs involve a double reversal. Parvati unitates the mythical male
creator, who by creating out of or off of his body imitates the
female procreative powers. Here the woman masquerades as the
man who masquerades as the woman. Ay we have seen. Siva does
not give Parvati his seed. She does not have the opuon of giving
birth to Ganesa in the normal manner that humans use-—this ts
much the same predicament as the male creator - she must pro-
duce her offspring from her own substance alone by an alternative
method outside the womb [ayenid]

The seurf or residue out of which Parvati fashions Ganesit ts a
clue to the deeper levels of his meaning The texts use two words
for Uns substance. mala and depa Lach opeas up a different
range of semantic aysociations. Mala is dirt—specitically: bodels
dirt. Probably densved from the root ala, “decay. fade” it makes
its one and only Vedic appearance in the Aymn to the Kesins. the
long-haired ones, Descriting their wild way of hte, the poct says,
“girdled by the wind. these sages clothe themselves with red duet”
(RY 10.136.2). The ditt menuened here iy the dirt naked ascetics
rub on themselves. much like ashes Fullowing Grassman’s gloss.
O'Flaherty translates this stanza. “These asceties, swathed un
wind, put ditty red rags on” (ig8t. pp ry ake The cred rags”
are suggesuve of the sattron robes worn by varus monastic and
ascetic communities of later tines The redness of the dirt or
clothing resembles the redness of Ganesa’s chthonic images
found on sbrines and at crossroads weross Lodia Mala can also
mean, depending on the contest dust. sweat, excrement. bodily
defilements assorted with childhurth, evil dackness. and fertile
manure (Dich). pp toy. 620). The term also appears ina phil
sophical contest. sizmifying the dust covering the aucror This.
like the smoke buding the fire and the membranes concealing the
embrya, i a metaphor for desire and anger, which presents us
from sceing toality as itis (BAG 4 a8) In the Pasupata school of
Saivite philosophy. aiaia means primordial darkness, “the exit
which resides in the seul” (Hata. p lor It particularly means
false knowledge (atuthapidnal svroanvmous with the Advaita
Vedamla notion ot avidva (ignorance) In its fullest: meaning,
mala has a wide range of assaciitions that blink bodily existence,
dirkness. evil. and ignerance all ued to the cosmological princi
ple of prakrit, and so connected in turn to Parvati. Afala is the

--- Page 79 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta 35
“carnal residue of her cxistence,” the auspicious dirl that is both
part of her and apart from her (Kramrisch 1981, p. 320). It is
auspicious dirt—-polluting, yet fertile—-dirt as Mary Douglas de-
senbes tin Purity and Danger This mala is the matertal drawn
from the boundary of the goddess’s body, a fit substance for the
one who himself resides at the threshold

The second term used to refer to Ganesa’s bodily substance is
fepa, meaning ditt or residue. The word also has a more specific
and perhaps more primal meaning. Derived from the soot ip,
“smear.” the noun fepa indicates that which ts smeared or wiped
off. In the context of Brahmanw rttual, fepa refers to the “parti-
cles or remnants wiped off the hands after oblations to the three
ancestors” (Monier-Williams, p 902)

In the rite of sapindikaranu, performed for the deceased ances:
tors of the immediate three generations past. the descendant ritu-
alist makes “bodies” out of balls of cooked rice called pigda. The
ancestors of the fourth through seventh generations removed are
not given full measure of purda offerings because they are already
So close to heaven they need only a smal! amount of pinda to
sustain them successfully in the higher realms. They are given the
wiping [fepa], what is left over trom the pindgas offered to the
more immediate ancestors, hence they are salled lepabhagins,
‘eaters of the leftover offenngs” (Kaipe. pp iti-24) Over a
period of ten days the priest builds a symbolic embryo for the
deceased out of the rice ball offerings, or peidas On the first day
the head as created. followed in successive days by the neck and
shoulders, torso. limbs. genitals. and concluding with the diges-
live powers and thirst, enabling the ancestors ta recewe the food
offerings from theur Iving desceadants The similanties between
Ganesga’s birth story and this process of piling up a symbolic
body, much as the sacrheral bucks are piled up to make the body
of the cosmes person [purtsa]. gives the story strong Vedic and
Brahmanic resonances

This association of Ganesa’s bith and fepa with niles to the
ancestors lakes on additional significance when compared with
the Vedic myth of Martagda. the eighth son ot Aditi

When you gods took your places im the water with sour bands
joined together, 2 thick cloud of mist arose hke dust from dancers

When you gods, fike magicians. caused the worlds to swell yuu

--- Page 80 ---
56 GANE§A! LORD OF OBSTACLE FS, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
drew forth the sun that was hidden in the ocean bight sons there
are of Adin, who were born from her body Woh seven she went
forth among the gods. bul she threw Martagda, the sun. aside
With seven sons. Adity went forth inte the earliest age But she
bore Martanda so that he would in turn begel olfspring and then
soon die. (RV 10 72 6-9, O'Flanerty trans in O'Flaherty 1Wk). ¢
39)

The name Managda means “dead in the ege” and ts an epithet
for the firebird of Indo-European mvthology It also reters to the
sun that is born and dies in its periodic mings and sctungs. In this,
hymna. Adite either throws Martanga aside whea he is born or
miscarnes him (O'Flaherty 198t, p go) Te one commentary on
this hymn the following story is told:

Now Adin had exght sans. seven of them wete fing bet the
eighth, Martanda, she brought forth unformed It was onls a lump

of matter mixed together, as wide as il way both. the measure of &

man. they said) Then the gods. the sons of Adit said, “That which

has been born after us must not be lost Came iets make a shape
for w So thes shaped of the Was amar shaped The flesh which

they cut away and Lhrew down became ao clephant (SB 31 4 3-4

cf MP to2 8}

$n another resated myth of Martanda. ws sud that Adin made
alterings of nice balls [perda] to the gods in erder lo oF tain sons
From her first set of offerings she recemed three sets of iin,
but, impatient for mare sums, she ate the attesings betore the
gods could receive thet Then she had anethes setat bens, baer
of whom was Martunga. the one born fran the cee destined tor
death (MS 16 2b In her despenite desire tor sens Aditi stole the
offerings for the gods. otterings that wanld have been essential
for The pods to lend their ausprereus powers to make the creaion
of those sons possiile The conneatiod hemween tice food: tor
offerings and sced ss imphed in one Upannad, which advises the
husband vind wile ih thes wish le Baye a sen, 1a cut cooked rive
along wath nulk prstucts (BALEG g tg 16) Rive toad serves as a
substiute for male seed (SBortn a at Patng ios sand to
facroase both the prod ten eb semen ia men and the Ukelhood
of engendering mile adispring (Carstairs. p60, inden and Nich:
olas. pp sa 68. OHabeeis tase. pp oak. 9) In stealing the
Hee food oftenags to the gous. Ade shrogated their carher roles,
iN the creatine process by on elect. stealing there seed By re.

--- Page 81 ---
The Mythology of Ganega 57
versing the flow of offerings, taking rather than giving. she
turned the auspicious movement to an imausproous conclusion. In
addition to performing a citual error, she demied the gods partici:
pation in the creatiun of her sons. Hence, Martanda was made
out of what came trom the mother alone. the Aesth: the bones,
which according to the ancrent Indian view are provided by the
father. were missing (O'Flaherty 1o80. p. 30) This lett Martanda
im the shape of a lump. “as wide as it was tigh ” Furthermore,
because the gods did not recewe the nice offerings, they lacked
the food from which they could make the seed that would pro-
vide Martanda with immortality

As we have already seen in the myths in which Siva creates
Ganesa, the assumption ts that the father. through his seed. es-
tablishes the link with mortality by making the san, who is the
part of himselt that sath be carried into the tuture through his
descendants In ber eagerness tu have a son. Aditi cats the rice
offerings. an action remuuscent of the prenatal Bratimanie rite of
vignubalt in Shich the pregnant woman eats offenngs of rice in
the eighth month ot her pregnancy to assure the buth of suns
(Kane 22. pp 226-27) She does what the male gods do, she cats
the food, both guang and receing tn this sespect her acuons
Tesemble that of Parvati when she creates Gaoesa. liking the cole
of the male Parsau forms this creature Ganesa like a lump of
matter, und ti clephantne appearance recalls that of the cle-
Phant made up of preves lett over from the crealinn of Martanda.

‘The story of Martanda and the clephant-shapead letoser and
that ot the birth of Ganesa are connected an a deeper level by
tbe theme af the aggression of the mother agarast the son Adit
condemns Martanga to mortality aad formlyssneys by cheating
the gods out of ther rice offerings Axa consequence oF this. she
brings fecth a son without male parheipation the gods ate deft
out and there iy ae seed to make Marland. 5 bones and gree hum
Immortality through descendants. Soth ot which ase cared by
males The theme of maternal ageresion in the nivalis of Gages
is more vetled. butts there as we base seer in the ins tin wacre
Parvati curses Ganesa to be ugiy wad as we stoi see ors the grsth
where she places him at the deenwas te be cut down to size 38
Siva and leh over in a dormlesy pile ot wien shy snsists thal the
cursed sage Sam look upon Ganesa even theugir sie hows bs
glance will mutilate anything ce stakes Phe ston of Acuy aod

--- Page 82 ---
53 GANESA? LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Martaoda is the quintessential myth of maternal aggression and
mutilation in the Vedic corpus, and it 1s also connected to the
Ganesa birth stories through the mouts of the creation maternal
that is both seed and pinda (nce offering) and the clephant that is
created from the formless leftover parts of Martanda. Both
Martanda and Ganesa are made up out of the remainder, the
leftover, which 1s both dangerous because of its associatuns with
J death and fertile because of its connectiun with the egg and birth

They emobdy the principle contained in the notion of vase or
ucchista, the remainder. As Shulman observes, “The remainder
contains the germ of a new birth. Like leavings generally in Hen-
duism, the remnaat of the sacrifice is impure and pollubag, at the
same ume it is a fertuhzing. Ite-giving substance” (pp yo-gi)
Mircea Eliade makes the following odDsersation about the more
general ontological umplications of such creations out of letlovers.
“Creation springs forth from abundance The gous create out of
an excess of power, an overflow of energy Creation is accom:
phshed by a surplus of ontological substance” (p y7)) Both Siva
and Parvati are capable of creaung Ganesa without the partieipa
tion of the other. As deities. cach has this “surplus of ontalogical
substance” from which to fashion additional divine peines This
metaphysical abundance overrides any gender-specihe considera:
hons so far as the intent of the myths 1s concerned

These notions of sacred residue may also snelude that of
prasia, the Iettover portion of tood that ws Giken out tint and
caten by the Brahmans after the gods have been fed LASS 3011
When Prajapate was committing incest with his daughter in order
to create the universe, Rudra Siva shot him with uo arrow The
gods were carer that no part ol the god be lost, just as the sans of
Aditi were amaous that the body of the eighth san aot disappear,
and so they made ul the list part of the offering (GB 21.2) This
“dangertaden morsel.” as Kramrisch describes 1, was so potent
that burned out the eves of Bhaga and caused Pusan’s teeth to
fall out OSB G Fy s-8. Krammsch 1a8e. p20) The primacy of
place given ta this postion of the sacrificial oitening and to
Prajapatrs bods suggests a connection with Gagesa as the one
who is worshipped trst tor the success of endeavors to follow. Ef
tus worship is torgoticn of neglected, he also becomes “danger
laden” and withdraws his obstacle-removing powers, leaving the
worshipper al the merey of mis or her own evil karma:

--- Page 83 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa x»

The substance out of which Ganesa is made is dirt, impure and
dangerous Yet. it is powerfully auspicious. like the dung and
urine of the cow, the bathwater [firtha] of deities and sages, the
leftovers from the sacritice [tecchisia]. the remaining food offer-
ings to the deity returned as prasdda to the devotees, all of which
are transformed into life-giving substances by contact with deities
and sacred persons. Ganesa's bodily torm and mater come from
the restduc of his mother, and this places him in a relationship of
hierarchical inferiority to and dependence on her, a dependence
expressed mythologically in his unwillingness (o marry because
ho woman could be as beautiful as hts mother is Parvati is the
only person whom he does not confront. He comes into conflict
with the full array of gods especially his father—humans, and
demons, but he never crosses his mother. There are occasions in
which she inflicts ageression on him, bul he never inuates any
toward her

Another version of Ganesa’s origiis as told in connection with
the founding of a shrine. in a myth that combines many of the
elements we have been examining:

Ganesa is the son of Siva and Parvatt. of rather the latter for he
was produced from the ungucnis with which the goddess had an-
nointed herself Wath the water of her bath they were conveyed to
the mouth of the Ganges and were there imbibed by Matin. a
goddess with the head of ao elephant She gave buth tod boy wher
had four arms and Ave heads of an clephant’ Gunga chose him for
hes sun. bur Swa declared tin to be the sen of Parnvaty He te
duced his five heads 10 one sad enthroned him on Anjanagin ay
the “remaver of obstacles “(Jacoby pp Ser 8 citing Jay adr arias
Haracardacintamant 18. cf Getty. pp 6 1)

An elephant-headed goddess, of (possibly) a demon {rdk save}.
or one of the mothers attending Skane, drinks Panan’s oath:
water. thal residue made sacred and potcat by contact with her
body, much as Adite ate the nee offered to ibe gods to become
pregnant with Martanda Unfortunately for Parvati the child
Malini produces does net resemble her As Gamis and Pansat
quarrel about who is the true mother of the child, Siva interrupts
their dispute and reduces the five heads of the child to one. ay be
did when he cat off Brahma’s fifth head when the latter dooked
lustfully at Parvati Sis then installs Gunesa as the Lord over

--- Page 84 ---
to GANESA! LOAD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Obstacles in the particular shrine assoctated with thy variant of
the myth

The seed-substitute provided by Parvati was so potent that it
produced a child who had five clephant heads to Malini’s one:
Swa makes Parvati the true mother by trimming Ganesa’s extra
heads and declaring him to belong to her Malini may be scen as
Parvati's “other” sell, her female aspect. because she had taken
on the role of the mate in giving the seed “These t¥0 “mothers”
together make up a singly androgynous parent. Siva’s part is
more that of an initiator. the dcarva, who gives the child his
social identity and instructs him in the sacred teachings and
powers related to making and removing obstacles

Ganesa’s birth from the dirt-seed of his mother - her umperson-
ation uf male generativitv—underseores Parvat'y tundamental
androgyny This mav be why the Puranic tradition contains myths
in which eather Siva or Parvati creates Ganesa, each of them can
operate androgynously, although the more frequently attested
variants place the creative cole with Parvati Thies may be an
index of the relatively late period historically in which Ganesa’s
mythology found its way into the Purante corpus—at 2 tine when
the Sdkta notions of creative power as fundamentally feminine
prevailed

An allogether different method of crestioa iw esident in the
story of Pasvati and the wieks tree. a tale relied to che Guanes
birth narratwes Just utter sbe had cecated Gaoesa. Pars ati raised
up a shoot of an asuke tree with water she hid herself cutried
fam the nver, Summoning the seven saves she performed all
appropaate ausprciaus oles But the sages said te ber What witl
be the fruit savcn by this tree son whick sou have made!” She
Fephed. “HE a weiss man dies aw clin a ailage where there 0 ne
water, whea the wetor appears Ne teyomes we heaven Buta pead
worth ten wells a dake worth ten ponds. ¢ daughte: warth ten
lakes. a sucaficg worth den daughters. a son worth ten sagritices
snd a sacred tree [deal wocth ten sens (SRP Sera ee
abo MatssaP 16g set 92. PP Spytikhanda 4s gaa: 6xi

fe this story che feeth et Ganesa apparently dogs not satis
Parates fonging for motherbaud perhaps heeause Siva had not
Ruthapatcd en hes ongenceumg. allboueh Be was the epject of her
desire She compensates by making a son out uf an aseka tree.
whose same means “without sorrow 7 When the sages mock her

--- Page 85 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 61
by asking what fruit such a tree-son will bring. she tells them that
the tree has greater value even than a son The material out of
which Ganesa emerges—dirt [mala; lepa] and wood—are those
materials the makers of images use in creating the images for
worship. ft may be that Parvati cannot make a son the way bu-
mans make sons. but she does make sons the way humans make
gods. forming them out of the materials of the earth and endow-
ing them with breath and life lo be ht containers for their divine
presence (BDP 2.60.27-29: SkP 3.2.12.11 13). Thus though her
sons are made of ditt. they have the power to give hfelike seed.

Another interpretation of this episode im the myth comes to
hight when cxamined in relation to the rituals of marriage
[vesdhasamskara] On the first day of the marrage sequence the
groom 1s bathed and his body rubbed with a mixture of turmeric
and oil [gatra-Aartdra] A portion of this mixture is then sent lo
the bride and. after bathing. she is anointed with this substance
This action “seais out undesirable substances from their bodies
and hegins the process of transforming their two bodies into one
by operating on the surfaces of their bodies.” (Inder and Nicho-
las, p41) The depa that Parvati uses in engendering Ganesa may
include this golden-colored seedhke substance that ts both purify:
ing and potent: Sven in this way, then, Ganesa is actuatly made
out of Siva’s substance mediated by Parvatr’s creative activity,
just as the child as made from the father’s sced mediated by the
mother’s womb.

The micans used in Gagesa’s creation are as important as the
substance trom which his body as made In most versions of the
story. Parvaty rubs Gatese out ot the substance an thy suchice of
her limbs This rubbing coals the widespread Indian tradhtied of
creation accomplished through string (he sete and subbing the
fire stks in Vedie sucnee. and churmoag the ocean uf muk om
Puram cosmogonses Is rubbing ber dumbs Parvate creates de
man, as when the seges churned the thish ef the waked sing
Vena to create tis son, the cuthtceus King Plu CO bicherty
1976. pp art 48) Phe associated ef the thy howeat tie phallas
inthe Indean traditean dates dram the Ay Ve fe (RN St Homas
be seniticant that Parvati does viet create Guniesa bs rabbiag ber
breasts or torm out el hee breast milk dedeesk rs most aati
Parvat’ cannot nurse children because get breast mek vel popea
them; although in one sariant myth spe dees beng Catnesa te hide

--- Page 86 ---
62 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
by giving him her breast after Siva had created him in jest out of
piece of her garment (BDP 2 60 27-28). Even here. however, the
child she holds to her breast 1s doomed soon to lose his head and
require Airavata’s in its place

Another aspect ot Patvali’s creative technique also deserves
attention. In several versions, Parvati ts said to form Ganesa into
the shape of a man or son as though she were making a pitda
body for an ancestor or a clay image of the deity for worship. like
those ued by Ganesa’s desotves in domestic and public devonion
(MatsvaP isg.so1 2. SKP 3.2 12.t1-12: GP 214.4 tf) In their
use of metaphors of rubbing and churning. the myths presuppose:
a cosmogome and metual setung. For both the substance and tech-
niques involved in creating Ganesa. brs mythology reaches deeply
into the classical Hindu imagery of creation, with ats great themes
of generation by srring and churning, as well as into the patterns
of ancestral worship of the Brahmanic tradiven, with its notions
of propagative and androgynous substances By these means the
mythology of Ganesa becomes woven inte the larger fabriy at
Hindu mythology and blended into us grand design
The Severed Head and Broken Tusk
Ganesa ss the clephant-headed god. made from Siva and Panaty’s
divine substance. but ho as also the beheaded god Accounts of
his decupitation or mutilinen appear aa nears all the saruiaty at
his creation myths Been where he dees not bterally lose bis
head. the toss is implied in Siva’s cure that he become ugly and
have the head of an elephaat because Parvati looks at him too
lustfully (WarP >att isi As wath the myths of bis elephanting
head and the sohstinces and methods of he creation, the staries
ot bs beheading show vanabons that contain clues to Ganesa’s
felgiays meaneig ane further display the narrative agility of the

rh mythographers who lent their imagmabons to his creaton
vy

Tur Heap
In many versions of the story. Parvati created Ganesa to keep
Siaand all other potental intruders away from her bath. to

--- Page 87 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta 63
protect the privacy and sanctity of her inner chamber. To that
end she placed Gagesa as the doorkeeper and guardian, instruct-
ing him to prohibit anyone from entering:
Then at that time the great lord arrived and desired to enter the
house Ganesa. who was standing in the doorway, did not fet him

in’ Then the lord became angry and the two of them started to

ight with each other Ganesa struck the great lord with his axe:

but the great lord, raising his trident. struck off Ganesa’s head,
which fell to the ground. When Parvati saw that her son had falten

lo the ground in this way. she began to cry loudly, And when

Ganesa cojlapsed on the ground there urose a great lamentation

throughout the whole world When Siva saw that Parvati was so.

bereaved, he thought to himselt, “What have [ doac wrong?”

(SkP 3.2.12.1§-20: sce also DP 111-16, MBAP 35)

Parvati makes no exceptions to Ganesa’s instructions to guard
the door, he is to keep out aff would-be intruders. When Siva
arrives at the door, just returning from his long period of fierce
asceticism, he presents himself as more than caper to enjoy the
goddess's company in the setting of her private chamber. After he
and Ganesa do battle, and Gianesa is decapitated. Siva pleads his
own innocence when Parvati comes and rages at him for destroy:
ing her son The story masks the implications of the father kiting
bis own son by making Siva and Ganesa necessarily ignorant of
one another's identity Even when Siva reveals to Ganesa his iden-
tity as Parvati’s husband. it does not matter because Ganesa’s lask
is to prohibit any intrusion, but Ganesa does not tell Siva that he ts
Parvati’s son [tis essential that the perpetrator of the came
should not know the implication of hy action. This theme of
father'son aggression is one to which we shall return

The battle between Siva and Ganesa is not on one between
father and son. dt also represents an extension of the tension
between Siva and Parvati for Ganesa acts ay an extension of
Parsati’s power, just as Ganesa’s physical formas ai extension of
her form The contict between the Iwo “parcats” Lakes a niches
and more detailed form im the version ol the story trom the Sava
Puréga. After Parva) made Ganess trom ber bodily residue
[mala]. she said to him, “You are my son, my vers own No one
else belongs ta me No one else ts tu enter my quarters without
my permission” (SP 2.5.3.26-28):

--- Page 88 ---
64 GANESA. LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS

When she had placed him at her doorway in this way. she went
inside to take hee bath. Then Sava. who indulges in every form of
play and expert in all, arrived at her dvor Ganadhipa (Ganesa]
not knowing he was the lord Siva. said, “You cannot cates without
my mother’s permission She ts taking her bath Where are sou
omg? You must lease © And after he said thes he picked up his
slaf€ and pushed Siva back Then Seva. seeing all thy. said You
are afoul’ Don't you koow who Lam? [am none other than Siva’
But then Ganesa beat him with bis staff, and Siva. enor skiled in
all forms of play, became enraged and sad “You tool! Don't sou
even Know that [am Sia, the husband oft Pansat! Little bos. 1am
going into aty house, why do vou Block my way USP 2s UE ast
The story continues that Siva called together his ganas to go

and ask Ganesa why be had setused the husband ef Parvat entry
into her bath Thes argue with him that thes. not Gasesa. are the
teal doorkeepers Siva orders them to remoxe Ganesa fram the
doorway and a battle follows after much shouting vind Gerona
One of Parvati’s servant samen overhears the argument and telly
Parvati

When thes man who belopes to us foe. Ganesa} is tiented this
Though we are beity tountcd So. gentle lady don rane up sa
always squeezes vou Tike aera, Sat What wil he de tons * He
arrogance wail tura an our favor (SP 2903 38 al
Panatis servant retaay te Ganesa and adnenishes bir to

Tema ft in has resolve to protest hrs mothee’s doorway at all
costs Siva hardens his cesalve athe and fe exhorts his own
troops.

Tbe wrong tr eek over tis. lot vou sre any own gers ail he
belongs te Gan [Poratip Bute Lik aes ten this byt
People WUD sts Sr os always cowed by his we te Ua serious
Tatice to hoow whatta de That gant others rs oak ahd wnat
power could Ne haw) Besides von ire experts 12 bullle and vou
belonp to me Whe should van avenst thes tight ail thecelore Se at
Meise foome? Plow co this wean Be see bsimatet bpecnnds te
her hisband’ Sane the one who has brought this an) Parva: wall
jadeed reap the cesults of her action (SP ors ug teat
The battle resumes, with cach side hardened in ity determina

Hoa te prowel aver the ether Cinabie to distodge the mighty
sathvcrelding Guingsa, Sars gues, ted by Nuncdin and Bhragin,

--- Page 89 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta 65
are repulsed Siva realizes that Gapesa can be destroyed only by
some act of deception. At thal moment the other gods arnve and
Sia sends Brahma to propitiate Ganesa. but he too ts violently
rebuffed After repeated attacks by both Siva and Visgu. Gagesa
begins to weaken Then in a final moment just as Ganesa knocks
Vispu down, Siva sneaks around behind and standing to the
north of Ganesa cuts off his head with his trident. At that mo
ment Parvati. seeing what stroke of all fortune has befallen her
son, fies into 4 rage Determined to destroy all the gods and
other creatures in retaliation, she calls together her army of sak-
us Only ater the most strenuous efforts at propitation and the
Promise that he will restore Ganesa’s severed head and appoint
him as the chef over bis gagas does Siva manage to cool Parvat’s
wrath and save the gods from hery destruction Siva orders his
Ragas to go to the north and return with the head of whatever
one thes find there (which happens to be an elephant) and to fit
tonto the lifeless shoulders of the fallen Ganesa Siva revives
Ganesa by giving him his own cnergy [tequs] and recites Vedic
mantras to bring him back to ule When Parvati sees that her son
has been restored. she promncs that Gancsa shall receive the
worship of all and remove all obstacles (SP 2.4.15 16)

In this more elaborate account of Ganesa’s battle at the thresh
old of Parvati'y bath and his beheading and restoration, the con-
flict between Siva and Parvatr serves ay the context tor Ganesa’s
Creation, Cestruchon, and resuscuavion Parvali wants to protect
the access to her inner chambers Her oath sembolizes the locus
of power assouated with her sexuality, ber sada. were Siva to
enter and Cake possession of il tie Uptingtion between them
the distinction essential lo mamtaning the world would be love
Her bath also has associauors with the uncer sanctum of nee
shine. thet place where, un the form of her image. she resides or:
her throne and fecenes the puntying and satestying baths from
her priests ft is uncerstancable that she woul seek to protect
the boundaries of this center of power fram detlement by out
siders But in making Ganesa—the ong hore ot ber own auspi
claus impunty—her guardian, she puts hee in yoopards and
makes him vulnerable to Sivas nceitable conquest: As the duos
keeper [didrupdla], Ganesa represents the dangerous tranior
from the profane world to the inner sacted enclosure Allnourh
Parvati contributes to Ganesa’s mutilation by placing bum at the

--- Page 90 ---
fod GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
liminal threshold where he must battle the mighty Siva, she also
sets the stage for his ultimate elevation to the rank of lord over
Siva’s army of ganas, empowered to place and remove obstacles
and receive the first offerings from devotees in worship

The figure of the doorkeeper is prominent in the mythology of
Siva. Doorkeepers appear as Siva's sons, like Viraka, Ganesa,
and Nandin, although they may work for him or against him
They often protect Siva or Siva and Parvati together, but they
also attack them, as we have seen in the episode at Parvati’s
door. From the point of view of the devotce who wishes to cnter
into the presence of the deity in the shrine. the doorkeeper is a
potential threat as the one who may prevent intrusion into the
sublime world of the deity’s private territory The doorkeepes’s
task is to prevent the deity and devotee from coming into con-
tact, to protect the former from interruption, and to keep the
devotee out. But the deity cannot remain aloof from the devotee.
there must be an intrusion. The doorkeeper is caught in the
middle. He 1s destined to be mutilated and defeated. But the fate
of the doorkeeper is double. He may suffer separation of head
from body, but he also experiences umion with godt Ganesa is
beheaded, but he 1s restored to a better positian than he had
when he was created. O'Flaherty describes the double role of the
doorkeeper this way.

Ulumately. therefore. the duarkeeper symbuhzes danger to the

worshipper about lo enter the temple as well as the assurance

that he will ulummately reach ts god Though the doorkeeper or
interlopet iy often mutilated, be w restored Ws. in any case.
the head of the doorkceper who sunives despite his mutlatien—
indeed who becomes immortal because of tt sematoing at his post

to warn the would by interloper of the dangers and rewards sn

what he is wbout to undertake. (Berkson, p30)

This cneounter between Siva and Ganeda at the threshold re-
calls another tale ot Siva and Parvati's quarrels in which Viraka.
Siva's doorkeeper and Parvati’s stepson, plays a role

Once sm jest Siva called Patvate “Blackie” [Adti] because her
skim looked black like a serpent She was offended by his remark
and so went away to practice sscetcism to abtain a golden skin

Vitaka. Siva’s doorkecper. begged her to take him with her, be-

cause he feared that Siva nught sent on bem his rage at Parvati's

--- Page 91 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta 67
teaving. But she told him to stay at Siva’s door and guard it so that
fo other woman could enter, for Siva 1s a notoriuus womanizer
Viraka remained at Siva’s door. obeving his mother Parvat, As
she was leaving, another goddess. Kusumumadim. appeared be-
fore her, and Parvati instructed het to tell her if any other woman
went to Siva’s door.

Then the demon Agi saw that Parvati had lett and remember
ing the hatred between his father, Andhika and Sra. he prac:
ticed asceticism unnl he tecewed a boon trom Brahma that he
would remain immortal so long as he never changed hes form
Then the demon went to where Siva was, and seeing Viruka at the
door, he took the form of a serpent and shpped past the guard
uanotked Then he took the form of Parvau and placed teeth like
thunderboils in his vagina and went to scduce Siva But Siva bes
came suspicious and realized that it way a demon ia disgunse So,
laughing te bimself, he placed s weapon on bry phalluy and sat.
fied the demon’s lust as he screamed in ternble pain and died

(nike meanome Kusamimodini. aot koowing that the woman
wath Seva was the demon Adi in disgune. went and told Parvati
that Sivawas commuting adultery Boraged that Virake iad Failed
to weep watch at the gate. Parvati said to hin. “Since you have
abandoned me [ail turd you into a stone marked wah the svllable
[mantra] of Goness [re . Om)” Hee anger was so. great that a
fierce lon appeared from her forehead, which attracted Brahms
attention When she tele hum that Siva had called her “Black
Beakma gave her the buon of a golden skin and transturmed the
hoo into hee sehnie Then she Became Jed wilh remorse for
abandoning her husband, aad returned to Siva When Viraks san
her coming Ae did not tccoymize her in her oew golden form, snd
kept ber from cntemng Say polase dle sand A demon in the
form of u goddess Mas entered here antnoticed my order te stay wah
the god but Siva devtrayed tim He ropumanded me that | should
not det any waman get patoime Oh omy mother Gin come in”
‘Then Parvaly was overcame with prict wher sae realized she had
cursed Viraks unjustly. but she was usable te Gike hack her cone
However, she did tell Viraka that he would by reboru ay Nadir
and become the guardian of Saas door (SkP 0227 Daf Mat
syaP 184 692-98 See also Kramnyeh iytt pp ag 6s OT cohorts
1975. pp 252-61)

In the story of Viraka, most of the elements present in the

Ganess myth are reversed. Whereas Parvati creates Ganesa to

protect her from Siva’s intrusions. here she orders Virskit to spy

--- Page 92 ---
68 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
on Siva to see if he ts letting other women into his private cham-
bers. The demon Adi sneaks past Viraka. disguised as a serpent,
and then masquerades as Parvati, who wrongly concludes that
Siva is behaving adultcrously and that Viraka has switched alle-
giance from her and conspired to protect Siva. She feels doubly
abandoned, both by husband and son In her serrow and rage she
curses Vitaka to be abandoned as she turns him inty a stone, a
stone nevertheless bearing the ausprious mark of Gagess
Brahma appears and explains to her that she has cursed Viraka
unjustly. It is too late to undo the damage. but Parsate does
manage to modify the curse and turns Viraka into Nundin.
thereby enabling him to remain close to his ford as hes chiel gaa
and beloved disciple. In this myth tis Parvali ratner than Siva
who stands outside the threshold secking entry. and Viraka fails
to revognize her, just as Ganesa does not recognize Siva in other
myths She transforms Viraka into Nandin, recreating him in the
forin ot an animal, partly to remove the force of the curse. and
thus ske repairs the separation between her and Viraka ds keep:
ing him in the doorway. Siva does simular things with Gunesa ia
other tales when he puls him back together with the Read of an
elephant, The body 1s separated (rom ts head by Siva. s coys that
ty not fully restored But Ganesa renvainy visible in his new and
Modified term as the clephant- headed duockeeper
The story of the beheading and restorstien ob Ganess receives
a difterent emphasis in two related mths His role as Parsates
IAtANt sen is the point of departure in both stories According to
one sersion Siva created Gagesa out of a piece ot Pls ati’s gar
ment as a mock-child when she Rad pleaded with him to concen e
achild wath hee But sbe beld the child to ber breast und he was
brought to dkfe through the tough of her breast milk Astonished
That her magi was as impressive as tas Own, Siva sand te Pansat
Ciotdess P gave vou that son who was made cut of cloth ass
Joke. bun through your good tortune he bee ene areal san Whats
Hs moeacle Gave bene ta ing and let mie look at bur Hes a real
Somindced os on thengh he ny made trom Gieth Wut how dud tile
enter ited Xs he said the, Sambhu [Siai, land of the moun
Lam Teck hes som ie has finds aad Lad hiny down exgmuoing bm
cores oe thoreughhy checkiog all hi limbs Chen. cemember
ree Ae Hw tren bas pirtn Sankar [Seal sud to the goddess
Uhee sealer sours was bern with an airy Brought about hy Sant

--- Page 93 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta 69
the planet of suicides Hie will not live long. but an auspicious
death will come lo him quickly The death of 4 sirtuous ane causes
Steal sorrow,”

As Sambhu. the maker of the child. sad this. the boy's head.
which was pomting to the north, fell (rom bis hand. When the little
boy's head had fallen to the ground from her husband's hand.
Parvaty was overwhelmed with grief She picked up the body
whose head had been cut oft and cued. “My baby, my lutte baby"
Astonehed at thes. Siva took tis son's bead in his hand and said
sweetly to the goddess. “Do not cry, lovely Parvati. though vou
gneve for your son No grief iy greater than that for a son, but
Tothing so wabers tne soul Stap your sarrowing FE will bring him
back to Ide Goddess, yon his head unto hes shoulders.” And so
Parvats yoined thal bead on as he hag toad her to do, but it did not
Jorn properly Then Siva thought about this, and al that istaat a
voice from the sky wid. “Sambhu. this bead of your son has been
injured by a harmtul glance therefore yuur felts bow will not line
with this head Put the head of someone else on his shoulders and
revive him Since you held the boy in yeur hand wath bis head
facing north. fetch the head of someone whos facing narth and
your it to hon | When Santsasa heard ths vorce from the sky he
consaled the goddess: and called Nandin aad seat him out to tind
the suitable head (BDP 2 60 35 $0)

In this story, the son whom Parvati had wanted to fulpll her
maternal longings and whom Siva had created as a joke, himselt
hecomes the victint of an even crucler yoke When Parvati brings
him to lite aed hands him to Siva, who inspects hun for auspr
clous marks. he tells her of the cutse of Sum, who, according to
Hindu asuology. is the bringer of musturtune af he appears on
one’s astrological chart The meth attempts to shift the blame
from Siva onte the tate inherent in the constellabon al torces
apparent at Ganesa’s birth Among Lomil-speaking tandus of Sr #
Lanka, itis believed that only Siva has the power to caunter the
destructive influence of Sam (Pfattenberger. p61) Hence in
both these myths Sani acts as Siva’s destructive Cother™ self Sane
does the beheading and Siva can appear in hey own forms as the
one who cestores Ganesa to dite Although the myth trics to
blame Sani for Ganesa’s beheading. 1s Sivas lotetul touch that
causes the head to seven Wher all cHorts at repaue hi, a este
nous voice trom the sky announces that Ganesan fated to hase
the head of another, one whose bead. oke Ganesa’s at the mo

--- Page 94 ---
jo GABESAS LORD OF OBSTACLES, TORD OF BEGINNINGS
ment of its fall fram Siva’s hand. os pointing ta the north, the
auspicious direction: Siva then dispatches Nandin to find the ap-
propriate head. which as we have seen, teras out to be that of
Anravata, Indra’s elephant vehicle
This story wrestles with o contradiction, Ganesa cannot keep
his onginal form. it simply wall not hold together, The head and
the body, once severed. cannot be reunited. but the story ts
reluctant to blame Siva fur the beheading and Wansfers thy prob:
A lem to Sani and a tate ordained (or Ganesa before his birth But
Ganesa’s fale to be Deheaded still les in Srva’s hans, for its has
touch that preciprates the decapitation bn the carer myth Siva
beheaded Ganesa because of the doorkeoper’s refusab ta lor him
inside Pursati's bath, but bere Sani. the pormemihestiod of stro.
logical of karaic tate, lakes Siva’s rule The tact thatitis Sea
who orders Nandi to return with a suitable head yrves aay As
vompheity in the ocheading even though the mythos uawaitling to
acknowledge UC directly and tries fo conce st SIUS agteressiye te
toa by invoking the preexsnog fate deereemny tha Gates must
lose his original head and get a new one The new clephant head
is tas steal” head. the one bes ordained in the story ie revenve
Tos the head displayed on hes wonography Phe elephant head ws
the one That expresses his true ature Indeed, Che avi: might be
fead as the story of haw he beeume completed by recening: hes
Que aad appropriate head Viewed this was then his fist bead
the ong that pels cub ath the mask that Ros to be removed
through beheading to grable hum to sesveal his real head Thus
Ganes’s damemberment becomes the vieleatly wuspreous pre
fude to the completion ut the vod’s form threugh which he gt
GOUT ippears to he devotees The pursue ot the “real” head
regatls the Vedic enib oof Dadhvane. the press who knew thy
secre’ of how to briny the stenitice to suveesstul completion In.
de threatened Dadhyaie that he over tald Cus seeret to any:
one. he would cut et) Dadhvane s head) The Assins the hare:
headed bens. overheard Indna’s remark and came to Dadhyane
asking to be rmitiated as mus pupils in order to learn the secret ot
the sacritice Dadbyaie tolu them of Inded’s threat. but thes
Tephed that thes would cut off Dadhyane’s head and hide trom
Indra. seplocme Uns sccre-kaowing head with that at a horse
Dadhyane agreed aad told them the secret) Then. when Indra
returned and ocheaded Dadbyanc’s horse head. the Asvin’s ce.

--- Page 95 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta W
Placed the hose head with Dadhyanc’s onginal head (SB
(4.1.1.18-2g). In this way Dadhyane’s “real head. the one
knowing the secret of the sacrilice’s power. was actually the head
that replaced the head decapitated by Indra This ancient myth of
Dadhyanc’s beheading and restoration by Indra provides the nar-
tative architecture that later on was possibly the pattern for the
various myths of Ganesa’s beheading and restoration

Sant’s role m Ganesa’s dismemberment comes inte focus more
clearly in the second myth Like the story we have just exa-
mined, this variant postrays Ganesa as the passive infant whos
the victim of a territle deed. In this heavily Vaisnava rendering
of the story. in which Ganesa ts actually um incarnation ot
Krsna, the beheading episode opens with Panali and Ganesa
assembled with the other deitics, presumably for the rite of
namakarana samskara the Wte-cvcle mle un which the child os
given his name:

Then the great ascettc Sani the san ot Sara. armed there He
came to pay homage lo the new son of Parvati, and sud to
Visalakgu. the daarkceper. “Servant of Siva. | have come hers al
the command and invitation of Wiggu and the other deities to look
upon the child of Parvaty and pay homage to hee Whyo d have
seen the Child in bee presence [shall eeturn home” Vialinss
obtained Parval’s peemuswn far tur [Saar] to enter. urd San
came in to where the goddess and child wore bur be kept his cvs
cast down Parvali sand Why. Q lord ol the planets do you keep
your head down, why won't you ook at me or my son?”

Sam explamed te her that hy bad een a deentce of Ryne tor
his whole bie. always heepune ham an the loretront of bis mune bls
father arranged far hum to marty the daughter of Crisaraha, bur
he and his wie both remained cehmate end peered ascetem
Bur ance.” Sant said. this caghaness of the minds ob sages
[te 2 dis wife] adored bere Ponehh in qewek and came to pie
when she bad finished ber ball) When shy sie that fas casaged
In meditation at the fet ef Vesey ste sm cd at colle Bor ses
flirlatiousls. destang to make fove with ae Bat when spy sae the
Twas absorhed in my cscctrasm cad vot mat. et etna els
she sealed that hee lertile time weuhl poes citable rnd se she
cured me. sayng You den erca tek wimg vet feancern to:
My ume ub ferlbhy  Tbeectare ansthing vou feos apen wall He
come destroyed | Whe Peomplzted ey aycciosi: | btimabe a
wath her Out she was unable to dane Back the cuss atthe eh sae

--- Page 96 ---
n GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
wanted to, Since then, because of fear of harming trving things. 1
keep my head hung down, not looking at anyone.”

Parvati and her attendants laughed mockingly at Sani and she
demanded that he look upon her child And so. with greal fear,
and onty out of the curner of bis eye. Sam gave a quick glance at
the chiki’s face Bul instantly his glunce severed the child's head
and that headless body lay in Parvali’s tap covered with blond. and
then the head went up ta Goloka and united with Krpna (BVP
FbE 10-3.12.7)

In this version of the story the onus of Gunese’s beheading
undemably rests on Sam, but here loo there are comphicatians in
blaming him. His decapitating glance resulted trom his wife's
curse when he had attended more to his asceticism than to his
conjugal duties and enjoyments His predicament parallels that of
Siva, who had likewise refused his wife's entreaties te become 4
father. The destructive force wielded by Sans’s glance ss communis:
cent of Siva’s capacity to munlate bis opponents when he does
not want to be disturbed from his meditations by crate distac:
tions, an awesome power thal he unleashes on Kama and other

f anterlopers Here San cares the blame for Ganesa’s beheading
4 other sersions reluctantly adat ct was really Siva

As the story contioucs. there tan attempt to compensate Sans
for his destructive role and aso toe peess cancer tor the elephant
whose head was taken to provide Ganesa with a replacement
After Visnu beheaded Gajendir and took hes head for Gaines, the
elephant-king ened owt in erel Moved ys compassiog tor bet
Foss. Wigau. “separating the beds tam the head ot another cle
Phant. joined at ento this clephant pOwnendea] and browehe hiar
back te dite sath his brahim Koowedee BNP orbs ron lust
as the mth shits the blime for Ganesan s deeapratien fram Siva
onto tas surrogate Sunt and thee te fis wie it thes fe resalke Ihe
moral dilemma of Scribe an mnecent wephant te rephie thy
head that replaced Gages’s cagmal tead Wievokes the pracy:
of the chain ot dan. casing the posuhibts that past desds be
behing that vafortunate elephants behaving Therein pate.
tally at least. hes anather bole Qae’s gain is anarke rs dass AL
though Sava remiuins on the background in this s.estrr at the story,
the conthet between Saar and be wily parallel: that ol Sia and
Parvati. thay the strugture ef the Men remy constant although
the names are changed te prefect the guilty

--- Page 97 ---
The Mythology of Ganega 2B

The mouf of displacing the blame for Ganesa’s beheading is
continued in this myth. After Ganesa 1s restored with his new
elephant head, Parvati curses Sani to be lame:

But Yama and the other gods objected to her, saving that Sans
was under a curse and she insisted that he look on her child. There:
fore Sam had committed no sin and Parvan was wrong lo curse him
Yama threatened even to curse Parvati im secur. but Brabma in-
sisted thal Parsatis curse was done out of female fickleness and
anger Parvati then realized that Sant was innocent but she could
not take back the curse. and so Sunircmained lame (BYP 3 12.40
sk)

Yama, the lord of the dead, ted the others in coming to Sam's
defense Yama had himself been cursed to be lame by the
shadow form of tis mother when he had protested that she
feglected him in favor of (ie other children (MP bos.t - 40: cf
O'Flaherty 1980, pp 180-85) His story a the reverse of Sani’s,
who is cuned because he neglected his wife Yama and the
other gods remind Parvati that a was she who compelled Sani to
luok on Ganesa even though he had warned her about the
curse She contributed to Ganesu’s mutilation. just as she did
when she placed him in the deorkay to confront Siva. But the
msth as not content to leave the blame with the mother goddess
Brahma steps in te shift the onus onto “nature” and “female
fckleness and anger the misogyanst saluliea —bhume the
woman’ Bsen when Parsale docs rovagnize that she wars wrong
to he ange, Gaward Sani she rs unable to rescind the cease, the
word unce spokes. tke the seed once planted cannet he tiken kK
back. fate must have ity das She os the the wife ot Sam whe
was unable to wade ber curse even atten he had met as macital
obligations as ske demanded In one way or nother everyone in
the story stuns uatter a curse tsa sttuation that unites all
the characters

The storys draws on the larger theme of mutilate ay the te
male mother fizure—<tismembermenrs smbolie casthdiens
such as we saw at work in the case of Adin Martarda The mute
lations accur in response te some kind of abandonment wie bs
hushand, son by mother Ganesa and Sant net to cmenthas Ca
jendra, are victims of female creat desis Sen had tated te
satisfy Ris wife's crole desires. just i Siva had fated: Parsats

--- Page 98 ---
74 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
when they were interrupted by the gods disguised as mendicants:
in both cases the forces of ascetic restraint won out ver crotic
desire, but at a cost’ Only Gajendia is the true vicuim, for he had
satisfied hi wife hut was beheaded anyway at the moment just
after he had fultilled his conjugal role. He is the true sacritcral
victim. the one whose dismemberment enables the reintegravon
of a being of greater signihcance im the scheme of things. Gayen-
dra recetves full restorauen when Visnu replaces his head with
one identical to his original once, Ganesa’s elephant head is a
permancat reminder of his beheading. thus only a parval restora:
tion. Sanv's lameness is mollited but never fully healed, and so
he is deft to limp hke Yama for the rest of his days
In these vanations of the myth of Ganesa. the forces of mater:
nal desire for proereauion come into confict with those of ascetic
withdrawal Once Ganesa comes inte the ston and his birth ps
accomplished, he finds himself in the muddle. in the luminal tern
tory of the doorway. Whether his father Siva, the surrogate ay-
eetic Sani. or the Movements of fate cause fis decapitation, of
inevitable that the marks he must carey as the visible emolem of
that contlict be applied
Tue Ttsk
Ganesa’s mutilation takes a different form in the myth im which
he loses bis tusk in battle sith Parasurama, Gre son ot Jumadaear,
as he stinds at the threshold guarding bod: fis parents, who are
inside making love Asan the other stares, Ganesa tails sacha to
excessive and intrusive power. and as chewhere Sivas hind can
be scem at work un the background Phe eprode begins wath
Parasurama setumning tram deleating the sons of Kartainss and
ther demon arms. whom he bad slau with Che ae ef nave Siva
had geen him with the booo tht at would never de used in vain
There Parasurime sow Sirs palace surrounded by a the un
Sere. and at the @ stern gate he sow Shanda standing on the left
aml Vingvake (Gaoesa] on the aght, domed with jewery and
sittine on seats studdce wilh pecgious poms He poked te those
Bae, whee valor was bhe hated Sia himselt and the Qee guscd:
aw gathered ground tim As Paroucuma wos abou: the cater thy
Peles Ganesa sant te bam. Wait the Lord sin there sleeping
youth Came Pavel osk ther porassien and then figs vec an thers

--- Page 99 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 1s
wath me. Wait a moment. brother “ When Paraéursma heard this,
being in a Farry, he yard. “As soon as | have gone inside and paid
homage to these two parents of the universe. | wall return immedi:
ately to my own palace I was because of Siva’s power that [have
been able to slay the many armies of demons which were strong in
their powces of delusion ” Then Ganesa rephed. “Yau will have
your audience, bul today the Lord ts in there wild the goddess You
see. when a man ‘nd a woman are having iniercourse, whoever
disturbs their pleasure will surely go to hell—especially when tt os
one’s parents. or guru. king, of twice-born, when they ure making
lave in private, Anyone who sees someone else's lovemaking will
certainly lose bis own wife for seven births. And whoever wes the
buttocks. breasts, of face of someone else's wife. mother, sister, or
daughter 1s the worst kind of person ~

Parasurama replied. “Don't you think 1 know that? Have you
lost sour scases. are you just Irving to make surne kind of yoke. or
did those words just slip out of your mouth? This injunction from
the Sastras ts meant for those who are unstable and EYed with lust:
but there as no sin for ached or one who a witbout desire So. 1
well Ro inte their bedroom, and you. little bow, cam stay here! | will
do the proper thing You say itis your parenis who ate in there.
but Sia and Parsata are the father and mother of the whole
world ~ When he had said this, Parasurama prepared (o goin, but
Ganesa immediately jumped up and blocked his way

Then a hattle of wards arose between them and they began to
Push ang shove each other wath the hands Shanda suw them
fighting anc ined lo push them apact: Bot Parasurama. the de-
Stroyer of Ihe prowess of he tacs. hecam: vers anges al Ganesa
He picked ug bry axe and got reads te throw i When Gnesa sae
this he quickly ited hum up aah hes tevak. fowcang hem down
through the <even regions of the warld ind finally down to the
ocean at the innermost part af the carth untl Pacasucama became
s0 frightened he wanted te che Thea Gunesa totumed him te
where thes were sunging But hecaus he bad been whirled
around 17 Ths was he was cumenced he had been deleated Then
when Parasurama sow Chait Ganesa ®.s stil standing there looking
unsuifled, be Hew inte scrape amt threa he re et bm When
Ganesa saw the ave commas towed bon and saw le be the ery
same axe whieh ins Gitbor had grea te Pareursns Re tid pal
Want Us Ibrowing te bean vaio. se he look inc bina ob the ne on
hay lett tusk

Whee the tusk fell to the eround beac wares shall coe ne
trembled wath fear Taere arose a gteeat cammober ns che toads i

--- Page 100 ---
76 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BFGINNINGS
heaven stood by and watched Skanda and the others cned out in
distress. Then Siva and Parvati, who heard the none from the
falling of the tusk. came there also Parvati asked what had
happened. Shanda explained it to her as Parasurama Istened
Then Parvati became angry and turned to Siva. saving. “This
Parasursma. sour disciple. 1s more like a son lo sou. You gave
bim this axe by which he conquered the whole world Now that he
has completed at. he has even given vou Ganesa’s tusk as 4 pas-
ment [dak sera] Se now your work ws completed, there 1s 90 deubl
‘Then you take cate of him. this Paraturamas. your worthiest dis:
ciple, for You are his great guru and he vill do saur housework [
won't say bere a moment longer. | wall take my o40 sony and eo
to my father’s house Vietuaus people take Better care of ther
Muses than you do of me You have nol sad even one Gung in
defense of vour own son” When Parvatt had finished speanitg in
this way. Sina remained seat. (BrP 2 y gt wend ba ast BYP
341-45)

This myth rearranges a number of elements we have seen at
work in other stones of Ganesa’s beheading In the other arsthy
Ganesa stands at the threshold af che bath ta keep Sma and
Parsi separated. put here ts rotors to keep them lowethor to
Prevent ams interrupnea of ther uaien This ume the intrider is
Parssurama whe has come to honor Sra tar tending the swing
power of the weapon that enshled him to defeat the demon er
emes, much as a devotee might came te a shame te thank Siva
for the power enabling bint to flaunsh in the world amd spe off
evil intivcnees Altboush thas Parsurama wae feats cuts oft
Ganeses tusk aun get Hist gattles the cosaios ind that succeeds
finally in omterrupting bis parcals. [ust as Gaintesa’s boheaing by
Sia bad brogght Pant eat ol her private quarters he does sa
wah Saas axe En this was Parosucamie ind Sau capil ar
Imply deny Games’. status as Sis sen Putestune anues
etthe doorway that Saand Parib are the parents ef ie thy
world aad thercfory Ganesa Bas no prisdsecd chum as there san,
Parsatt castipates Siva lor net coming fo Gartgsa’s aid, comment
Ing wath hitter sarcasn thar Parasuroms ts the real soa bey ase he
wields the emblem of he fathers masculine pawee his aight.
Matt Eaghoat these events the gate-crasting raterruption of Sit
and Parsaiys crouse phy. Sivas dental of Ganess. and Pareates
departure serve to undetmmne the cove. finuhal atmosphere im
which the moth opened

--- Page 101 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa n

In having Parasurama come to Siva’s door to pay him homage
for the gift of the magic axe, this myth reverses a pattern we have
seen elsewhere when the gods interrupt Siva and Parvati’s love-
making. Here Parasurama arrives at the end of the cycle of chaos
and the rule of demons, and the celebration of the axe represents
the affirmation of order, whereas in the previous myths the gods
seek to prevent the onset of chaos that would result either from
Sia and Parvati’s prolonged lovemaking ot from the birth of the
child who could cambine the full force of their respective powers
Parasurama’s conflict with Ganesa at the doomay consists of a
sees of denials. He denies that Ganesa has legitimate authority
to prevent bum from gaining access to Siva and Parvati. which 1s
parallel to Siva’s failure to recogmze Ganesa when he en-
countered him at the threshold of Parsati’s bath. Purasurama
demes Ganesa’s sonstip by claiming that all beings are Siva and
Parvati’, children) When Ganesa invokes the rules of the Sastras
regarding the consequences of saxeurism on one’s own family,
especialy one’s mother while engaged in sexual intercourse,
Paradurama mockingly claims that he 1s both their child and one
who is free from ius: and theretore exempt from such restraints
These dems reverse the argument Siva makes to Ganesa in
other versions of the story i which he shouls at him, “Don't you
know who Fam?” Thus chaming himself to be an cacepuion to
Pars ati's order that Ganese prohibit all intruders from entry

Jo thes meth the broking of the tusk replaces the beheading
scene The ters cither assumes that the beheading and restora
tuo bas already happened of that Ganesa was created seth has.
elephant headed form clreads un pay As wath doy beheading in
the ather mveh sanaats we hav cxamncedt, Gane aecepe hee
dismeriber ment as a dine necessity He accepts his own muths
bona the consichior Chat Savas ase MTSE nese ATs rts tks
tn the othee beheading stones. he places ebedienes to Parwah s
command above his own safety

Phe issue et Sry ether nece anises a aurtber oh wows ie
ths myth Barsate chastacs Siva tor Labor te came bo Gams
defense proterng he desigce Pareurann: £6 Bry ows sae She
tronically calls Ganess Broker and bloods task: Paras. cams s
dadgoga. the gitar payment the disaple offers he cure Phe task
serves ay Parasucama’s Craphy front be conquest at tae thre sient
turned-battleticld, winch be offers ap to Se.cas ch cmt ot iy

--- Page 102 ---
Bi GANFSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
devotion and in gratitude for giving him the weapon with which
he could seize such a prize Parvati interprets Siva’s preference
for Parasurama to mean that he prefers this relationship of dis-
cipleship—forged an the ascetic world and symbolized in the
axe‘staft given to Paragurama as the guru gives 4 staff to his
disciple on initiating him into the stage of studenthood during the
titual of the investiture of the sacred thread [apandvantal —two the
father-son relationship within the world ef the householder This
apparent demonstration that Siva’s ascelig orientation is stronger
than his family ties. together with fis abandonmeat of Ganesa.
provokes Parvati to leave Siva and, taking her children with her,
return to her father’s house where the lovalties of kinship wall not
be undervalued. Su the myth comes around full crreig Atteript-
ine lo protect Siva and Panati's pravate world, the dourkeeper
Ganesa loses the battle to the miruder, whe mutiites him aad
provokes the dissolution of the dane housckod Ay a result of
the baitte at the threshold and Ganesa s metliben. Siva vad
Parasurama move to one side and Parvati and Ganesa to the
ether But the myth appears to be vacomlorieele with Unis Gane
clusion and seeks lo give ita happy ending Later in the story
Krsna arsives woth Radha. and thes both ane eff such lustraus
emery veras| that Sia and Parasurama are draw teat: Reyna
persuades Parvan to donse Parasunim.e much ay the eds at
tempted to comanee her to take Pack her curse em Sant in the
eather ayth The renston disselves rt an charity dance in
which sons and disciples move thom one parents Lip ta another
to the -ccumpaniment of metiply swe ad music
When she board Reis work. Parsate was astaaished be
Radha sud, Magee Fraser] and spun [pares] are catiagled 1
ong vibother, albeqeh om the werkl hes appesc ay separaly Be:
TALE Seu ama me there Hal the slightest dense Yau are
Sino amd fat Se who have became split pars Visnu bas taken
Jeu con and dwcyin Sisnu’s heart Pansuramta tas bern tesa
Nismo) became hes aa aatal Buty rdevotee al Sat Games t
whe rs Smit raate: has Bevoine a dewites ot Varn, There ta.
Unoi geet te Bo lound bets cen our husbsinds  Ynen she bad sid
The Radha titted Gomesa mt her Lip. and sielisny he We ad ind
fonshen tes wounded cheek she healed him samediitel Happs
nl pul cag oe Radha. Porte pked up Patasurana who had
Falter caatately a ner dget When Rist sak bee these tee

--- Page 103 ---
The Mythology of Ganeta n
women embraced Ganesa and Paragurama. lovingly he picked up
Skanda and placed him on his own lip. Then Siva. who was de-
lighted by all th, hoaored Kina and took him inte he lap (BrP.
2.3.42.46- 56)

This sersion of the reconcianon between Siva and Parvati
after Ganesu’s mutilation appears to parallel those in which Siva
Bnally recognizes Ganda us hes san ard adopts him to be the
leader of bes gatas Although the wound can be healed, the tusk,
bhe the fist head. cunnot be replaced. It has become forever
sepatated) Repair and recoacdritioa mark the end of the story,
hut the traces ot the breach in the form ot something that is
missing —the tusa or something brought a from somewhere
che + the clephant bead -remaia as an essential reminder that in
the midst of wholeness aad tranquility there is an ineeatable and
nccessary breach

The two dorms ol mutibivon, beheading and detusking, come
logether in nother meth about a botle setween Siva and
Ganesa”

Once there wos a pote between Siva ond Guanes whieh had
eenunucd fora loay ime satleul imerapbon When Sia, who
was mounted of in ctepbaar and unvenquer Mk. sas that Ganess
was made our of matter wpedket and alle woh saursace. he
Anke hie cowa lung wath che cl phont he was ting Then
Passat praned Sie Ibe canqucren el cnemmes, aad asked him tor
acboon "Phy ene whom you have kilea rs cadecd my sea. there ny
fo dauht But he did not cevognize ven boise he was made al
matte: So bring him back to hfe in order to plesse me” Then tke
eteat Rude suled at hor and brought hfe back ante: Passat’s son
His jomed the bead of an ch phant to where his head had been cut
ot and sort was that Gaystany (Ganesr) Game inte being theageh
the grace of Siva, Although he way the san af Masa (Pareatt he
hecaine one wha way without alusion [arene] In onder te have
ad ascete's staff he pulled eut one of hii: Lirge tasks Then
Sia made him the kadet al bs ganas all obstacles and ether
powers (SKP tol sa 29-38)

Set within the framework of Samkhye philosophical categories
this myth combines clements from others we have already exam
ined This time the battle betwcen Sia ond Ganesa iy remunts
cent of the conflict between Soa and the elephant: demon
Gajasura. The story dees not say when the battle was taking

--- Page 104 ---
80 GAweSA: CORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
place, simply that it had been going on for 4 long ume. like the
battle between the gods and demons, a conflict inherent in the
universe itself, The beheading and restoration with the elephant
head follows the patterns by now familar. although here the
quest for the new head drops out of the story The sue of blame
for Ganega’s mutilation ts resolved ditterently here wheo Be are
told that Ganess failed to recognize Siva because he was made of
matter [prakrn]. presumably the matter of hes mother's bodily
dirt. Bis eyes were filled with darkness [ramias|. making him
unable to recognize his tather Parvati carefully disguises hes out
Tage at Ganesa’s dismemberment behind her gesture of praise to
Siva for his victory. and it only comes oul in the form of a request
for a boon for her devotion: she tells Siva to restore Ganesa ta
life This sanant of the beheading tale introduces the act of self.
mutation by which Ganesa teats out Mts own tusk and holds it
like a yogin’s staff, like bis father holdy his trident Phe gesture
temimscent of the time his father broke off fis own phallus when
he saw at was no longer of use except lo create progeny CRP 237.
O'Flaherty 1978. pp. 937 40) This act of sell mutihabon makes
Ganesa more like his father
AS a weapon of conguest, amalogous to thy axe that Par
asurama fecewed trom Siva te cot atl Ganesa’s tusk, the tesk is
Prominent im bvo myths invebviag imple beheadings i which
Ganesa comes out the winner Phe tists a South dadiin ach
about Gauesa’s battle with Gayasura. the elephant demon
Gapasua had obbaned the prvclepe af not deme kiiee oy a
beast. man i god or demon Palliat [Ganesa] not borg ante et
these as he way fall god. bal clephant. was tag eal ere who
coukl desl with bam vgtanoush Phe gia broge ait the god's
night task bud Pathan say bass peelin tested Go pimukhys
[Gapeucd) #bo Thostormed: Rams iste a rat ond byyame the
sebtele onthe poo Clouseau Dupteutl pe gr atet Geil prs
GP 2 1tar
Tn the math owhteton ithell a transtirmiaitien ot the myth el
Ganes’s beheading by Sinan tees Sivas murder and reste
Faben to discipleship of the demon AgtL Gained uses fy tusk
franstores: the clephant-demor adversary into a rat vehicle. to
tam how daw: to size The stor sonteresune when looked atin
relation ta the Sia Gajasuta-Ganesa cvele of mvtas Sia dee

--- Page 105 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa rT
feated Gajasura, whose head was taken to replace Ganesa's ong
nal one. Gajdsura now appears in the above myth as Ganesa’s
enemy and ts transformed through mutilation into his schicle
Ganega’s rat vehicle is thus really the elephant demon whose
head belongs to Ganesa. By the chain of transpositions forming
this gasland of heads, these three characters are indissolubly
linked together as transtormations one of another.

The second myth of the tusk acting as a weapon places the
confiict between Ganesa and the moon, when the moon saw hua
in a compromising situation:

Once Ganesa recered innumerabte sweets frnodaka] from his
devotees which he ale until his belly became large and distended
Then. mounting nis rat he proceeded home Suddenly a serpent
crossed the ragd in front of the rat Deswang back i fnght. the rat
knocked Ganesa down, causing bis belly to splet open and all the
sweets to rofl out on the gragad ural direcuians Ganesa gathered
up all the secels and killed the serpent. taking its body snd tying
up tis beliv witb wt Phe moon, who had been vatching all this,
Taughed oul loud uprosnousl. which made Ganesa furious Sa he
Pulled out one ot his tusks and threw it at the moan, whick cused
darkness all aver the cath The gous became distressed at this and
Pleaded with Garesa lo restore the moon and take back fis tusk
But Ganesa agreed to do so anly on the orditen that the moon
gain and lose us light by waxing and waning cach month (Getty
Poco! PE A Gopurths Rao. vol it. 9 $1. Russell and Lal,
vol 4. pp 19-40)

Thy myth roairanges many of the elements we have seen ia
ather variants “The myth opens with Ganesa alecads fused ia as
elephant headed form and sutfering from too much of a road
thing he had filled his belly ta oserilawing and fas satiated fis
legendary appetite for oral geatiheaton  Ehis sttuabon roughly
parallels the pursuit of genial grattication ocracen Sia ane
Parvati that forms the buckgeound tor the stars of Gunesa’s hirta
Ganesa’s gluttonous excesses cause aim to Ball apy tis tat and
spht open bis belly. as fis parents amorous pla shook the une
verse. The moon happened to witness all this. althowgs Ganes 1
clearly regarded i as sosveurism an Tbe muons pact Pe anorn’s
mocking laugh provoked Ganesa to leat out hr tusk and throw ¢
the a trident te sever the moor in bao. te ynderie wae at
waning. jist as Siva hed split him apactie then eattig Muhour:

--- Page 106 ---
82 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Ganesa restores the moon al the end of the story. as his father
testored him. the traces of the conflict nevertheless remain in the
cycles the moon moves through and thus gives testimony to the
wounding and healing process.

The link between Ganesa and the moon becomes more firmly
established in the myths of Rahu and Kirtumukha. When Visnu.
disguised himself as the goddess Mohini and distributed the am-
brosia to the gods at the time of the churning of the ocean, the
demon Rahu tried to steal it:

Disguesiag hemsel{ ay a god, The demon Rihu took a scat in the

Tow af gods and began to demk the ambrosta [ania] But the Sun

and Moon discovered him and painted him aut Just ay he was

dinaong the chu Visnu cut off tus bead wih bis discus su that his
headless body, whach bad aot yet recened the acer, fell down
dead Hix head had obluned mmmasiuinty decause of the nectar
and Brahma made him os planet, but because of bi batted of tbe

Sun and the Moun, be chases tbem oo the new and full moun

days (BP 8 y 24-26, ef MBh t 17.4-92 MatsyaP 251 5-16)

In this myth of dispurse, theft. and muulaton, Rahu attempts
fo steal the ambrossa stured owt af (he accen of milk at the
potent time of creation, ambrosia. like ity Vedio antecedent
soma. confers inumortalily an yayone who drinks it When the
Sua and Moon capose Radu’s theft. he loses his beds. but has
head survives because it had been transtormed by contact «uh
the suspiceus drink In recognition of Ais ummortal head
Beahisa gives Raby quastdivine status as a plunet But Rabu
trnsfers the force of hi own beheading and his tage losing Ais
hak to the Sun and Moon, hence ines fea ponedicalls lease their
bodes in the form at cchpses The Rahu story takes a different
furan another myth about Rahu’s batile with Saga myth thar
Kas alaniiics with those at Siva and Gunes

When the demon king Jalugdhara had defeated the vods and
senguered Ihe tiple anaverse he sent his messenger Rabu le Sia

We portage hia to gee up bos beaublul wile. Paraty Raha went

fa Sra at Mt Rauhast and told him that singe he iy an iscetic

pd ved ona cremabon ground ke was nat propedls peeing far
hes wate Becruse Faduadbars had taken aL the gods’ possessions
from then: ont he could pre Passat the luyun she deserved

Therelote Siva should please the hing by surrendering his wife 10

the messunger. Raha

--- Page 107 ---
The Mythology of Genesa 83
When Siva heard thiy message he became angry and a man with
the face of a lion appeared between his eyebrows. The man had
hair standing on end and ames pouring oul of his eyes, and he
feaped out at Rahu. trying to desour him. Ternfed by this crea-
ture, Rahu called out to Siva for refuge. and ihe lord called off thes
gana Then this lion faced gana satd to Siva, “Why have you taken

him from me? (am tormented by hunper What can [ eat. O

ford?” Then Swa said to him. “If you need food so badly and if

hunger torments you. then cat the flesh ot your own hands and
feet * So the man ale the flesh of his own limbs unplonly his head
was lett ‘Then Siva. pleased by his obedience. said. “You shail
hereafter be known as Kirtumukha, the face of glory. and you shall
be my duorkeeper and one of my great ganas. herow and fearsome

to all esil ones Wheeser fails to honor you cannot please me.

Brom that time on, Kirumukha stood atthe entrance to the lord of

the gods. and those who do not worship hum at the outset will tind

their worship in vain. (SP 2.5 19 30- $1)

The myths of Raha. Kirtimukha, and Ganesa overlap in many
ways In cach of thent hunger and overeating set the stage for the
action to follow Ganesa has eaten too much and his belly splets
open, calling dawn the mocking laughter of the moon Raha is
gscedy for the ambrosia but foses his body when the gods dis-
cover bum. Rahu carries Jalandhara’s hunger for Parvati, and the
contest with Siva calls forth trom the god's forehead the hungry
gana who, when denied Rahu tora meal. has to ding on his own
hody unui like Rabu, only bis head as feft over. But this head.
the leftover part, proves to be the gang's auspicious remainder
Siva rewards him for bus suffering, just as he rewards Gunesa. by
placing him at his doorway and giving him the power to place and
remove obstacles This latter myth may also be linked to the
story of Stva's deteat of Gajasura. who, when Siva takes his skin,
calls hum Ketavasas, “the onc clad ina skin” The theme that
hotds all these myths together is beheading. of splittiag. und the
power released by that action, Wher Gageés splits open his
belly. he transfers the power of that action ta the moon throurh
his tusk. Rabu redirects the force of tis beheading to the Sun ani
Moon in the form of cclpses and Kirtinukba torns his ravenous
hunger onto himself and devours bi own body Bach of them
finds himself lett in some sort of hallway condivon haf elephant,
echpsed planet. or headless body at the doorway

--- Page 108 ---
Rg GADESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
The myths of Ganesa and Kirumukha share other clements as
well, Ganesa either must prevent Siva from gaining access to
Parvati or contend with Parasurama to keep him from interrupt-
ing Siva and Parvati in their private quarters. As Jalandhara’s
alter ego, Rahu attempts to take Parvati away from Suwa, lead-
ing to the creation of Kirtimukha, who must eat himself when
Rahu's timely supplication to Siva saves him from being de-
voured In both myths the point at uwsue is where Parvat
belongs. her locauon, and im both myths the scum of Siva’s
wrath obtains compensation by remarming close to Panat at the
threshold The dink) between the myths of Ganesa and
Kirtimukha as guardians of the doorway emerges fully in the
iconography of an eightecath-century Javanese caning of
Ganesa with the face of Kiremukha on the back (Zimmer 1946.
pp yy Sg) Like Ganesa. Kirnmukha’s image is placed at the
doorway in Siva’s temple Heinnch Zimmer comments on the
double-sided symbolism of this figure: ~
Kirumukna serves primanty ay ae apotrepare demon-mask, a grue-
some. awe-mspinng guardian of the threshold The salary. bow.
ever—the arthodoy devatee greets the “Face” with conndence
and tanh. tar be anows that Kirtomukha es an acts partion of the
substance of the daviuty binscl. a an and agent af hi protecting
bead-destroving power (Zimmer tg46. p i821
The mythology of Gunesa’s beheading draws on Whe carher
stories of Indra cind fis explons in detcatng sunous opponents
Along with bis horde of marty. the prociisers to Sis ganas,
Indra destroys and dismembers 8 piea. Toasts. the three headed
demon. aod many others One of the myths ot beheadime that
most closely resembles the stores of Ganesa's mutuatian as found
in the tale of Indra cutong up the sans of Daten her womb) Dite
was the mother ot the demons and dndia’s stepmother
Dit gresed because all her sens had been sian Let the tne
af the churaiog of the ecund She practecd awctenin for a
long ume in oner in have a son who woukl ane dav stay Indra
Then, disguised ay sere iol Undta came fo whete she was and
served her victuoush Bringing her hte. fued, and water. and
masaped her binbs whea she became ured Ort became pleased
with this servant and promped that he would shure with her
seas an the conquest ot Indra But Ditvoave Lay down te sleep

--- Page 109 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa 85
with her head where her feet should have been Seeing that she
was sleeping in this impure position. Indes rejorcd and entered
her womb and cut her embrsya inte seven pieces When she
awoke Indra explained to her that he had stsin her embryo and
cut uo inte seven pieces because she had deptoin an impure
posiuon Ditt pleaded with Inder that the seven pieces of her
embryo become the guardians of the regions of the seven winds:
one to sander im the world of Brahma. another in Indra’s
world. a third in heaven. and the remaining four to become
devices and wander in ull the four directions (Rot 46-40. cf
O'Haherty 1975. pp. 91-94)

In this myth Dive practices asceticusm to create a child who
would compensate her for the children she had lose and protect
her from Indra’s destructive power, much as Parvati created
Ganesa ia order to cnyoy the pleasures of motherhood and keep
Siva away Indra appears in discuise as a servant, tending to
Diti's needs. just ay Ganesa served Parvates, and whea Dit com:
mits the ritual error of inserting her head and feet. turning things
upside down, Indra seizes on this circumstance of reversal lo
abandon his supportive relavanship with Dite and abort her child
As she bes asleep with her head pomung te the north, Indra
enters her womb. crossing its threshold from the seuth The
south ss the location of danger In his battle with Siva. Gaines
faces the south: then when thy gods paved te find him anew hed
thes look to the north Atte: Indra bes slain Dit’s son. he grunts
her request thar the seven pieces lise thy seven sens of Adit it
the myth of Martinda mas became the lords of the winds and
directions [dikpefas} After bekesd:ag Parvati's son, Src prints
tum Jomimon over the threshold, which according to same ver
stons of the story faces south Phrouy hit must pass wil devotees
and adversaries One Benuall variant of the Gaigesa stan hes ut
that Siva sought a repltcement head trom a cow clephaat who
had the misfortune ot sleeping with her head peratiny vo the
narth (Gupte iyty. pp az-ayy Hence Garesa’s tae cemerphay
andregyay is made exphat. he hast female enimal new sada
male torso

The conncettons between the myths of Dit and tndia and
Ganesa are more evident ima cunousy vacant to the stery ol
Ganesa’s beheading found m Raya Radbakant Debs cnactcenth
century Sanskrit encyclopedia. the Sabdakalpadruma stich at.

--- Page 110 ---
86 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, FORD OF BEGINNINGS
tributes the story to the Skanda Purdna Siva narrates the story to
Skanda:

Once Ganesa. in the form of a headless child. was talking with a
sage. The sage said, “If you have taken this incarnation in order to
reveal rightcousness. then quwkly reveal to all the head which
destroys sorrow, and bring yoy to the hearts of all the gous. © This
yon of Parva, who had no head. replied toa the sage. “Once
before whea King Mahesa bowed at your fect sou gave him a
blessing. You said to bin. ‘Your hberation wall come through birth:

In the womb of an elephant, accomplished by Sia's hand Ail this

has now come to pass and this onc in the womb hay a lovely head

honored by Siva And he ws the one whose head 4 Il complete my
incarnation "The sage’s heart was filled with they miracle and he
sard to the child, “Lard. you possess all lorms and lines sou ere
the lord of all, you know what lf said to the king, Puanaet compre:
head your form as the lord " Then Narada. wha bod heen lsiening

to all this. said, “How did you become wearnate witheus ahead ie

the first place? Dal someane cub otf sour head when vou were in

the turm ot a child? Remove my confusen. Merlul avd supreme
lord * Drinking in Natadi's words. the child said 7 A certain de
mon named Sindura took the farm atu breese, andi the eyhth

Month he catered the womb and Sut oft my nea Now | aath kill

hum [16 . Muhess] Deesuse he has the eleoneats head © When

Narada heard this be said le the fond who had biken the lorm ol

the child. “We gads know nothing about bow that head was canted

Gisou. You must base pommed it veursetl. .coniag te veur oan

fature “And just as the sege said thy, the sor of Lime appeared

te all, Complete in ii fis haps vy the clephantneaded ane pSuh

dakaipadruma, vol 2. Pp 2u1}

In this fasemabng. although Gungled. Mar Cappers chit King
Mahesa (ho a name for Siva) eather committed some sion was
cursed to be born as aa elephant ar was tbe tresraatien eb the
demon Sinddra The king came to the sage ter absolution and
feceived tin the tonm ots prophees that he would be reborn as
aa elephant that Siva would slay thas makiny of hima sacnticnal
offering and yoving him salvation So the Kung was reharn in the
form of an clephant. with the head tated to de erento Ganesan
When Ganesa was in the cighth menth a Paras wamb og
demon named Sindura took the form ot a breeze and cut oll fis
head. as Indra cul up Dats embrye in her wamb Thus Ganesa
was born headless. atler a conversation with the sage. Ganess

--- Page 111 ---
The Mythology of Gonesa 87
vows to kill the king who possesses the beautiful elephant head
Narada confesses his astomshment that Ganesa could join the
elephant head to his own body. but instantly he appears before
all the sages and gods in his recognizable form with its clephant
head.

In addition to the similarities of this story to the myth of Indra
slaying Ditr’s embryo. it shares important resonances with the
ancient Vedic myth of Dadhyane. the priest who knew the secret
of how to make the sacrce effective in achieving us results
When Indra threatened to behead Dadhyane if he ever revealed
this secret, the Asvin (wins apprenticed themselves to Dadhyaic
in order to learn it, agreeing to remove Dadhyanie’s original head
and replace it with the head of a horse. When Indra discovered
the seeret had been told, he beheaded Dadhyanc's horse-head.
and the Asvins restored fim by replacing tis original head Just
as Dadhyafc’s orginal head. the one that contains the secret
knowledee of the sacrifice’s power, must be hidden trom Indra,
so in this story Ganesa’s elephant head must be rescued from
King Mahega (.¢ . Siva) to make Ganesa physically complete
and thus release his obstacle-removing powers. 1 both stories
the fulfillment comes from getting the right head in place com:
plete with sacrificial knowledpe and the power to bring success in
undertakings and hestow salvation

Lake so many myths of beheadings. this story equivegutes on
the dents of the beheader First we are told that the king wall
be bora as an clephant se that Siva can slay hent and pave hin
salvation, much as he had done vith Gajasura shen he slew his
and wrapped bimself in the elephant deman’s skin thus allowing
his perpetual intimate proamity with hes tord- er when he be-
headed Ganesa und thea ease hom thy reward of fesdship over as
troop ot ganat But here the story abe marty hil Caine sts
head way taken while ston Parvatys womb hy the deman
Sindira i the torm of a breeze thus alowine Goness in lar to
behead King Maheso in the format an elyphant ane rake hes
head. By attobunne the onnal beheading te the demon
Sindura. thus myth (ike others we have sce; attempts lo shill
the blame for Ganesa s mutlaban bsen when the Beheading
myths do not hesitite fo port the mager at Si. as Thy apere ser,
thes go outot there way ta show Chat Siva way proseked eta ce hy
Ganesa’s intransigence at the doorway dois clear tran Ligse

--- Page 112 ---
88 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
variants of the beheading story thal the myths are uncomfortable
in placing the blame for Gancsa’s mutilation on his tather, al-
though in fact they do so, albeit in clever and indirect ways In
the following chapter we shall explore some interpretations of
this disguised tatherson aggression as it hinds expression in (aml
ial and ritual rclanonstups in the Hindu context

One final beheading msth from ancient Sn Lanka is worth
noting for the ways in which it combines and rearranges elements
in the story:

Al that ime Basmasura [vc] was a servant of the god Isaars
[Sia] The goddess Umayangana [Parvati] was matted lo Iswara
While Basmasura way cpioyed under Umass angana she seni slene
to the river tu bathe and pulled up a small quantity of Singatact
(i plant) and crested trom ita prince. aad instructed him to remain
and protect hee She then entered the water A tale hvarer went ond
Gibely told tera that Basmasura had garg to watch the goddess
hathe Then fswars mounted hes elephant and taking his swore
Peocecded fo the spor He cut afl the prince head which fell inte:
the water The pocudess thereupon came autaf the waler and sid te
Wear. Why did you behead the panes whom [hase created”
Ieara cephed. “TE thought he was Basmasura. il vou can create
another prince. dase” Then the goddess said. “UH sau ll. ase
the prince whom Phase created te come to lig agin Twill teate
sever more " bart agseed to ths But he wats unable ta tind the
head. and ke therefore ereoled wowshite dotus plant Ho then ut et!
the head of bis elephant ind ted ct an the age ot ine bebsaded
Prince an named hier Gans Downs [Gangsal UParker 186, 6
O'Blaberty 18a. pp yz. 225
Thos mth opens with the famibar setung of Parsan s bath

Parsan tikes Siva’s servant Basmysura to guard her while she
hathes fn the aves she pully a phint trom the mud and tishians it
to a san muchas she Aad made Guidesa fram the “mud en the
sudtacs OF her limbs i other sersions af the story Sivas falsely
told that tos sonata saver and has scen Puirsate in tes
naacdness ta he ouucire be mstakenly bebeads the soa Pacsat
has created Paraite promises to make seven more sens out of the
fiver sma wall restore the ame she has created. Cuter on the
mth we leacn that sy of the seven merge toyether to tora
Shenae wRereds the seserti, reminiscent of Mastinda. escipes
Wher Sra toes to fud the orginal head. it has disappeared. he

--- Page 113 ---
The Mythology of Ganesa &
must therefore make a head from a lotus plant accompanied by
the head of his ctephant vehicle. like the fateful parydia Hower
testing on Airavata’s head. Again tou. the blame for Gagesa’s
beheading points to Siva. but then shifts to the tale-bearer who
deceived Siva with the lic that Basmasura was lusting after
Parvati as she bathed in the river. This falye accusation against
Basmasura parallels the tale told against Viraka who was Uicked
by the demon Adi when he entered the doorway disguised as a
serpent and then changed into Parvati's double,

The myths of Gagesa’s beheading display a number of varia
tions and draw on many of the motfs that are prominent in the
mythologies of Indra, Viraka. Rahu, and others In and through
these varsant myths run several common threads. First, Ganesa’s
beheading 1s inevitable and necessary. for only when he receives
his new head can his full entity and power emerge. As with
Dadhyanic with the horse's head, i seems that Ganesa’s head
must be removed to make easy tor the “real” head, the one he is
destined to have wn order that be may be made complete. This
Point hads support in the served in which he as born without any
head at all and Parvati sends Skanda to bring hs first and only
head, that of an clephant Second. the beheading takes place in
some threshold locauen the wamb, doomay, of nverbanks
These places are. in Victor TLucner’s (tg6y) phrase, “betwixt and
between” two orders of seatity: There are all marginal regions
where dangers and possibilittes dwell together more intensely
Ganesa’s ambiguous teatary tends fo be ted in with the conthict
between hy mother and father Hew caught the middle. made
from her substance but mutiated and testored by hes achon
Third, the source of Gunesa’s decapitation lies wath bos father
Feen in those myths ia whick Gagesa loses he head by the ace
trons of fate. a curse. a sage. of Parasunima. Sinai atways pees
eatin the background while these other forces and persons stand
in toe him) Bat thy myths allempt to conceal his Lick in sartous
ways. as though thes must adaut ud oul aot openly binalls
Ganesa is both the vctun and sator in these mths He doses his
head. Hequentlh being cought from behator othe raise decen eal
into his own mutabon, but he gains aonee head and more im
Porlant status by sattuc of fis humibation Hr aew power and
authority over the gatas, obstagdes. aml begeniags come trom
his being at once broken and whoeie Thi parades is echoed ma

--- Page 114 ---
re GANESA. LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
number of other important oppositions: inside‘outside—symbol-
ized by the threshold, placing: removing obstacles, animal deity,
wild/tame, and so forth, Impheit in these myths are two pervasive
and significant themes in Indian religion: sacrifice and imtiation
Because the myths are about familial relations fraught with vie-
tence and restoration, they raise questions of interpretation use-
fully pursued, but not hited to, the approach of psychoanalytic
theory. ‘These themes and interpretations. along with others. will
be taken up in the next chapter.

--- Page 115 ---
36
Ritual, Psychological, and
Religious Themes in the
:

Mythology of Ganesa
Now that we hase explored many of the vanectics of Ganesa’s
myths and theie parallels in other stories that make up the vast
corpus of Hindu mythology. it is appropriate to turn our atten:
fien to some of the interpretive questions we mught bang to these
staries How are we to read these myths? What as their signifi:
cance to Hindu and Western readers of listeners Sa much of the
Process of reading or hearing and interpreting any story celated
to the assumptions. behets. and Gites of the reader or listener
There ts nd single “true” meaning ot the myths fasta there ere
vanious (cadings to which we might sobject the maths Some of
the readings may He closer to thy assumptions andife capenence
ofa Hindu audience others may seem tarfetohed te: trachtnal
Hindu but wall make sense toa Western reader fa this situation
as we stand before the maths an scareh ol wavs tainterprer them
within the contest of there oven cuiture ange Resaiad un. p
Proach that takes methadologiead elects serausly mikes Ee
Most sense

In this chapter we shall first look tromoti th at thy maior
episodes in the Games stony hich, nehowtiy restarts
thresholds, obstacles, and so tomn te sce where hilvd he gies
find clear articulation in Hindu culture We cern her be ruse 2

Mi

--- Page 116 ---
gz GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
és out of this tradition that the myths and rituals originate, Onec
this indigenous context has been explored, we shall move our
mquiry in ways that can take advantage of other interpretive
methods. such as psychoanalysis, None of the approaches we
shall explore are definitive: all are suggestive. Our purpose ts not
to fight the battle of methodological venficaton of falsification
but 10 contunue moving through the myths in various ways. gain-
ing an insight here and there that makes them come alive and
Move us to an understanding of the worlds from which thes come
and the worlds from which we come.

Sacrifice and Initiation: Breaking Up and Making Whole
The beheading of Ganesa fits into a larger pattern of beheadings.
mutilations, and dismemberments in Hindu mythology, especialy
in the cycles of myths associated with Indra and Siva In the
Vedic texts Indra beheads and otherwise mitlates a host of op.
ponents He splits open Vetra to release the waters and restore
the balance of the gosmos that had been withheld in the serpeat’s
body (RV 132.1275) He cuts off Dadbyaie’s head as punish:
ment for revealing to the Asvins the sceret of releasing the power
of the sacrifice (SB 1g t 618-24) Aod Indra lops off the three
heads of Trsiras when he ts masquerading as a pricst of the gods
in order to subvert them (Brhaddevata 6 tay 44. MBb $y 1-44)
Vignu’s head is wadvertently severed by the strmg of his awn
bow. and is then replaced with the head af a hare (SB tan
15) Indra bebeads Namuct whoxe head pursues Indra shouting
In protest (SB os gue toot MBA yi 2X8 ath Siva destroys
Brahmas fits head wath fis thumbnan USP uk 36 $00 of
O'Flaherty tu7a. ppt ab Hy attacks Dakge’s sacetee. be
heading bie and turnine boy Regd mie the sucnfuad otters.
Uhus completing the rite that he had orginally ser out lo destroy
(KP 11g) Durga Uckes the bead at the demon Mahisa to punish
bom for trying te seduce and destroy her (MP Sas. ag) We
have already looked atthe damembermenat of Dites embrye gad
the inverted beheadings of Rabu and Kicumukhba. the former
whea he ted to steal the ambrosia atthe churaing of the ocean
and the Ustice wheal Siva cured him to devour his own body
These are bute fow of the legions of heads of pods, demans, and

--- Page 117 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 93
humans lying about on the sacrificial battlefields af Hindu my-
thology that are strung together, tke flowers into garlands. to
adorn Siva and the goddess.

Behcadings take place ay puntshments and as a way of inducing
humilty of of transforming the opponent inte a devotee. as we
saw in the myth of Gajasura’s defeat by Siva and in some of the
Gagesa beheading stones Death by beheading hus the advantage
of drama and decisiveness The violence calls attention to the
awesome power released when the head ts severed trom the body
and the blood flows. distribuung its life-containing substance
(Brubaker 1979)

[na number of myths beheadings take place in pairs. which
allows a number of possibilities for exchange of heads and
bodies, with some unexpected but auspicious resulls. The sage
Jamadagni falsely accused his chaste wife, Renuka, of adultery
and ordered his son Parasurama to cut off her head as punish-
ment. But the son's sword cut too wide a swath and abso took off
the head of an untouchable woman who was standing near
Renuka As a boon (rom bis father for his ohedience Parasurama
restored bis mother, but with the body of the untouchable
woman In this way the restored goddess Renuka combines the
head of a high-caste deity with the body of an untouchable. At
the level of village religion, this myth enables the poddess to
appeal to a broad combination devotees from many castes and
Provides the village with the religious unity to support tls social
divesrons (Brubaker 1977) A sumilar predicament results from
the exchange of head and bods in the dchghtful tale (on which
Thomas Mann based his novella The Trumposed Heads) {rom the
Kathdsarusagara

Once « soung waskerman named Dhasali went te the pomd to
bathe These he saw a beautiful gid, Madunosundarr of the same
caste Immediately he tell passionately in tose wath her and bean

to waste away from the pain of separation from her Eager to

make him happy. bis parents arranged for the tae We be aries ay

soon as powible A while after there martes Madanosurdute >
brothers came to visit ane fhe three of them teesther want on.

Pilgrimage to the shane at the goddess 'Durge] Stra by the

beauty of the lemple. Dhasaila urged bry wee and Protne ean Low fe

goimside bat they rctuscd sasiag they hacl ne simtapig otignay fe
give the goddess Su he weaCunsile the temple lang Phere ins

--- Page 118 ---
OF GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
moment of intense devotion, he cut aff his own head and offered wt

to the goddess After a while. when he did not return, his brother

in-daw went into the temple to look for him) Seeing Dhavala lying

there beheaded he was overcome with grief and cut off his own
head as well. Finally, when neither of them returned, Madana-
sundari also went into the temple Seeing her hushand and brother
dead on the floor, she prayed to the goddess that she might be
reborn again to the same husband and brother. and then she tied a
creeper vine around Ret neck as a noose But the vere of the
goddess said she was pleased with the offerings they had made and
told her to rejoin the heads and bodies of her husband and
brother Overjoyed af the goddess’s grace. ina moment of contu-
ston, she atlached her husband's head to hes brather’s beady and
her brother's head to her husband's body Immediately they came

to life Waen she realized what she had dune. she became per-

plexed. (KSS 6.80)

Madanasundari’s perpleaty of mind a understandable Which
of these bybrd men is now her husband and which ws her
brother? To put it more boldly, to which of these men is she to
be unfaithful and woh whom is she lo commit incest? (Brubsker
1979) The tale resolves this dilemma by saying that itis the hese
that counts; 1 is the highest point on the body. the source of
speech. and. according to yogic traditions. the repository ult:
mately of seed (see O'Flaherty roa, pp. i> a1)

In the case of Ganesa, the orginal head cacinat roiein the body
once it has been severed. whether because th keeps studing off. as
when Parvate tries to stick i Back en. or Beceuse it disappeared
Into the heavens upon became sepacided irom the body Se
Siva must find anew head. as he did vith Daksa. grag hin at
goals head ates he had taken Dakyas ong head (SP
P2ADIA ay top Cave the clephane Read ws plivcd on Ganesas
Shoulders. 10 sticks eq os fC had always belonged there, bringing
fim back fo bte with cohaneed power and suthonty: One sarin
eb the Mon appears to pecopnize the aw kseardness ot putting such
adarge header se smalls child and tikes the eppertunmty ta have
Sea supply an elymutagy lor Ganesa’s name. Vinasgke So
says to Parsaty

Sage batbter ol the mountain, the bead is the leager [dy aks

Sending aa ine hedy and you told me the Read was too hag’

when Shanda jemed. to thy bady and Ss ts proeminenee iis the

--- Page 119 ---
Ritual, Psychological. and Religious Themes 98
leader [vindyaka} of the body on which it stands, we shall name
him Mahavinayaka.” (SkP 7.3.32.15-17)

The head has preeminence for yet another reason in addition
to the fact that it rests on top of the body: in every vanant in
which a beheading occurs, the head is Sia’s comtribulion to
Gapesa’s creation. In cutting off tis orginal head, Siva removed
that premier part of his son made completely from Parvati’s sub-
stance. Siva’s create activity follows on his destructive evele
here as elsewhere. He must first de-create Ganesa before he can
re-create him, at least partially, tn his own image. The elephant
trunk, which perpetually bangs timp. and the broken tusk are
reminiscent of Swa's own phallic character, but as these phalhe
analogs are either excessive or in the wrong place, they pose no
threat to Siva’s power and his crotic clams on Parvati.

Once Ganesa recerves his new head he not only carries on as
before as Parvati’s son—as if the beheading were only a flesh
wound—but he improves hs stature by becoming Siva’s adopted
son and lord of his attendants. and he enjoys the privilege of
being worshipped before all other pods and of having the power
to remove obstacles

Asa mayor mouf in Ganesa’s story, the severed and transposed &
head draws much of i power from the larger Indian theme of © WY
sacrifice That quintessential Vedic-Bratmame arena in which the
ntual specialist the “hoower” assembled hy own untverse out
of the parts of fire. speech. offerings, Knowledge. and sacniice
was the paradigmaty and abstract unnwerse out of which the
world of human and divine expenence. power. and ummortality
was understood 1a came En the form of the cosma person
Purusa-Prajapat: was dismembered in the saceilive aad tes pieces
made up the universe (RV 20 yo). The world of the sacritice was
as Jan Heesterman describes it

A cosmos which as siolenty broken ap le be put back tagethe:

again This Won accurdance with the oscil concepyon ol tee

universe underlying the tiiual filerature the constant s.termatiny
movement between the poles of deantige tom and ree gs bat
death and birth, nether world and uppes world. ar idea wt
found sts clearest systematic expresston in the banding af the ley
altar concenved of as the restaratier of the deuttegsated: eosin
man The pivotal point, however. i that actual degth aad disci

--- Page 120 ---
ro GANFSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF SEGENNINGS
gration have been eliminated Abstraction enabled the ntualists—
and this is the rationale and achtevement of the ritual system—to
do away with the actusahty of death Death has been rationalized

away (p 24)

At the center of the sacrificial ground, buried beneath the altar
of bricks is the head. taken from an opponent in agonistic struggle
The violence of the beheading belongs te the world ef myth: itis
the task of ritual to unite what has already been rent asunder The
head 1s the container of the priceless treasure. the mystenous ¢s
sence of Agni. the location of seed and soma, the place of speech
The Brahmins themselves—the knowers and chanters of the sacri
fice—have been made from Puruya-Prajspan’s head In the Vedic
tradition the bead did not belong to the vods. thes had to discover
it or steal it from others in a competition between them and the
demons binding the (we groups together ina struggle for the
head that completed the sacuifice when at was severed and gave
forth its lite- bestow ing substance (Heesterman, p27 cf Damelou
1964, pp. 280-8¢) Ta thas contest the hosts invited the yuests to
the sucnfice to subvert them and take thei precious heads us
otferings to the gods: In his destruction at Daksa’s sacrifice, Siva
inverts this pattern: Daksa fail fo invite Sinas who thea tikes
Daksa’s head fer the offering inanact that both destroys vind
completes the sacnitice Although the ntual moves toward the pele
ob restonabon between the pairs of forees—desth immortihts des
Mons‘gods the myuh rotatns the traces ef the wrolence Chat pre-
ceded the sacrifice. and indeed mide at bod necessary and posse:
ble Inthe tual she bead was thot of ananimal hase. bull. rant

Lar goat (SB 62 U4 s.0sh In later stages. ne doubt under the

xX influence of the weetis tradtian with its emphasis on poningury

[alensa]. the ctual reduced its emphases on the hoods dimensians

af the sacnthee ane focused on the claw ada potin which the fire

Yes transported and the sot olferings kept (ASS 16 27-7) The

whhd pot. lke the seme it conta, had to be fetebed. just as a7 the

more ancrent tradition of the horse sacritice, the animal had to be
followed fora year before it could be capture.

The ritual emerges as the model ot restoration and integration,
with the sacnibeer mearporatiag the umverse inty himself as he 1s
teborn om the sacntice The difficulty: with thes model is that the
mual paradigm of order and balance, abstraction and encoded

--- Page 121 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 9?
sacred speech. and gestures and pure substances does not accord
with everyday reality [nto this impasse myth enters:
The contradiction between system and reality is obvious if we
consider that the abstract ritual means have to be explained by a
mythology which stresses vivienve The violence excluded from the
ftual ws relegated to mythology The ritual can only picture resto
fation, its counterpart, destruction, can only be expressed mytho-
logically (Heesterman, p. 30)
The ritual builds on the violence that has taken place in myth, a
violence conducted offstage: it cleans up and repairs the dirty but
necessary work done by the myth
When we consider the myths of Ganesa's creation, beheading,
and restoration in the light of this sacrificial paradigm, additonal
nuances appear Parvaty creates Ganesa out of the dirt of her
body. ina process analogous to the making of the akAg pots She
brings him to life by standing him up and breathing hfe into him
or telling him to come to life, movements reminiscent of those of
the priests bringing the ukha pots to life by sprinkling them with
mantras In the later tradition of image worship [paya]. Ganesa’s
Image ts fashioned out of clay and brought to life by the invoking
of vilat breath [prantal inte the image by the worshipper. In the
myth, Siva und Parsath come into conthet over Ganesa’s head
Siva wins by taking the orginal head Bul, having performed the
destruction of Parsat's creation, he must restore it with @ second
and permaneat head. one that completes Ganest aod restores
him to his mother With the second head cames order and har
mony Another way of reading the myth @ tu see Siva and
Parvati contending over which of them will keep Ganesas ong
nal head Parvati remains offstage during: thes parte the contest.
acting through the aller egos of her sare. whe contend with Siva
and bis xegas at the doomeay When Siva restores Ganesa with
the elephant head--thus completing the sacatig by destroying
the offering—he contributes the clepkant head with the fhacod
trunk, a caricature of bis fuga, as the remainder that makes thy
restoration possible and brings Ganesa to life Ganesa thus bee %
comes the embodiment af restaration, an unlikely but aonethe-
IES Vital and powerful reality whom all gods and powers mus;
acknowledge if their undertakings are to be successtul The vio
lence inherent in the myth of Ganesa’s creation is deflected onto

--- Page 122 ---
8 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Ganesa himself and from him passed on to others as he wields his
power as the obstacle maker and remover fn this context 101s
interesting to note that iconographically as well as rtually Ganesa
always appears in his restored form. There are neither images
tepresenting Ganesa before he had his clephant bead nor any
sculptural or other visual representations of the primal act of
beheading The Ganesa we see, his image [sndri], is the restored
one, the beneficiary of the process of sacrificial dismemberment
and resuscitation. The primary imagery and logic of the Ganesa
birth story 1s sacrificial: the Indian paradigm of sacrifice provides
the myth with its basic rules and moves

The myth of Cranesa—his formation, mutilation, and restora
tlon- expresses another fundamental paradigm i the Hindu tra-
dition, that of indiation Gunesa undergoes a difficult: passage
beginning with, in Van Geanep’s terms, a “separation” from bis
mother, followed by a “hminal” period at the threshold in which
he suffers wounding and loss of entity. and concluding with a
“reaggregation” or restoration, with a new head and advopnea by
Swa as his son and ay lord of the ganus (pp. 05-665) [tts as
though the myth charts Ganesa’s inhanon rate deamts. many
elements of his myth reflect the imagers of Hindu amitation nites
There are Wo major initiatory models inthe Beahmame teadnan
from which Ganesa’s myth appears lo draw the firsts the didsa,
the mle ot consecration when the sacrifices [samara] undergacs
asymbole reburth mto the sacanee in the manner reasniscent of
the selt-sucrifige of Puruya. the second as the npanuvarta. the
ceremony that counters Iwice-bord status en a young hiyth-caste
male. in which he begins his period of study and apprenticeship
[Prahmacarval toa teacher [acdesa]. rocenes tis sacred thread.
vows to remain chaste. and teatas the quurtessence af all ssered
Vedic speech, the pasar? mantra. A more detaled look at these
Iwo ceremomes. especudly the hitter, will underscore the cam.
plexity and richness of Gagesa’s story.

When the sorta sacrifice is sbout to begin, after the barber bas.
shaved olf his body bar and pared his fingernails, the priests
spnokle the sacriticer fyajamana] with water. identified as seed.
and purty hem by smearing fresh butter on him aad ruborng him
with twents one handfuls ot darbha grass (AB 2. SB 48 2 1-
12) fn Gore tos, the poests make the sacativer “inte an embryo.
again” {AB 1 40% Then they conduct him to a “womb-hut

--- Page 123 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 99
[dtksitavimita]” where he sus doubled up in a fetal position. They
cover him with a cloth garment (identihed as a caul—the mem-
brane covering the fetus) ted with a strand of muraia grass as well
as with a black antelope skin representing the placenta. The sac-
ficee clases bis fingers into fists and thereby “holds tightly in his
hands the sacniftce and all the gods” (iid) This doubling up
Symbolically returns the sacrificer to that primal creative moment
when he takes the gods and the cosmos into hinsell, when there
“is no misfortune for him” (bid) While in the womb-hut and in
Tenouncing food. he makes himself into a tood offering. an oola-
bon, to the gods (SB 3.3.4.2). 06684) He refrains from contact
with others and must only speak in an inaudible or babbling
fasthon. hike that of an infant: In the womb-hut, surrounded by
embryome svizbohsm on all sides, the sucnificer undergoes a
death and rebirth process: death back inte the womb, nding
himself of fis presious contamination, and being reborn from the
womb as the offering to the gods and benches of the welfare
they bestow in return (see Kacler, pps? sk)

The passage of the sacrificer in this imitaben ritual and mat of
Ganesa’s creation and the events thal follow cun along paraliel
lines. The sacritcer begins his passage unto the world of the sacer-
fice as an embryo He then becomes punticd and prepared as a
food offering to the gods. a sacuibee ia tus own mebt: Sunitarly
Parvati makes Ganesa and places hia an the doorway. an miter:
mediate space analogous to the womb-hut of the drksa Ganesas
sacrifice to Siva follows. Siva Cikes the role plaved Ov the vods in
the sacrifice, which culminates in his beheading Ganesa and te:
cenwing that head as a kind of offenng Sia. albert rcluctantis
testores Garesa as a reward far his self-sacrifice. miuca as the
gous reward the sacrifices with wealth, soox and foag ble tar pis
offering of himself and his sorta Siva gives Gamtesa new ee
and anew lease an dife, yustas thy gods give the sagemnee rs mmr
tally and well-being The similarities between Hy ayik and ot
ual are suggestive Althouph we need not suppese that the my th
was self-consciously patierned on the didsa mite. we see thy peu
siveness of this initatory pattern in the imaeinatiens at the myth
makers and the possibilities mt offered for tunkiap shoot lie
origins of this deity

There is more striking similarity between the stony of Ganesa
and the intiatory rile of epanavana the investiture of the sere

--- Page 124 ---
soo GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
thread. The upanayana citual appears to draw sume of its symbol-
ism and structure from the diksé rite, and st parallels more closely
the processes experienced by Ganesa in the myth

From the Lipanisadic period. the epanavana ceremony has Peed
the premiere rite of passage tor tigh-caste. particularly Brahmin,
males. Although there are many versions in both texts and prac-
tices, the basic structure of the nite follows On the day before the
rite is to be perlormed- after Ganesa. Sa thakymy), and other
deities are propitiated— the young man iy smeared with Curmeri¢
and required tu spend the night in absolute secnge. As Pandes sn
bes mayer study of Hindu nites of passage. comments. “the veltow-
ish powder gave a show af embryene almosphere and absolute
silence made the Bow a speechless child anew” (pu2k: The tal-
lowing morning the boy and Ais mathe: sare a final meal to-
gether, tor atter his intation he will cat with the other mates af
the houschold sepatatety trom the women aad children Thyn ihe
boy's tather and mother coadect him to the canopy uader which
the Vedic sacrifioal fre bas been kindled Atte: a purifying bath
and shaving of bedy hair and tonsure [cadedurmer]. the boy os
pivera garment [kunpree). onginally made atacdese skin the tat
ward oy ascetics The pnests then give the Bos a staftidarta: The
box announces to hry new teacher that he intends te became a
brahmacann, a student and stiscipie. the leagher jdedeva] signals
bis acceptance of the bow in apprenticeship By tying acourd the
bow au agudle made of Circe strands of vena pris. sicaitying the
threes Vedas that will pe the core ot his studies Treat the dedr ia
invests The boy with his sacred thread. (hres strands represeating
the Ubree gitas and ied together by a bradimaceanth: KNOT Son
bolic ot the presence of Brahma. Ving. and Sina Phe aati ahe
gives him an aya (oc upper garment made from in antelope skied
which tke Ute daapote carmen caries stradys assect dons with the
Practices ot ascctes and mas abe be reain cent ab fe anteiape
shin uscd as an cmibryome caver tor the utiiat nthe Venn dik sa

Phe invests of the thread marks (le vayor transtonmation
wa the pee. the porate at which the bay moves ite category of
frohmacaen ona must conan obedient to us eblieahoaas Once
Tho ims estituss et the thread has Laken pice, the aedrtd cives the
Brot pnecete a SL Mtatedal Te takes il sasing, “My stilt which
Tel cows tae rend in Ge oped aie. thal take up again for
the sake et date: Lt) neds lustre ame heliaess” (PGS 23 sa)

--- Page 125 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes tor

As with the diksa rite, the upanavana encompasses the pro-
cesses of separation. liminal ambiguity. and reaggregaion. On
the day prior to the rite, the boy passes backward into his first
human birth. He ws smeared with the embryome substance and
kept apart. silent. and bound to hes mother tor bis source of toad.
As the rite begins. he ts separated from her and his human Sich
through the tual acts of bathing. shaving. und receiving his as-
cetic garments - garments thal in the didya@ rite were explicitly
identified as the caul and placenta appropriate to his new birth
into the sacrifice. the world of the gods Larly saurces for the
upanayana state Unat when the acarsa receives the student as his
apprentice he “places him Ike a foetus and carries him for three
days in brs belly” LAY a2 206) or becomes pregnant with him (SB
t1.§.4.16. cf Kaclber. ps6) In becoming “preenant™ with the
brahmacdrn, the male acurva gies bith to hin andeogy nously
into a spiritual lneage and a new life. a bfe exphertl weatibed
with the sacohce into which the sucriheer is bora through the
diksd Once the student has beea reborn into tay anew hfe. he
receives garments. pire. and thread. cach of which has associa
tions with the embryo, caul. placenta. umpidical cord, and with
renunciation as well—-the path that leads through death to te
birth While in this new embrvanic state born of the acarv. the
student inhabits a deminal locaton ia which bis whole adentty
depends on his teacher “The ucdrva (caches him how to behave
how to observe the complex cules and oblyations appropriate le
his new Infe, how to perform the fire sacrhce, how to utter ding
speech, and soon Wher the student rcccives his staff thas the
staff he saves that “fell ta the ereund bromo pyschoanals ne
perspective. this tual move pray be reac as a semoohe Casta:
ton. ia that his ascesie yuarduin stall protects him while he re.
mans cebbate Once the acanva has made the bratmacarint ute 3
mans thats. has een hie his second birth as a dba a twice:
horn Hindu—he is fit to return to the world ot bis tends. 90
longer as their son but ay a beggar ascety from a new and
spiritual lineage “Fhe brufinacarin ctually begs toad teom the
assembled family He beys as ore coming (tam a new and sprit
ual lineage. His retura tor aims constitutes Ris reaggrenahen ite
the human woski. a world that now krows him und tesponds te
him in his new and elevated status

The ritual passage of the Avadumacaria hike thot ol tag san

--- Page 126 ---
102 GANFSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
ficer in the diksd rite, bears some striking resemblance to
Ganesa’s expetience in the myth. When Parvati makes Ganesa
out of the substance of her body, her role iy similar to that of the
boy's mother who smears him wah turmene Indeed. according
to one variant of the Ganesa birth story, Parvate uses turmenc
[Aaridral a6 the unguent with which she rubs her limbs to bring
Gaoesa into being (MBP 16) The sellow color of the turmenc
is suggestive of seed, gestation, and power It features prom
ently on the embryonic symbolism of the Vedic diksd rite and is
a common feature of many ntuals to the goddess (Parvatil (ef
Ayyar. pp. 74.75: Hiltebertel ty2. pp Xe-1) In placeng
Ganesa in the dooneay—the lininal locagor and ping him the
staff of the guardian, Parats separates tim trom herselt Ga-
pese’s defeat and resuscitation by Siva parallels rhe imitators
process carned outon the Arahmacarim by the acd Ganesa’s
beheading is bike the cutting of the studeats har, particulaziv the
tonsure Swa's adoption of Ganesa as his son and fos gnving him
fis name and lordship over br retinue corresponds to the aearva
guving birth androgynously to the Araheraedea and instructing
him in his duties as a student and Wwiee-born male bike Ganesa,
the brahmacarin romiins celibate. an apprentice to by adoptise
tather The return of the Prafmmacarin tothe LAMY as atl isestie
begear recalls the scenes im the Ganesa ane’ in when Ae is
Presented to the assembled deates tor the first Gime as the Lord
of Obstacles whan they must now recognize as having anew and
clevated status

These structural parallels between the passage et Ganesa and
that ot the bradmacarin herps to explain why Ganess os such a
Appealing feu to human on spite at his obvious phsswal ditter
ences tram them thy passage as bhe the pissage of all otice-born
Hindu mates. dike then he has espencnced the process ot mater:
nal separation. imitation through symbelm mublebon by a new
“father” (the aeariad. and the arduous toayyrerative social zation
and acculturation pecessany to nuke buat recognivable entity in
the sousl wath! Ganesa Knows ther passage because ios ale
hy own. and this commonality ot experience conders him access
Ble cn ways the ather pods are not Ganesa is then ally and
advocate ia the court of diving beines und powers As human
inttlates ascend to the realy of the gods through the ritual of the
upanayanda, Canes descends to the world of humans through

--- Page 127 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 103
myth. They meet in the middle—on the threshoid—whence they
emerge as new beings broken and made whole and Alled with
potential knowledge and power.
Father, Mother, Son, and Brother
The myth of Ganesa parallels aspects of human experience be-
yond the restricted world of ntual initiation [tis a tale of family
relations and reflects the unconscious ambivalences of carly for-
gotten childhood experience One need not be an ideological
Freudian to see the fruitfulness ot raising psychoanalytic ques-
tions about a myth that involves such a sioleat and complex
account of father son relations The extent to which the myth of
Ganesa explores these relations and the sensibilities that attend
them, it reaches beyond its Indian context and takes on universal
meaning and appeal

The story begins even before Ganesa arrives, with the tension
between the mother and father over whether to have achild at all
The mother fervently desires a son. the father resists. The extended
“famiiv” of gods impedes the couple's opportunities for intimacy -
they continually interrupt Seva and Parvate just al the port un there
lovemaking when the natural engendering of a child might occur
After Ganesa’s arnval. the myth evokes the plastul momacy aad
warmth between the mother and her newly created son. aa intimacy
enjoyed while the father remains at a distance Eventually the
mother must let the son go: the son must confront the father and
compete with him far access to the mother in this conflict the sen
does not stand a chance against the father's overs helmuny strearth
The son positions himself between the mother and father. calling
forth the mother’s protecove isunets The son submits itd sacre
fices his own claims oo the mother to gain acceptance from The
father on the father’s terms The father. however, does not demand
total submission he wounds cather than kuly Whether autor yuilt
or grace, the father makes the son into his own image and pres him
a place to stand -near but beneath hen in stature do thes Indian
setting the oedipal theme finds a diftercat resoluten The contron
tation between tather and son for the mothe rends with the detcalot
the son, followed by his restoranen to the proximity of fis mother
but not to intimacy with her def Ramanuians

--- Page 128 ---
tog GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS

As a story about the mner experience of individual psychosex-
ual development and family relations. the myth of Ganesa deals
with the brute facts of human connecvians at the Most intimate of
associaions. Such truths are not comtortably admitted at the
conscious level of family and social life. but they are projected
onto the gods At the distance by which the divine and human
worlds are separated, the repressed and forgotten feehngs of the
maturation process can be encountered without intolerable psy-
chic shock. Ay a story of famity conflict and reconeihation and
the process of indvaduation. the myth invites the methodological
insights of psychoanalysis Like dreams. myths are maps of un-
conscious fechngs and repressed regions of carls childhood expe:
nence. The story of Ganesa gives us insight inte the Indian expe:
rience of being a son, the disguised ambivalences ot hfe in the
neiwork of famibal relaions As the Indian psychoanalyst Sudhir
Kakar points out:

The enormous papulunity of Gunesa cbrauehout Indi, a phe:

nomenon of considerable puz7ement to Induiegts Gan thus oy

partially explained ows recopnia, Ganesan the gad ter all prs
chic seasons, wha embadies wedi Wpice | resalutons of devel
opmental canthets in traddranal Hind soot. In clest ine
bow expresses the cumaction that thy oaks wus te propitiate ihe
mother’s deminds and ure again ke her curtacing ang srotes
fey lo repudiate the cause of the dinturbange er eu mutual,

hy mateness (pp. tor 2)

Te explore the wass in which Gotesas mth ns guide tn the
“Ctvpical’ resolutions ch doselopmentul cantigts on toatl
Hindu family contests. woo shall book at the several pais ot
relations that apesite an the msvth father mother cnurher sen
father son. and brother breather Thoimight be ebrested: that thy
“typi” trachtional family does net conten te the mucicar
model of father, mother ond sonesb but rather consists at the
evleaded banship umt cacompassuyg three aad tour geagsitiens
wilh cousos and i hass owelbag together im close prosiants
und that authority gad contig: aie thus detused among a eum
ber at parent surrogates This is cer unly thy case atthe lesed at
soci ble in the mth however ther anh what amibroapale:
got Brenda Bok Book cals the kinguck us the tundamental
felibons That cates the beavest cmehenal barden of ambiva-
tenes What we vist te explore isnot th crpitieal iamilial

--- Page 129 ---
Ritual, Psychological. and Religious Themes 105
telations that exist on the level of day-to-day social life but the
“concepts and feelings about kinsmea that are expressed less
directly in mediums such as folklore and citual prescription.”
(1974. p. 2). Weth the Gagesa myth we see the kin nucleus
boldly articulated
FatHer/MoTHER
Ganesa’s ongins. bhe those of every human son dod daughter,
are tound in the contex: of the relationship of his parents As we
have already scen. Siva and Parat quarrel over the question of
children Parvat longs to have a son, to “eel the kiss of a son's
face.” ay she tells Siva pleadingly {BDP 2.60.21). Her intense
desire reflects the longing of Jadian women to have chidren In
tradimonal Hindu culture, pring Deth to a son es the most ful:
filling contnbuton a woman can make to the well-being of the
family Notanly dees she bong forth a child who will give her the
emotional satiofaction and intimacy she sceks but also she has
offered the supreme gift to her husband and his kinsmen -a male
herr one who wall carry out tne «rdeddhd otual by which bes father
will be conducted safely cato the world of the ancestors after bis.
death Guing birth ta a son confers charmous status on the
mother. lis proot ot hee procrealive power and capacity to pre.
vide for the welhire ot the catire fares Indeed. its contiema
tian of her divinity Parvati childless ss ts her greatest sorrow
Her wish far s son ay so overpowernny that in Savas absence she
creates ao san ol het own Gul of the abundance of her po.
tentials teat of gencrative atchems chat covery Childlyss waite
might wish to cmulate

Siva. thy father, daes not ses pa snthend as such an unmit
gated blessing ber the lard ob ascetiasm whose pursuitet ic
fenuncialory path has frcea him tram: tae clutches at sernare
(the curse of death and rebiethy a son as aut biter and
nuance The sens ntial role thiourh Guests thy we th ol
humans. os ireelesaat te the deity Purthermere. a child wed ea
distracted to the mother, tucnung her sttonten ow oy Hare erate
Interest him He preters that Ubes remain tese ss unt esc
the interrupuians and annoyances that accompany the perm: ot
little tect Siva expresses fis resistance Lo precre iho. which est
charactersie ot the renunciatory pempectne and to tegts the toa

--- Page 130 ---
106 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
of loss of autonomous power that comes with the loss of semen
(cf. Carstairs. pp. 83 &7: O'Maherty 1980. pp. 43-53). The son
may provide assurance to the father that hiy passing into the next
world will not go unrecognized and dishonored; however. m that
very assurance lies the reminder that fatherhood itself ty a state of
bondage to sarsara Withdrawl trom attachinent ts the straighter
path, the road to renunciation and freedom) Siva is not the cals
one threatened by Parvati’s desire for children, The gods know
that a child of this union would displace them: compared to tim
their powers would pale to insigmibcance Heace they must inter
tupt the divine lovers before any consummation and conception
might take place. Frequently they disguise themselves as wander-
ing mendicants, renouncers, to remimd Siva where brs lovalues
ought to belong. Similarly. although the parents of an Indian
married couple insist on the urgency of having sons, “every effort
is made to hinder the development of intimacy within a couple
that might exclude other members of the family, especialiv the
parents” (cf. Kakar. p. 74)

In those variants ot the myth in which Sia does partorpate im
Ganesa’s engendering, he does so reluctantly of unwitonels. Ms
seed inadsertently fallmg on the ground and mising with Par-
vati's in the bath. as at did woh Skanda’s birth Hix mouves are
ambivalent He agrees to a son as a boon to the gods. hy
devotees. not because of tus own desire The gods need a son
to protect them from the demons. yust as the family needs sons
to protect them from the demons ot bunger. avglected snces
tors. loss of stulus. and even extinction at the lineage The
husband ws reminded that to engender a sen is a sacred duty.
partial bis obligations te those who gre themselves the authors
of his own existence and support His act ol engendennag wy like
an oblation inte the Siied fire of the wile’s womb [yer] tn the
human realm. chddren -cven sony are a macd blessing Thes
advance the fils s dortuegs sathia the realar of samusdea. but
they dems them the option uf iekease [medsa]. they bang the
Mother tultllment and intimacy. but they preaccupy her to the
exclusion of the tither This ambivalence would be destructive
to the comeston ol the tamuly it admitted openly. ity expression
Is left te tbe purratwe world of myth where it can be done
Indirectly Tas comforting to knew that even the gods, whose
IUMAGIES re aN Open scefel, alsa face such dilemmas.

--- Page 131 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 107
MoTHFR/SON

Parvati longed for a son. Her longing was made all the more
Poignant by Siva’s interminable absences and resistance. Her de-
sire generates enough power to turn bodily dirt mixed wah un-
guents into seed and engender a baby without Siva. Astonished
by her own creative power, she fondles the child, enjoying bim
like a young girl with her doll, She tells Gaoesa that he belongs
gnly to her, he os the flesh of her flesh. there is no difference in
essence between them. The descriptions of Parvati’s doting en-
juyment af her son evoke the delight with which Indian women
indulge their young children As Carstairs notes

Hindu children. almost without exception, begin Ife with a wonder:

fully rewarding experience. Dunag thei frst year they are never

separated trom there mothers for more than a short time and thes are
given the bieas generously, whenever they [cel hungrs oF upset

In the Hindu family, because ne experiences so little [rustration, the

child develaps an assurance that the support and succar will never $e

demed him hence his constant tand even unreaushte) optimesm in

later hfe. (p $7. cf Kakar. pp Bo-8t, 126-33)

The relationship between the mother and son ws an especially
tender ane. creating in the son a lifelong bond of loyalts and
affection, The son regards his mother with the reverence owing
the goddess. the eternal giver of all benesolences Women saint
and chief temale devotees of male gurus are frequently culled
“Mother” by their disciples.

In the myth Parvaul has other reasons for creating Ganesa than
the enjoyment of mothering a son: -she secks protection fram the
Intrusions of hee husband with his insatiable crotic expectations
Se she stitions Ganesa at the doa to hor proate chambers, her
bath—symbolic of her sesualty Chere al the doorway bo stands
between his mother and father As thy stony procesds, he musi
face his father aione. abandoned oy hes imother, for vie romans
outo( sight. and shes dawn outonk ation the danmge i dang
But in one reiated myth about doorways she does necleave hen
behind, her alienation from Siva sGengtheay her materia! bond
with Ganesa After Sua has insulted: Parsat fe Gabrog her
“Blackie [Kali]. she vows todeave hi and return te her Luther's
home, and she then stavens her other son, Vintka tie oe
whom Siva had made at the doorway te sps cen er husbands

--- Page 132 ---
108 VANESSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
extramarital amorous exploits. Fearing hi father’s unpredictable
manner, Ganesa pleads with Parvati to take him along with her
She agrees. saying. “He will laugh at you, my son, because vou
have an elephant’s face, just as he Isughs at me Therefore. come
with me: go where T ga” (SkP 1 2.24, cf O'Flaherty 1975. p
288) Parvati and her strange looking son have @ common bond ir
suffering the ridicuic of Siva, and they shelter one another from
his unique sense of humor.

Ganesa frst encounters his father in a violent conlrontation
which the myth attempts to palliate by saving thal son and tather
do not recugnize cach ether He experiences a jolang tranction
from the warm inner segions of has mother’s world to painful
subordinstion to his fathers cutting authority, Utecally His pas
sage thorough he as culm half. given a ‘second birth as ais
father’s son according to the father’s terms, wich even the
mother must accept

The myth evekes a process sirulir to the developmental one
that Hindu males expenence around the age of tour ta hve wears
They ate taken quite abrupuy from the cass and andemanding
world of ther mothers. a world uv which the father has became
largely abseat oc pesiphesal. and they are placed undee the street
and emononally distant authority af their tarhees The son bongs
for the tender, undifferentiated. less demanding word ot ite
myes with his mother. a longong that mas tease bom co nwlealizy bis
mother in his adull memory Kekar comments op the interplay
henscun the abruptngss of this Gansite and at tendency te
ierease the sans banding sad rdgntinoatton wach his motes
This traumaty “second bieth scpaciien tram tag mathe: lends
to foster im the son's inner worid a

Topfessen lec carer happion eer eda ieedengs te censel

date anes deotite men wth the mothy rn order te campenmsaty

for her lass Tispite ef the emote nehgs eats bony ane

IDKEMYE LOW reap acy wah the mothe: eas sere up in thy

ladies mings world this une amen. ea tuts tends be

hinder the growth of the seers sateen tae rhs katie ae psy

shi striate relive ty undilereaiiied. aie the beundenes ol

the scl€ vague (praia Carstairs po tsa. Gune poraue

This abrupt separation not onty tends to deepen the alluehment
tothe mother encoureeing in the son an uncomsqous desire te

--- Page 133 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 109
temain eternally the child to his mother, but it serves to heighten
the distance and authority of the father Kakar continues:

The consequences at the “sccund buth” in the identity develap:

ment of Indian men ate several. a heightened narensisnie salncra-

bility. an unconscious tendency to “submu” ty an iealized and
ommpotent figure. both wa the inner world of fantasy and in the

outer tarld of mukang 4 ting. the lifelung search for somenne. a

charismati. Ieeder or gure. who will provide mentorship and a

guiding worldview. thereby restoring intimacy and authority to the

individual Ife, (p. 628. cf Spratt. pp §-26)

We shall examine Ganesa’s submission to Siva as a reRechon
of the Indiga male search for wuthority in the next section of our
discussion For the Moment itis important to aotice the Ways 10
which Ganesa “supmits” toa his mother, attempting to remain
close to her by keeping be youthtul—indeed. childhke tors,
and never growing up Ganesa’s eternal youth matches Paryvates
eternal adulthood Because neither i subject to the msages of
lume, they both remain temporally enshrined ia a mother son
relationship Tconograpaically Ganesa’s bods ts that of 3 plump
jafant: Although at least ane Purane source has an account of bis
Martiage. Ganesa is generally represented as celibate. a celibacy
suggested visually and perhaps caricatured by his exaggerated but
pecpetually Wacad trunk finally bis insatiable appetie for
swectineals [atadahuj—a source of many amusing tales nancy
the quesben Crom a psvehounalytic perspecuver of whether thas
tendency loward oral crotie gretiheaion may dul sere as com:
pensation for his arrested develepment at not reaching the phallic
Stage as well ay the severing of the matetoal bond be underwent
at the beheading hand of hes father Gananath Obevesckere in
terprets Ganesa’s celibany Dke tas broken tusk. as the eunih:
ment he recetves for incestuous Pato on this mother tp a7

Ganesa’s iconographic lor is reminmsceat of go infant at
soung child as Well ws thatot a yaks Vabks the wh ya heures
however, Ganesa’s form lacks the more mature piusculolure ut
arms and legs that these squat qtusrdising quit deinen rea
lures possess PReaeonegraphy is clon esourh Ganesan shud,
ababy So he remains. never groweny mite the tull voutht al stave
at bis elder brother Skanda or dhe matugh: of on tuber Wher
shown in group setuings with his parents. hes deoreted orepar

--- Page 134 ---
to GANESA LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
lronately as a small child to an adult. In the Puranas this theme of
his childhkeness may be scen tn the fact that the great preponder-
ance of myths deal with the circumstances of his birth and initia
Gon into the service of his father, Only Liter in sectarian and
regional forms of expression, which we shall examine tn a subse

quent chapter, does Ganesa emerge from the shadows cast by his
illustrious parents into his own as an mdependent deity

Ganesa’s celibacy links him both to his father and his mother,
but for opposite reasons He remains celibate so as not to com:
Pete crotcatly with his father, a notonous womanizer. either ine
cestuously for his mother or for any other waman tor that matter
As we have already noted. Ganesa’s celibacy is alsa an expres:
ston of tis brahmacann identity—the faithfel servant to bys
father. the dedrva, ay well as pusrdian of his parents’ privacy In
relation to Parvat, howeser, Ganesa cemains celibate sn arder to
stay close to her—to continue to be her little boy In Muharasintra
is said that Ganesa never marries because he unable to find a
woman as beaulitul as bis own mother. so be remaiis at the
crossroads patiently waning lor such ao woman to come lung
{Moor 1968. p roo) In South India. Beek coports a sinilar view.

There os one tale Char purper’s to exphun whe Bis [Gangs s | at

ages ate so offen found of cver hanks and the edies ot pamds

Ganesan tls sad. wanting paticotls. wast hing ali the women whe

came lo batbe, wot he gaa hind ane as becuttul as Parvati Agerselt

Ths nthe seman he will mare Clas. Dotto cf Obcvesckere pp

any
The view as expressed in another Seuth Ladin tale, Sut wath
different twist

An anecdote ahout Gar se ance Pant asaed him whan be

Bout tke ote ey he repled, Semcon exacth hhe vou

Mum 7 cad Murmimy got outraged by such an opens mcestieus

wish and censcd him with sverhisting celtics thats why he’s sull

wbacheloe (Ramanujan. po 127)

Ganesa's celubaes whether soibchosen or resulting from: his
Mothers cure. refieets the hinges litte buys catertun belore
thes vere made uate of ingest taboos about marrying (her
Mothers to peman foresse within ther clase protective Gerele of
alteetien and power

Pheri vet turther aspect of Ganesu’s celthacs that deserves

--- Page 135 ---
Ruual, Psychological, and Religious Themes wt
comment. Both in his behavior and his inconographic form
Gagessa resembles in some aspects the figure of the cunuch.
Standing at the doorway, guarding but not entering the inner
chamber of Parvati’s house or “watching all the women who
come to bathe” (as he does im the story cited above), Ganesa is
luke a cunuch guarding the women of the harem. In Indian folk-
Jore and practice eunuchs have served as trusted guardians of the
antuhpura, the seragho “They have the reputavon of being ho-
tosexuals, with a penchant for oral sex. and are looked upen as
the very drops of society” (Heltcbeitel 1980, p. 162) At weddings
and birth ceremonies, however, they pertorin an ambiguous but
auspicious function:

Al manage Gles among the Bharvach of Guracat. for instance. a

eunuch flings balls of wheat flour toward the four quarters to ward

nff evil spirits. And when they appear at hirthy and marriages,
they hold the power to bless as well as curse (ibtd }

Like the eunuch, Ganesa hus the power to bless and curse, that
8s. to place and remove obstacles. Although here there seem to
be no myths or folktales im which Ganesa caphetly performs oral
sex. Ais insanable appetite for sweets may be interpreted as an
ettort to satisfy a hunger thatseems inappropriate in an otherwise
ascetic disposition, a hunger having clear cratic overtones
Ganesa’s broken tusk. fis guardian's statt, and diyplaced head
can be interpreted as symbols of castration, Anthropologist Ed
mund Leach nates

Ganeda’s broken Gisn 1a phate emblem and its detgchashility

denotes a certain ambieaicorc about Gunesas sequal nature

There are contests in which the fareaet phalvs which is properly

the emblem af Sia. may sce oy a aie tahon of any une of

Siva’s sons, Ganesa included In such a context, Ganesa iay be

vinle and potent Bur there are other conteuts wnere Guanes

seems to be an effeminate cunuch (p &2)

This combination of chdd-ascete-cunuch inthe symbolism of
Ganesa—each an exphet denial of adult nvale se cuahily — appears
to embody a primal Indian male longing to remna close to the
mother and to do so ina way what wil both protect her and ver ne
acceptable to the father. ‘This means that the son must retain ac
cess to the mother but not allempt to possess hee sexually Asa
child, a renouncer, of a cunuch. he can Iepiimately maintain that

--- Page 136 ---
Pd GAUNESAT LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Precious but precarious intimacy with his mother because. al-
though he is male. he ts more like her then he is like his father
This may explain why Ganesa takes on these qualities through his
own choice or why be willingly accepts them as mutations from
others—even from Parvati herselt—so long as they will guarantee
his continued proximity with her
We have already encountered Ganesa’s appeute for sweets
particularly in the story i which, as the moon looks on laughing.
he falls off his rat velucle and splits open his bells tull of modada
Modakas. or sweel wheat or tice balls. are offered lo Ganesan
copious quanbnes—traditionalls twenty-once-—by his desatees
Some contemporary Hindus say that he is so fat Because he can
never get his till of madakas. snd the more of them a devotee
gives him. the more likely ws Ganesa to remorse obstacles tor hunt
Thus the god's ghuttonous tendencies are tumed to the devuice s
spiritual advantage In South India one anthropologist has re-
cently observed:
Ali informants who celebrated Vetiveker ctatards. cammemotst
ing the day whem de [Ganesal toverved his ciephan: herd samied
to satiety hes auttonausaess only they did net el attes an what he
Inked Bost Tn Tamdnad. peoply offer to Vitavehar Ketukhotin
BENET Ma BE fo sevens. ctkes Wats sacet or wuts hlliags of
wtsoh the Apanc moduka sane lo Karatiae he tscened br
dubte suming te the Lar cake but gasavs ascot in Aruhes Proud
esboone thes unfeaiia ao weet ball and oun Kerata people are
cominced That bes espeailly fond at ehee eppant sweet round
wake tet in ghee Un the latter suites in ander te appease
Ganapiys bunver. oven mindappen pga mas be pectoreied
whens the Wolo Iteralls submerged Sy thie cakes cb hunger
Ferro luca itt, p46) :
Gages extirordinany fondness lor arateka er us toed
equivalents may be mare comprebensible whea sie wes in the
Fight at the toliowing Puraie conversation en which Parvati on
Plans te her (wo yeune poss, Shanda and Ganesa. te special
qualities of the moduka
the seul wer riled with happiness [ab the bith af the O60
Seps aE Se ind: Pansat] amd gave ts serectmeat at as called
vrcot phe hye es Jonitntadakey and ombsesus [amtat VIL tell
yess ares Iter carclw ly Amvone wha merely smells it asl
serail boon cam atal Hy wall secome one wha is reared in

--- Page 137 ---
Ritual, Psvchological. and Religions Themes 3
the Sastras. clever at weapons. knowledgeable in the ‘Tantras. a
writer and painter, one who has both worldly and divine knowl.
edgc. there us no doubt. my suns.” (PP Sppukhagda 658-10)

In the context of this story. miedaka is cqunsaicnt to summa, the
immortality-bestow ing seed tood that the gods and demans hight
over throughout Hindu mythology The word “modake” derives
from the root mud meaning “be merry.” and it my also be used
as an adjective meaning “gladdeniog” of eshdaraung.” charac
ferptics also attributed to suma. According to one myth about
Ganesa’s rat gompanion ty said thet the nit was drawn by the
scent of the modaka to come out of his hole and take a bit of this
wondrous food, whereupon be became immortal and Ganesa’s
vehicle (SkP 7.3.32.2-12}

Ganesa’s insatiable appetite for ths food and the obesity re
sulung from it symbolize the abundance of fis Inte-giving power
as the semoser of obstacles Devotees literally bathe or bury him
in modakas to sausty his hunger. Tims feeding of the pod to
appease his hunger ts reminescent of lecding the demons to pre
vent them [rom upsetung the sacotce and tarmag uo lo inauspe
cious resulls: Feeding Ganesa is both an expression of the deva
ive’s generosity and devotion tu the god and hay Hort tu ayeet
the gad’s hunger. lest Ganesa turn away mm sagen al berng until:
filed and create obstacles foe the devotee in response

The perpetual son desiring to remain close to his mothys and
having an insatiable appetiie tor sacety cvokes assccuitons of
osal croncnm Demed the possibility od reacting the stung ot dull
genial masculine power by the amaipatent tore ab te Lather
the son seeks erabheation en some seceplable way As dome as he
remains stuffed full ke ss cunteat and beans like satisthed
infant atats mother’s breast If Ganesa stould ce hungry hey use
of the devotee’s failure te feed and worship him bee betore all
other gods. then bis primordia) hostity 1 aroused, bo tae del
meat of all Feeding Ganesa copious quantities of ar rfaksns salts
fying tis oral erotic desires. also aceps him from becoming gent
tally erotic ke his father This would dead fot conto mere
disastrous for the gods and humans tan neresty to teed an
Ganesa’s obesity suggests a vompulsiveness in bis cianiter All
the gods and goddesses recenve loud oflerings OF varius wireis to
be sure. but Ganesa must reseiy thy set and un over site quad:

--- Page 138 ---
14 GAMNESA! LORD OF OBSTACLE FS, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
ties. ike the demon Rahu who sneaked to the head of the line to
get his share of ambrosia before the other gods could get their
portions Gangesa's impatience for food suggests an anxety. a
hunger that is never completely fed no matter how many moda-
kas he consumes. He is the child forever longing for the mother’s
breast—that fountain of hfe-gring elixir he ance enjoved with-
out distress in infancy but 1s now denied because of the father’s
intrusion. Ganesa’s belly seems to empty itself as fast as it fills
up. as the myth of his stomach splitting open suggests As with so
many other threshold focauons in which he resides. here he
stands on the threshold between huneer and satiation fat. set
unable to he sufficiently filed As cach morsel appeases bis appe-
title. ato unly reminds him unconsciously of the food from his
mother that he may no longer have

Gane&tr's story is. an part, the story of maternal attachment,
Joss, and indirect but invamplete compensation As a celibate
child, and resembling the ambiguous tgure cf the eunuch
Ganesa is one whose masculinity remains partial. tammed. and
contained Unable to take tull possession ef his mother tthe
face of bis tather’s beheading castrating power. Ganesa les a
threshold carstence near but net near cnough-- scching tis own
fulfillment in dutiful service to his parents and takicg please in
an endless flow of sweetmeats from adoring devotees He is the
mythical expression of the male wish for materna: intimacy de-
med in real life in the coune of growing up, a tintass in which
the defeats the son must sutier at the hands af the father are
compensated indireeds by aa orally crote celibate proxamty to
the mother
Fare Sow
The conthet betweca Siva and Ganesan atthe threshold and the
lagers subscquent submission und restoration mtroguce the theme
of Either son apgression and invite comparnon with the myth of
Osdipus and the meaning Freud and his followers have denved
from tt for understanding human psychological dynamics.

The Occhpus story begins with Larus abandoning his infant son
because sn one predicts that his son well eventually murder
him. Bul Oedipus sursives and is raised asa prince in another
kingdom When he grows up. he searches for tus ongins and, ina

--- Page 139 ---
Riual. Psychological, and Religious Themes 5
chance encounter on the road. meets and slays Laius in an argu-
ment. not knowing Lawuy 1s his father. Later. arriving in Thebes,
he solves the riddle of the sphinx and 1s made king: he marries his
mother Jocasta and fathers two sons and daughters For a while
the kingdom prospers, but after a time a plague breaks out, The
oracle prophesies that prosperity will not return until Laus’
murderer is banished After a long pursuit and many delays.
Oedipus comes to know that he is the murderers of his father and
the husband of tis mother. Hornhed at hes own acnons, Oedipus
blinds himselt and goes into exile. thus restoring the wellare of
the kingdom and fulfitling the oracle of the gods.

Freud saw the truth of this msth in its dramatic expression of,
repressed childhved desires to bond with the mother and exclude
the tather “The myth directs “our first sexual impulses toward the
mother and our first hatred and our tat murderous impulses
against. our father Our dreams comatece us that this is so”
(Freud. po2S2)) This myth os powerlul in ways others are not
because if gives tuirnatve form ta the rst sexual impulses” at
thar vers: primal threshold at psschoxesual development where
such emotions ars capenenccd with greatest intensity The myth
leads males, Freud thought toa ideatey with Oedipus’ desire to
eApress the infttle wish to Be uted with the mothoe but then
are chastened os Ocd.puy’ Tater agemes se that this desires
abandoned afiay web othe related wish to murder the fathes
Only Chen da mates accept entry otion with the father aad seck
scAcal eratiicadon oa @ mature. genitals choc monner with
another woman For Freud

Togdhpuss iy cae in when, these pamaces wishes of our childhood

hase been Iulbdled, aad we shrink hae tram thea with the whety

Jone Of represses by ow high tose wishes hove since Tout ime

beer held down @hin us (p 296)

In the sth and drama Oedipus ns cotragn eure on thy tantasy
there can be ne tuliliment. only tn aeceptangs of thy inesitabl
realty of daisy the mother aad the subscqucat icenttication
wath the father that makes if possible for the oreo te tewslap
adequately and reahstecally

The similantics between the myths of Gedipus aad Canysa
from a psschounalstic perspective have beet noted oe nuenbye
of scholars (Goleman. ppoarts cr. Leach Ramunucin Spot

--- Page 140 ---
116 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
PP. 124-27, 350-$1; cf, Courtright 1980, pp. 75-77: O'Flaherty
1976, pp. 361ff.). Robert Goldman summarizes the inks between
the two myths

The legend of Ganesa. well known to the later puramic Iterature.

ts a much clearer example of a story representing the primal ordi-

pal trangle of son, father, and mother and the san’s allempts tu

Possess the mother to the exclusion of the lather, a0 alicmpt that

keads to violent confict and the final symbol cayication of the

son. (p. 371)

The trangle of father. mother, and son, with the son's vialent
contest with the father over access lo an possessian of the
mother. are clearly parallel in the Oedipus and Ganesa stones
Unhke Ocdipus. Ganesa does not kill his tather, he is himself
killed. to be revived later with anew head Ramanujan notes this
important reversal in the flow of aggression

The Indian and Greek Western tales do aor differ in the has

pattero (aj Like sexes repel (br Gobhe sexes attract across geo

erations But thes do differ im the divecnon of ageresston of desire

Instead of son desinog mothers and overcoming jathers te p.

Ocdipus} we have tathers suppressing sons, and mothers

desing sons (p 133)

Another unportant dilference ia the direction of the maths is
that although the Ocdipus story dircets us ta the dundumentally
tragic acceptance of the exile from the mother stad submusstan ta
the superego demands represented by the father ends. of tute.
the Ganesa story ends with bis restoratiog and. anew Beetansag in
which relations between parents and chu are reconciled Ganesa
emerges wath a new conmscrousness--ssmbolived bythe new
head as che made! devotee He las borne aH tas mistortuncs
and mutitatians as itty of graces The restr for bis sutfe rag 5s ty
Feconve ele tfan inittaes with the androageneus diinuty conte:
sented by hosts hs mother and father together foonoeraphically
Tew mest alten represented will bes father. or falbor and mother
lagetber, Det seldam with his mother alone

Tas tesco, hewetet. nat ew truer its gree brom the
pechoadoivtis perspectose the svaipbalism ot the threshold ay the
Joc acon waste tne bate occas os vgsinoat [rs the threshold
to Pann s ath aed Bedrecn semiberat her siirme. womb, aad
Pombo scaboate fia thy plicg sisunesusly ot union and

--- Page 141 ---
Ruual, Psychotogical, and Religtous Themes 117
separation Ganesa the child is coming out of the door at the
moment Siva the husband 1s attempting to get in. The doorway ts
not big cnough for both of them at the same ume, one must
Prevail, and, of course. ites the father. The resolution, at least
iniually, must fall in his favor. The particular type of mutilavon
Siva inflicts on Cianesa ts also significant. Ax Robert Goldman
points out in commenting on Cianesa’s beheading. “This particu:
lac mode of displaced castration is a common feature of Hindu
legends. Beheading 1s, moreover, a regular symbol for castration
in dreams and fantasies” (pp 371-72, cf Freud. pp. 366-64). In
traditional Indian yogte physivlugy the head os the receptacle of
both thought and sexual potency or sced: In Tantric descriptions
of the process of spiritual Wheration [mokya] the seed ty drawn up
from the sexual organs through various centers [cakra} along the
spinal wos until itis released through an aperture at the top of
the head [srahmarandhru cakra or sahasrara cakral (cf. O'Fla-
herty (goku. pp. 47 60). In sume versions of the myth where
Ganesa already has his elephantine torm. the “displaced castes:
tion” takes place on an even more obvious surrogate, the tusk In
separating Ganesa’s head tusk Siva, of one of bis stand-ins. ree
Moves any potential Unreal of incest and thereby leaves Ganesa
sexually ambiguous Leach entices the logic ef such a structural
resolution within the context af Sn and Parvati s celationship iy
terms of Samkhya prnuples of puraga and prodrtc Cor cosmic
sexuality}:
The male prine.ole and the female principle stiad apposed 9 third
prouple (Ganesha). hind of impemonulsed sevcaliy stands a
the middle and serves bath lo onite and ia seponike Tbe cart ane
ton of male-plus-femae is ferteg but Pthy outeomy iy recon
complete male. then jealousy volt wparate #hal aay coiled th.
alicmative mate-plus mate ne sterne. ied the tea mates aul by
jealaus over the Possession of semen Pre myrratters a foselu
ton” of the parados [fe crate inies wa female te prluse o
sterile offspring then the Letter will sens ts a picendtun i face
the sexes instead al a sour ob costes Che man er ie miklle
must be either no sex a Roth sexes te allgenaties: rp ute
Although the myth may efter @ resolupon tery the pasha
analyte paradox of erotic wituchment te the mothe cnc enter
ous hatred for the father through resuscitation witht pew bead
and (2) to the structural paradox by introducing Goness as at

--- Page 142 ---
18 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
asexual or sexually ambiguous figure hetwcen the two cqualls
mighty and opposed embodiments of feminine procreutve and
masculine ascetic powers. 1h remains uncomfortable about por:
Iraying Siva tn such wo unflattering hght as a father To camou-
flage the full torce of Siva's mutilating actions, the myth displaces
the deed onto sarous surregates. Sunt. Parasurama, a curse, the
actions of fate, and Siva's inerance that Ganesa is his son Simt-
larly, when Ganesa docs battle sath Siva. he iy also ignorant ot
Siva's true identity and takes him to be an anonymous intruder
even though Siva shouty st bum. “Bool den’t sou know who |
am? Tam none otber than Siva!” (SP 260153.22). Thus they both
act oul their aggressions unaware at cach other's true identiues
As a narrate device in the misth. (he characters’ mutual igne-
rance corresponds to the themes af forgetting and repressian in
psychoanalytic thears: once the sun hes beeame sogalved inte
his identity through identiticotion with the father, he forgets of
represses his desire foe the mether and tus aostility toward the
father. In the myth, when Ganess comes te understind that Sra
is his father =n cecogamtion he waquites anh vitiee recen ing a new
head tram bis father--he secepts bas rate as the Lard of Obst
cles, becomes a vopr nd a duincer thhe bes father). aad takes up
yanious weapons fe euatd the daervay for both his patents to
Protect Chere mags Lam unwanted: itesle rs.

Howeser much the myth pias want to cocee up or displace the
stolence inherent ny Si and Gauesa’s cantiantinan, the lage ol
the story requires that the rapture beneeen them tke place $i
Must pet past the doarkeeper Parcag must aot be allowed: te
tema aloot from the workl and create without mate participa
ton ef some kind The lord must aarte with hey sake Tn the seme
way. at thy entrance tothe shang. the devotee must csk douy
baile wath the expher and hidden forces eb svteraal pollution
and interaal resistances to Cath and press oa inte the amnermost
Peet of the shrme fo experience Ue eesome geace inherent 07
contr with the deity’s prescnce A simile logis obras an the
real of ritual and sogial ble. br the tite of upaauyand the dears
Must sustain the thidiGen by Preaking the childhood attachments
of the vitate wid make him into a new bem. born again into a
male workd thet as tinked to the past through test. sacred speech,
and xestute Hos acgessity the proper order [dfarau] of things
that this process Lake plice The father must take the boy out ot

--- Page 143 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 9
the domestic world of women and introduce him to the world of
men, this public reaim of work and pohtcs, the arena of the
superego function, just as hiy father did for him and so on back
into the ancestral past.

There is displacement of another sort in the myth also, this
time seen in Parvatr’y role in Ganesa’s mutilation and restoration,
When she creates him and stations him at the door, she exposes
him to inevitable danger What need us there of a guard unless
you are expecting trouble? She tells him be must semain there
admitting no one, no exception, In another verion of the story.
when Sani tesists looking at Ganesa because of the curse he 1s
under that anything he looks oo will be destroyed. Parvati mocks
him and forces him to look at her son. Her complicity in her son's
dismemberment suggests a more subtle ambivalence than the one
we noted with Siva. Ita as though she has to expose him to hs
inevitable fate, just as the mother of the brafenacdem must ture
her son over to the ucarva. and the psyche must see the mother
as less than absolutely benesoaleat Parvaty is a “good” mother
because she loves her son tenderly and defends him against the
father’s violence: she is a “had” mother. in that she exposes him
to danger and gives him an impossible task to perform. But the
myth as as uncomtoriable about addutting hee complity on
Ganesa’s beheading as atis sath Siva’s naked aggression It at-
tempts to diffuse the taree of thy events onto a wider set ot
powers and penons When viewed in relatien to the dynamics ot
the traditional Hindu extended Januly. the mth tinds a strugtural
parallel (na family organization that contains multiple parental
surrogates, the forces of infantile desire are net placed in overde
termined ways on the mother and father alone. instead they are
scattered among a number of sdutts. leasing the child with the
(ecling that the painy of maturatian rest with forces hirer Chany
those of the mother and father

For Gagesa there sono fing! death, enables temporiny rupture
Sta puts him back together va the oak form ia which he can
existoun the werd As sith the sacnticn he campuctes Ganesa
even as be destroys him Phe bard: that rends rs the han that
mends The story has ae happy ending when Guiness is testored
and given primacy of place betore all the gods. Sis sad Parvate
are roumted, death ws rationalized awes and Tere os epoertunuly,
for a new bepanine

--- Page 144 ---
120 GANECA, LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS

After Siva has restored Ganesa with the head of an clephant.
he confers on him various powers and privileges The stones vary
in details, but the pattern is tmportant After embracing him.
performing the proper nics of childbirth, and giving him weap-
ons, Siva initiates Gapesga into his new duties. In some versions of
the story Gagesa’s dharma is to protect the status quo Siva
speaks:
“My son. you are born in order to destrey the demons and help
the gods and Brahmins who teach the Vedas Stand there in the
path that ieads to heaven and create obstacies in the nites of eho:
ever bas sacritces perfurmed but fils to pay the priests’ fee “(LP
10§.14-t6, cf SkP 1.2.27.7 14h
Other vemions of the story have Ganesa create oostacles for
the gods os for Siva’s own devotees, who are secking entry ita
heaven through Siva’s shrine and crowding out the gods (SkP
7b aB.-ag. VamP 28.72). This patters of Ganesa’s ambivaleat
behavior at the threshold links hin with the aguons of demons
and will be examined in more detail Jater

In the divine scheme of things Ganesa does not win recogmbion
for bauhng herowally against the superior might of Sia, but
rather recenves his titles and powers asa coward for submitting to
Sia. This submission theme emerges particularly clear when
Ganesa allows Siva’s axe fo tab on his tusk rather than le dens
obedience to hus Gathers weapon, the ssmbol at bes authority
Sia ts forced by the power inhereat in Ganesa’s renunenben,
and with ao small amount ob prodding trom Parats re recone
Ganesa as Tas san and reward hin with the symbols at the sea
and disople Inthe battle wath Sad Ganesa wins by losing Ths a
Passive aggressive sttotesy aad Coingsa sy submissian cucrees bis
father’s generosity

Paratlels can be opsenved atthe levebot nmtsat perlosmanee and
Infantile tantass In the ete of tpariatate the bratenacarit sup.
mils to fasting. scparttion shaving. and secon. and the aca
pives haw his statl and clothiny adapts him) and gives bim his
ritual aame and iastrucben [he nal stage in the resolutian at
the Endian sariation of the oedipal sation eames wath the den:
ticaton of the sen with the father. but tor Indian males this
identification absolute, especially as at aces in the relation

--- Page 145 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 120
ship of the disciple to the guru. Carstairs comments. “When con-
fronted with this complete surrender the deity. the father and the
Guru are compelled to offer help: the tyranny of carly childhood
Teasserts itself” (p. (60). This new father son, gurusdisciple,
acdryaibrahmacarin relauonship creates a new bond of affection
in the context of absolute domination by the authority hgure and
utter dependence of the discipic The sexual nuances of this rela-
tionstup are well hidden. but it 1s significant that in the myth Siva
gives Ganesa his weapons and in the ritual the dedrva gives the
brahmacarin the ascetc’s staft [yogudandal—symbots, ke the
broken tusk, of the detached phallus. Carstars notes turther,
“There as abo a powerfully repressed homosexual fixation on the
father This is shown in indirect and sublimated form, ina
man’s feeling toward his Guru—in one context in which a warm
affecvonate relationship (although a passive and dependent one)
is given free expresston” (ibed.)

Ad important clement in the ssmbolism of the elephant head 1s.
displacement az. better, disguise. The myth wants to make it
appear that the elephant head was not a debberate chore but
merely the nearest available head in an ausprous deection or
the head af vae of Siva’s opponents to whom he had already
Granted saivanun But. from a psychoanalytic perspective, there
IS meaning in the selechon of the elephant head Its trunk i the
displaced phalles. a caricature of Siva’s fuiga Tt poses no threat
because tos tou farge faced. and inthe wrong place to be
usetul tor sexual purposes In the myth of the Stoker tusk, Sing
does notrestar i hutleaves it for Ganesa Wi cares around and ty
use occastonalhy as a weapon or a writing unstrumeat The cle:
Phant head as sca mask. and, as Us mask ’s SUTpose semulTae
Neousls fe reveal and conceal. Doth disganses aml expresses the
aggressor inherent mn the stare So Ganesa tikes on the attr
butes oF fs dather beta an inverted form wath an evasee sated
himp phallus ascetie andl bemgn whereas Sra snarl” Ne
dhvaluiga}. erouc, and destructive

Gans s Chotaclenishes QUT r Those at his Laue i contest
to the croue heron lord ob creates Siva Pasupat. Cates as
the cebbatepassive arm headee dad Wien Sing ys Ged.
Ganesan meek, but when Siva suimas powerless Gon. un arste
cle ax he does belore the righteous King Devcceea who rules

--- Page 146 ---
422 GANESA: FORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
over Siva’s longed-for city of Kasi—it 1s Ganesa who overcomes
the obstacle (as we shail sec) Leach comments on this structure
of relations:

The sexual qualities which are attributed to Ganesha depend upon

context and, generally speaking. are the opposite of Uhase atin:

uted to his father. As Shiva varies so also Ganesha vanes. but

in the inverse direction. (p 82; cf. Beck tors, p 1)

The inverse variations Ganesa edubis in relation to Siva carry
beyond those of sexual identity inte the realms of physical form
and action, where these identities are displayed and played out

The theolagical message of the Siva Ganesa. acarva brah.
macdrin, father.son pattern can be summarized in this way sub-
mit that you may be saved, be destroyed that vou may be made
whole ‘The sacrifical violence is nol the tragic condusion. bul the
Necessary beginning of a passage into a new order where renun-
ciation of the self makes affirmabon trum the other possible.
where transforming yourself into an offering te the deity induces
the god to give you rebirth into this world. The god who breaks
you makes you; destraction and creating ultimatels spring fram
the same source Personal fulfillment comes when personal wie:
syncratic attachments pive way lo accepfance of the transpenonal
divine order, an order made apparent only at the moment in
which the particulir sev! surrenders sell The Maharashtoaa
poctsaint Tukarama expressed this theological vision succmetly
(Tukarama Gatha, no 34g. 4470)

He we want to enjos Gad

we should lap off our head tram our bods

and hold win our hands

when the budy hay been sacrificed to god. save Fuk

all worsiup has been accemphisned
Bronte Bronk
Sia and Paraty have eo sons, neither engendered i the normal
fashion Shanda. abe Kewn as Kartitkeye. Guha, and Ga bamt
Murukag. bora fom Sivas sced spilt inte the Ganges and hes
Taned by the sey Phodes (Rite). hence Shunde las ane bods
and sa heads fhe aneh of hes aigun appears in the older Epic

--- Page 147 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 123
and Puragic texts in many variations: he enjoys a separate follow-
ing among devotees, especially in South India (cf O'Haherty
1975. p. 327 [myth no. 43] for vanants, sce also P. K. Agrawala
1966. Clothes). Although the myths of Skanda’s birth are earlier
and appear to provide the model for some of the versions of
Ganesa’s birth stury. Skunda in most areas tends to be regarded
as the younger sun (Beck 1974. pp. 11-02). He as a handsome
child. a perpetual youth, slender of body and heroic in his 6x-
ploits in detense of the gods against the ravages of the demon
Taraka Unlike Ganesa. Shanda’s relanonship with his mother
appears uncomplicated by meestuous desires. and with tis father
there is none of the confict that hes brother expenences, The two
sons of Siva and Parvati do come inte conthet with one another,
however. and their story evokes the theme of sibling nvalry: the
competition takes difterent forms in several myths (Revicre}. lis
a continuation of the oedipal conthict, tus time played out not
with the father but with another male. the brother, over access lo
the mother, The best Known of these myths is tram the Siva
Purana, in which the two brothers compete over the prize of
women
Siva and Parsgte said to there two sans "You are bath geod
sons, cqaat in our eves An suspiciius marrige will be performed
for the sen whe ceturs ery aller having gene round the entre
world © When he heard thes. Skanda stitted alt ammedtatels to go
around the world, bul Ganesa pondered in his mind Thea ne
hathed and placed two seats der the worship al hes tather and
mother Altes prawns them he coyamambulated seven umes
wtound their seats. and then sani 7 beh ms susonieus marrege be
celebrated now But his pareets wore surprised at be roman
and so Ganesa replied Tsim nct sand nthe Vedas and Sasteas that
AM obe Whe warmups hes Datenls aad oescmimbs ales thea wal?
éentve The ment of cucumambulatiog the Corth Suck theses are
said in the Seats and Sasttas are seu gene be say Paes ire Lays
Uf vou do then veur formy become tube cb te the Vek them
shes So, Ict ms marciage be arrenged que kty ~
When Sea und Parsets heard fs words fies were gre uh aytan
ished. but they praised ther soa for hry cleses and Lad se
Ganesa was manned to the caugbter of Praapate saidhe su.
cos) and Buddby intellect) Mthor seams tiie Gheresa beget te
suns Kyeme (Prosperity) bor to Side and the if Acdunt ont
bora to Buddby When Skands returned andl foued co be Lad

--- Page 148 ---
124 GANFA; LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
been tricked by his brother, he went angnily to the Kraunca moun-
tain where he remains, celibate. (2 §.19.1§-20,26)

The prize of a bride ts curious in the light of Ganesa’s usual
aversion to women other than tus mother Iconographically he 1s
sometimes represented sitting between Siddhy and Buddhi. but
there ts Ittle in the way of mythology about his marrage in the
textual tradition These women appear more hke feminine ema-
nations of his androgynous nature. saktes rather than spouses
having their own characters and stares They are like the Agure
of Ganedani or Vinayaki. a femimmne form of Ganesa Theis ap-
pearance iconographically seems to be to provide an overall bal-
ance and pairing of gender (see PK Agrawala. passim) The
prize of the wife may be interpreted in another way. in light of a
vaniant of this msth from Sr Lanka Ganesa’s mother. Patton.
otfers the pnze of a mango to which of her sans car go around
the world first. Ganesa vans by circumambulating her and eats
the trun and then gets beheaded Obevesenere ports out thaitia
the cult of Pattns the mango 1s 4 saginal symbol Hence Ganesa’s
cating the trintis an act of incestuops possession of the mother
for which he is punished by beheading. symbol for castranea and
bis cehbecs is bry punshment for achag out his incestuous desires
(p avn)

The celibate character of his marnare is evoked by the sev
enth-century poet, Bana, who weate at Ganesa and fi bade as
The tused-androgsne. hacking sulfivicat separateness Tram one
another to cagage tthe erotic possibiliges of marnage May
the single tusked Ganesa vuatd the uanerse. wie imitates hrs
Parents custom in that bos bride. it seems, has Been allowed ia
Lake that dot ot Aim wherein bis tase as tuskless (SRK at
Tovall’s trops tHe hves acehibace marrige ver according to the
sbese mith ot feast, be bas chiktren. thes iy anether wos in whch
hes the raycestan af Ary tuther, who has sex but na cketca—att
least nane cnpendered naturally Reference to Ganesas children
arc indeed rare. this one in the Sing Purana oeme the ants one
known tome among the Puri sources The contemporary
North Induin cul te thy teesatls established goddess. Santas:
Malthe bemen crotber who gives her most wamen devatces
goed health and susprctous matnages chums Ganesa 4s ber
father (Howell, ppoti ast The myth attempts to domesticate

--- Page 149 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 126
Ganesa into the fold of family life, using the rivalry with Skanda
as the occasion. just as tt uses Ganesa to make a father out of
Siva Tt may also be because Ganesa and Skanda are always in
opposition in the myths ia which they appesr together that the
logic of the opposition requires if one ts celibate. the other must
be marned The Skands tradition predates that of Ganesa, and
Skanda’s identity ay a brahmacdrin is clearly established. In those
cases where there is a tradition of Shanda being married, Ganesa
ts the one who ws celibate, Here as ekew here. Ganesa is the more
Protean figure. capable of making a sudden about-face and mov

ing in contradictory direchons

This story of traternal competition may draw ity ansprravon
from a much older tale in the Brahmanas about a bet hetween
Indra and Rusama. who appears to be cast in the role et Indra’s
brother:

Indra sng Rusama made v wager “Whichever of us shall frst

Tun round the earth shall be the wines" India tan sound the

earth. Rusama tun tocnd Kurukgetra (only) She said. ‘1 have

conquered thee © But Indra said “ltrs Po that have conquered
thee” They went te the gods for a decision The gods sant

“Kurukgsetts is as great al the vedi (sacriheral post) of Peapapate 7

So nenther of them wan (Pandya 2413 4. 66 JB 2 306)

The issue in the campetinon between Indra and Russars. as 10
that between Shanda and Ganesa, ns which elfort siclds: the
greater prize Its a contiet between two citual strategies: On the
one hand 1 the comple. of winning thy pave by conquest, rem.
miaceat of the ancient kings who prior to the sauntce of the
hone, would ‘go around the world conquering on every de”
(AB & 21-23) The theme at cenquenoe the world. ciarking off
ts outer boundaries coalesces into baad Cadition of pilgrimage.
going a great distance and grasping the prize of fe auspicious
sight fdarsanal ot the deity Thos the hero quest for the
“center” sthe Jecus of scceet and precious power at the tas and
dangerous periphery of thy famiise world, followed by the retuen
home sith the page in eac’s hand or marke on one’s soul (ol
Turner 197g. pp. 166 2z30n Its Indra and Sharda s quest (hes
are both heroes gad such sentures ate upprope de to tbe na
tures The other ritual strategy os to keep the circcmaribulaiens
closer to home. Kuruksetra and Siva and Parvals ace the Teen

--- Page 150 ---
126, GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
ters” of the universe This leep of theological imagination saves
many steps and much ome, In the mith of Indra and Rusama.
ther efforts cancel each other out, and the gods call the contest a
draw. In the second story. Kurukgetra ss the whole world In the
case of Ganesa and Skanda. there 1s a clear winner: The myth
claims equal status for devotion and pilgrimage, the bhaki solu-
tion Is as potent and “easiee” than karmavoga This is the lesson
the Bhagavad Gite teaches Ganesa tricks his brother out of the
prize and forces Siva to reward him for his cleverness. 4 clever
ness that is inseparable from his devotion:

‘The theme of sibling compeution sppears to have deep roots i
the Indian tradinon, as the sncicnt Brahmanic story amuivales,
and it has nol escaped notice in anthropologigal studies of cone
temporary fndia. Stepttea Tyler emphasizes thy tension Suit inte
the structure ot tratcenal relations in the yornt amily that seems
to contribute to abenation between brothers

Brothers ere not capeeted to be mutually supporting bot mare
offen than cot becomy jeslous anu guttrehome suctealics when
the father’s suthonly dechnes of ceases with his death aA
younger brother ns supposed te extend ta hy elder Mother tae
kind of respect he gives te bay Lather. bur he otto tesents and
Febels against this acrogaton of his caler brother s status Ca
versely. elder brother quickly: kes elton at ans dpe ings ot
tack of respect From a yaunger brother Vaunger brothers bocl “at
there elder brothers aitemph to make then Gamers thar tbe
share ob the work, ard clocr brothers ape: vomeige: feathges ot
faginess and malingeany Both sibiigs are quick fo suspect the
other ot resenany a chyproportence shaty ob ais ingame cthy:
through paternal prederence or skunduaeety (pact

The competition bee cen sons for the paren sates son Games.
into even clearer focus in ainother sarneiont ef thy Gaittess Shed
Story After Pansat exphumed te Skandia sod Gangs the sane
lous searmalike qualtics ob rredukds the woe dove bested hee
cach asking lor thom for hasell She sacd te them

Your Gather vill decade wha Povilla. ea Whoa Skanes
heord this be quackh: went an a pilgeumage teagan the te
world mounted on his peek BEE PIE wine por-bellicd ane ee
cueruimbslsted he ace paceats Tien be Send there happea ea
Troan of Bis tee patents saving Cis it tee gas atte tte’ as
Shah wes ccteiny oenind him Thea leewiny at them Sern

--- Page 151 ---
Ritual, Pswchological, and Rehyious Themes 27
Parvats smiled and suid, “All the pilgnmages and sacrifices are nov
worth a sixteenth part of the worship of ong s parents Dherclore
this son [1 ¢. Gunesal sy worth more than a bundred sons having
hundred sirtues, (PP Sptikhanda 65 14-20)

Calike the first version of the story, here the prize is food
rather than wives cach bestows its own kind of immortality. The
comlest over ritual strategigs—achion versus devotion — remains
constant in both variants. and blake is the preferred path to
salvation, for tt alone gives the greatest measure of nourishment.

These sibling avelty stones repeat themes we have seen before
an the relationship between Ganesa and hi parents. especially his
mother Ganess deleats Skanda in the contest by remaining close
to his parents, honoring them, selling up a shrine and worship
ping thom there. He makes use of the same strategy with
Parasurama. who. like Skanda. came back from his pilynmage of
haale and sought entry into his “parents: “presence But Ganesa
get to the door before him. and. Jecturmpe bum bke an elecr
brother about the ctiquette of children not lookiag on the naked:
ness ef their parents (he. Rol getting fea close to them), he
refused to allow Parasurdma to get closer to Siva and Parvats
than he Aumsclt was The clissival Sanskrit court poct, Mandana
writes of Garesa thes ome the younger brether asking Skandia
# mocking ciddle about their parents separateness and union
When father and mather became a steele bods what happened
elder brother, to the other habysat caeh? Che ong on earth was
born as every man, the other every woman’ (SR 8s. Ingall’s
trans) Here again, Ganesa is the model cusotee Why go
around the world when the center of the world. the source of thy
world —your parents stand helore seu? As betose Ganesa’s
submission vans him the reward The myth portrays Shanda as
well-meaning but a bit din-witied, Ganesan das omy the pertect
devotee but he is alse the clever rldistibeadarman who knows
how te turn the rutes and doctrines to bis wen ads ntave lesa
clever god. and bis clescrness os the mover and plicer at obsta
cles is an important theme we shall explore later

The contrast in peronality between Shanda ind Gaoesis tinds
expression in relation to their devotees as well as tho) parents [ne
contemporary Seuth Indias, where the cull of Skanda for Mu
rukan, his Tamil name) as particularly popular Giinesa plays 4

--- Page 152 ---
(28 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
more specialized role than in other parts of India. Ay Brenda
Beck notes:

Ganesh, the elder. 15 mainly seen as someone who helps overcome

obstacles and inauspictaty influences: Murugan (skandal. cn the

other hand, has a more poutive personality and 1s graaler of favors

or boons Murugan oe known to respond lo a desatee’s expression,

of affection and need. (1974. p12)

In the cycle of myths of Ganesa. we sce a sertes of umbnva-
lences inherent inthe realities of tamily hfe The Jather and
mother cngender children out of the desire tor the affection and
Prestige they confer, yet they. especially the tather, see them as
an intrusion into the ulamate goal of hberation trom the world of
desire and rebirth. The son both unites and separates his parents
Wuhb fis mother the son is bound ina close emotwnal celauen:
shop. yet she must parboipate im severing thes bund ay she sields
him up to the authonty of the male world. symboived by the
constellalion of asceticism and initiation inte the realm at social
life and by Parvati’s creating and then endangerme Ganesa be
making him her puardian She iy the generous | good” mother
and the decapitating “bad” mother” The son supmits fo his
jather’s arbitrary and heavy hand of authoney and takes an him
self the acceptable forms ot cultural dents ard qarueipation—
an inversion of the Western serton ef the oedipal contict
Through this sudmussiun comes aeceptanes. tecogition. and ulte
mately ao sictons af sorts ower the Lather as the son muliie Geso-
tee reverves The mantle of brs new status and Gikes his ondained,
place inthe divinely grounded order tn the myths fee process 1s.
represented sn Ganesa’s bohesding and restoration as the Lore of
Obstacles and Beginnings, the une to be worshipped at the outset
of all undertakiags even those dirested town Sea timseit “The
ayths bnally cxptore the world of bing compeiton in the
stores of Skanda and Ganesa contencing tor there parents ap
proval Impboitin this rales is the campention pemwecen diller
cat teheious paths, the ascete’s park ot pagrimage ind renunci
hea ove: against the Rouscholler’s path at duty and desaton to
anes parents aad vomunumty at home Much ot thy appeal of
Ganess lot Haadus surely stems fromthe capacity ef bis myths to
evoke the inesitahle ambuwences of tanuly lite at then most
motesse levels and to represent the tensions and resolutions at the

--- Page 153 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Rehgious Themes tag
developmental process as they occur in the context of traditional
Hindu society and values.
Ganesa and the Demons
In many respects Ganesa is one with the demons in Hindu my
thology, As we have already noted in our discussion of the myth
of his ongins, Ganesa’s story draws much af its imagery fron the
earher tales of Siva's defeat of the elephant demon Gayasura
Ganesa exhibits a pattern sinular to other demon adversaries of
gods and goddesses who take on ammat forms He ws like Kaliva
the aver serpent demon. whom Kryna first defeats when Katia
threatens the cow maidens, but thea restores Kaliya to be hes
disciple. Or Ganesa ts like Mahisa, the buffalo demon, who re-
cenves salvabon from Durga after she has taken tes head in
battle When Siva deteats and beheads Ganesa, he prepares the
way for Ganesa’s elevation into the innee circle of Stva’s own
divine retinue, and Siva brings Ganesa across the threshold inte
the company of the gods as their guardian

Ganesa’s connections with the demon sorld appear in various
ways in different myths (tis said that in the dvdpara surg, the
cosmic age prior to the present Adit saga. Ganesa appearcd as
Gayanana, the clephant-headed one. and did battle with the ted
demon Sindira After he had defeated the demon, Ganesa him-
self turned red (GP 2126 th) The tale explains why many ot
Ganesa’s wonggraphic representations are red uv colos and it alse
hints that Ganesa took on the quahis of the demoa when he
inherited his color, much as when Sa toux the shat of the ele:
phant demon and wrapped himself in it

Gagesa’s demon ancestty shows tbedi in another math about
his origins, one in which the clephat headed: Gomen Malin
drinks Parvati’s bathwater miavd with her seca dint and produces
a son with five clepnant heads Sasa compleies the or ative pre:
cess by trimming the four supertveus heads | Leap! pp ses
Hence Gagesa has one diane mother. Parent. whe ancrogs
nously provides the creative substattee. and enc Jemen moti:
whe brings forth the five headed hike Sra tastes the on
gendering process with aa caitutons mutilation ceakin Cues
tecogmaable and acceptable to the pods Tho amperiben ot the

--- Page 154 ---
$30 GANFSA* LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
four heads may also be read as Siva’s cutting away Ganesa’s
demon portion to render him fully divine.

Ganesa’s association with demons is hinted at elsewhere ina
brief but suggestive passage in a text of ritual instructions for the
worship of the goddess Fyestha (or Nircti). the snauspicous detty
who instigates quarrels and the alter ego of the henesolent goddess
Laksmt. The text describes Jvespha as “elephant-headed” and
“pot-belligd” and followed by a “retinue of obstacles” (BGS
4.9.3 4. cf BGpS 4.9.ta-19. Kramrisch 1975, po 264). Neverthe-
fess, coming fram demon stock 1s aot particularly disads antageous
in the context of Hindy mythology: the demons are not all bad Of
course, they do compete with the gads ever the semua of the sacri-
fice and the angta at the churning of the ocean Thes perform
mighty acts of asceticism to win boons from the gods. which enable
them ta destroy the universe and undermine dhurna But thes
also sacrifice themselves as model devatees and become trans:
formed thereby into dergs of devine stature (cf Hospital) bois ear
so much that the gods are all good and the demons are atl bad The
demons tend to look bad because the maths about therm aie tend
from the gods’ port of siew (an the evil god and the good deman
see O'Flaherty 1976. pp. 9438) Shulman. pp ait ahh The de-
mons play an indispersable role in the Hiadu ecologs of sutton ing
aod suenfice, sametimes crossing over the boundary trom ong
mi thological calegery to arather, Fran gods ta demons and vice
Versa,

As tis rconogciphy reseals, Ganesa is sumlar ue fer tes they
woksas. That class ot semmdnang. tsualis benevolent berigs who
atiend the god Rubera and others and who take their places at
the boundaries and bases of temples. foading ther aid te main
Lain an auspicious cavifonment for denies and desatees alike (see
plos) In the Buddhist Jutuka tales the vadsas are the demonw
Wants whe stand as guardians ot the carth s riches: Assess earh
Mage of Ganesa (ar perhaps his prototype) appears ag the cop:
ing of the Buddhist shrine at Amacaan-- dating teant the second
century of the common crasstinding among ather reksas, al-
though his name does net appear on any list of these creatures
(Coomataswamy 1g2%. po3) Ganesa alse resembles Rubera in
functions Kuberais the lord of wealth aad king over the vadgas,
has setinue tacludes a host of auspicious bemgs, such us gudtvakas.
Ainnaras. gandharvas. and apsarases, Kubera has a fat, dwartish

--- Page 155 ---
Ritual. Psychological. and Religious Themes 131
body similar to that of Ganesa as well as an almost tusklike
mustache, he is also associated with wiki and malevolent forces
underneath his bemyn exterior Because of his abihty to bring
both auspicous and inauspicious influences. he ws both praised
and propitiated Like Ganesa, Kubera protects one of the direc:
tions—standing as the guardian of the northern directon—in
opposition to Ganesa as lord over the youth. According to one
teference in the Mahdbhdrata, he also has a consort named
Rddhi (MBh $.115.8-9). Both Kubera and Ganesa are closely
associated with Siva. and they are both invoked by devotees to
bring weablh. success, good fortune in warldly matters, and to
ward uff malevolent or dangerous powers (cf Bedekar, passim)
When Siva restores Gapesa's head with that of an elephant.
Siva rewards Ganesa tor his sacrifice by placing him in charge of
Siva’s own entourage of semidivine. semidemonic followers, the
ganas. The ganas are the troops. ay then name implies. who
follow Siva from place to place and carry out his orders. They are
a motley looking crew of strange-faced creatures, alternately hor-
nible and humorous. and, Uke their master, deuizens of the wild
forest. They resemble the Vedic marurs or riedras, the martial
storm gods who make up the troops followsng Endra and Rudra
Like Siva’s ganas of the I pic and Puranic periods. these ancient
maruts act ay the guardians of tke directions and protectors of the
divine palaces We have already noted the connection betwcea
the story of Ganesa’s ongins and that of the niarun who were
born from) Dités wonib after Indra had cut them untu seven
pieces The eanas sometimes add comic touches to hile at the Ieet
of Siva and Parvati As the poct drimaust Kalidasa tolis it en
ther wedding might when Parva was coacting wath all the shy
fess appropriate to a new bride to Siva’s amutous advanues Sava
called to his pramathas (ie. guasy. the custodians of trugbter
and “he caused her to laugh by the srimaces jeckera] of the faves.
of the pramathas” (Kumarasambhave 798) Like the seven
dwarts of European folklore, who serve Snow White and yo mer
ily aff to work each day. the ganas always appear the plural
anonymously, and they duttully revere ther master They dow
their powers from Siva. or. at his biddeny. from Gouess A
Ganesa has another exphat connection wit the demon world ©
in his name Vindyaka Etymologically the name is dened from
the preny ve and the root af (lead 3. taken topetacr they thats:

--- Page 156 ---
32 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
late as “lead away.” In the earliest sources in which this name
appears, vinayakas are groups of malevolent creatures who lead
people astray and place obstacles in their paths. However, with
proper and potent ritual propitiation—detailed in some of the
Smyte texts—their mischsevous influences coukd be controlled

‘The Mdnavagrhyasitra, a Vedic manual for domestic rites. de-
tails a ceremony called the vindyekakalpa for the propitiation of
these vinayaha demons. In ut the symptoms of the vinayakas’s
malevolent presence are descnbed:

Now we shail explain (the mic for the atonement of) the
Vinasakas (The names of the Vinayakas are ) Salakatanalata.
Kadymandarajaputra, Usmia, and Devasayana. The person whe 1s
possessed by these (Windy akus). show the following ssmpioms He
presses a clod af casth He cuts down blades of geass He makes
sefatches on biy limbs He sees water in his cream He sees people
with shaven heach (10 his dream) He sees people with crested hatt
din bis dream) He sees peaple with reddish-brown garments (in
tus dream) He secy camels. pigs. donkeys. Candalas. ete (in hes
dream) and (has other impure) dreams, (He dreams that) he
strides through the air When he walks along a path. he thinks (10
himself) “Someane is followmg me from behind ~ Princes now,
when they are possessed by these Vinayakus. chen wnen thes are
endowed with auspicious marks, ate not blessed with sue Ot
women, even when they are virtuous, the children dig A learned
Brabrn, even when (he has the qualities fer) deing a teacher, he
docs not gun the Cofficusth status of teaches During rhe tome that
the pupils studs grout obstactes arise for them The tralty of mer
chanly vaninhes The husbandes of ploughmen bears (only) tew
fruis (MGS 24g. 2t) Dresden trans AP ong. Betursamhird
shy. GarP oot a, bisgudharmetiaca Purang > io4y. ul OVS
4 270-74: Kane 2.2, pp 214 16}

This text Wentihes tour vindyakas. possibly associated with the
four directions, whose powers of destruction are capable at aver:
coming the posiive tiflucnces of personal vittue ia order to phice
obstacles in the way of thase who seek an auspicious marrage,
healthy childbirth, poltucal rule. schotarly attainment. and pratit-
able pusiness and agnculture They appear ta cause scvures.
tughtmares. aml parinova. This same text goes on to speuity what
Atual strategies might truntfully be used to ward otf the negative
influences of these vinayakas After making the appropriate pu-

--- Page 157 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Rehgious Themes 333
Tificatory ablutions and invoking the presence of the vinayakas,
the priest performs the following ritual:

At the cross road in a vitlage. or at cross roads in a town, of ata
cross road in a marketplace. after having strewn darbha grass with
the points of the blades turned (outwards) in all directions, he
offers with a new winnowing basket a dalt sacrifice (consisting of)
husked (ve) grams, unhusked (rice) grains, uncooked meal and
cooked meat, uncooked fish and cooked fish, uncooked flour-
cakes and cooked flour-cakes, pounded. fragrant substances, a fra-
grant beverage. a honey beverage. a Maireya (7) beverage, a Sura
beverage. an untrimmed wreath and a trimmed wreath, a red
wreath, a white wreath. red. yellow, white. black, blue, green, and
multi-colored garments, beans, Kalmasa (a species of rice), roots
and (ruit. (MGS 2 13.28, Dresden trans.. cf. YS 1.28$-92)

When these offerings have been made at the crossroads, the
point where forces intersect, the priest recites, “May these gods
be pleased with me. may they, while being pleased. please me,
and being satished. satisfy me” (MGS 2.14 29). The purpose of
these portions of food (raw and cooked, vegetarian and nonvege-
tarian) and praise is to keep the vinayakas at a distance, fed, and
untroublesome.

Another ritual manual. probably of later compilation, repro-
duces essentially the same description of the symptoms of
vinayaka possession, hut with one unportant difference Instead
of mentioning four vinayakas. 10 speaks of a single figure
Vinayaka, the son of Ambika (Parvati), who “has been ap-
pointed by Rudra and Brahma ay the leaded of the ganas with the
Power to bring about obstacles to action” (YS 1.271). This de-
scription explictly links Vinayaka and Ganesa both in terms of
parentage and role A commentary on this teat, the Mutdkyaru:
adds the observation that Vinayaka’s purpose is to absteuct rites
ta two ways: to undercut actions that have the power to accom:
plish certain ends and tu thwart attaining the (ruits of actions or
ntes properly performed (YS 1271) Thus Vinayaka works at
both the beginning and end of actions. puling up darners to the
proper performance of a mte—such as causing the priest to forget
his lines and obstructing access to the benetits of mtes even
when they have been correctly performed. Consequently his ct-
forts erode the effecuveness of ntual action and the totuence of
personal virtue. It is not surprising that Vinayaka was feared or

--- Page 158 ---
34 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLFS, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
that he was accorded ritual honor before other rituals were un-
dertaken. This is the same role rdksasas play in Vedic sacnfices.
The enormously authoritative law book. the Manavadharma-
$dstra, condemns those who offer sacrifices and worship the
ganas—and it also includes these people on the lst of those to be
excluded from receiving a portion of the Vedic sacntice. along
with the thieves, oulcasts, cunuchs, atheists, and other undesir-
ables (Manu 3.164). The demon lineage from raksasa, marut. and
vindyaka lo Gagesa further supports the argument that Ganesa
emerges from within the network of Aryan and Vedic symbolism
in contrast to the view that he 1s an outsider from a Dravidian or
non-Aryan folk tradition. In the above text for vindyaka propiua-
tion, these rituals are appropriately located as a kind of preface
to the section on auspicwusness-producing nites [Sante] to the
planets to ensure successful undertakings The larger significance
of the custom of worshipping Ganess at the beginoing of under:
takings 1s one we shall explore more fully later
An account of the destructive tendencies ot Vinavaka appears
in the desenption of Brahmagic customs in South India by the
eighteenth-century traveler and clene. the Abbe Dubos. who
was never excessively generous in his appraisal of Hindu rehgious
practices: bis account clusely parallels those given in the classia:
texts:
XE He [Vinayakal is of a morose and irascible disposition, and always
© yeady to annoy and theart those who fail to pay tom suflicent
fespect [ty tor the reason that se mach deference is shown to him
and then on grand feast days his good offees are the fist to be
evoked, bis worshippers fowrig lest he should Coke tanto his head
to disturb the least aod bring lo a undiels end (pp ita 661
The latter part of this description, gathered fram canversations
with prtests. reminds us of Siva and bis tendency te mess up the
feasts or sacrifices of Those whe fail to propriate him. as he did
wath Daksa
The Puranie tests are uncamtortadhs: aware of the discrepancy
between the malesolent, obstacle creas powers of Vinavaka
and the postive, obstacle: temosing actions of Ganesa, and they
attempt to diseune Gageses demon Sackeround through the
clever use of false etymologies for the name “Vinavaka "In one
case, when Siva saw. much to bis surpinse. that Ganesa appeared

--- Page 159 ---
Ritual, Psychological. and Religious Themes 135
out of the mixture of his and Parvati’s sweat and bathwater, he
exclaimed to her, “A son has been born to you without [rind] a
husband [ndyakena], therefore this son shall be named Vina-
yaka™ (VamP 28.71-72} This etymological sleight of hand ob-
scures the association of Vinayaka with “those who lead astray.”
which is its etymologically prior meaning, and connects it with
another meaning uf adyaka as leader or husband. Another effort
at disguising Ganesa’s link to the inauspicious Vindyaka appesrs
in the conversation between Siva and Parvati after she made her
headless son out of her bodily dirt and sent Skanda to fetch an
available head for the child As Skanda attached the head onto
Gagesa’s shoulders, Parvati screamed that it was too large. But
Siva reassured her, explaining that since the head is the leader of
the body and since Gagesa’s new head is so large [tahar|. he
shall be called Mahavinayaka (SkP 7.3.32.1§-17)

Finally, a different strategy of concealment comes into play in
yet another myth of Ganesa’s arigins from South India, one in
which he ts created in order to defeat the demons ‘The story ts 4
variation of the Gajasura/Jalandhara myths in which Siva saves
the universe from destruction by defeating and destroying the
demon who has surpassed the powers of the gods themselves and
the story of Ganesa’s dismembering the moon into bright and
dark halves The tale opens with the famibar predicament of the
gods being pushed around by the demons

tl used, as they were, by the haughty giant Gajsmukha (Ihc

clephant-faced). who had ubtained the pasilege that nether a

god. nor a demon, ner a man, gor a beast. shoutd be able to kill

hum. (the gods) thought of Ganupau. as the one who mght kill the
tytant, sceing that he way none of the four, bul a cempound

Accordingly, Ganapaty went with all bis hosts te batle and in

the herght of the combat. be broke bis night tooth and threw ut at

the enemy. wha. ain the consequence af this tumbled to the
ground, and suddenly became a great rat Ganapati, howeser, oot
stow. sprang at care on the book af the cal whist bas cer sie
been his vehicle (Zicgenbale. psy. cf lousea Dubie: pp

41-42, GP 2 134)

Like his father destroying the elephant demon. Gagesa deteats
Gayamukha—a double of Gajasurs and perhaps Gages. own
aller ego -turning him into a cat, a cresture similar in its adits
to overcome obstacles--such as getting inte aught places to had

--- Page 160 ---
136 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLE FS, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
food—yet in marked contrast to the clephant-faced giant. The
rat and the elephant are poles apart in size and strength within
the animal kingdom, but each has the capacity both to overcome
obstacles and to thwart the fruitful outcome of undertakings. The
unlikely image of an clephant-faced deity riding on a rat may be
comicat—and a sense of humor seems to be quite intentional—
but this curious paw share a common trait: both are masters at
overcoming obstacles.

As one whose demon ancestry is manifest. despite efforts at a
cover-up in the Puranic texts, Gapesa 1s superbly qualified to be
lord over Siva's ganas, themscives a generally unruly bunch. As
one of the demons brought over into the family of the great lord
Siva, Ganesa mediates between the oppositional forces of the
divine and the demonic. He understands the demons, he knows
their ways and does not fear their powers Like his father. who
was originally an outsider within the Hindu pantheon and an
opponent to the other gods. Gagesa stands both outside and
inside the divine worlds as he dwells at the threshold (cf. Hilte-
beitel 1976. chap. 12) He both places and removes obstacles and
facilitates and thwarts undertakings. He does not tolerate neglect
from gods, demons, or humans: those who fait of forget to do
him homage or give him propitiation find their efforts coming to
ruin. Only a being who os as much a demon as 4 pod could stand
simultaneously on both sides of the threshold that separates and
connects the worlds of the gods and demons Only 6 bemg us
Protean as Gagesa could qualify for this medistory assignment in
the arena of principahties and powers as tepresented to human
beings through thetr myths and images
Obstactes and Thresholds
Gagesa is also called Vighnesvara or Vighnarata. the Lord of
Obstacles. His task in the divine scheme of things. his dhazma, 15
lo place and remove obstacles Its bis particular territory, the
Feason for his creation Siva gives him these respansibilues as the
chicf of his gayas. as he had done with other gagas in other
myths, such as Andhaka and the vaksa Hankesa in reward bor
their exemplary asceucism (MalsyaP 17% 8-40. 179) Siva ex:
plains in one story of Gagesa’s birth:

--- Page 161 ---
*
. .
» Oia alg. ge Oe
We .
v —*
* td
Pod
ae
ae
ny
“ ‘
i)
iz \
t —
es > o
«
Plater Dancing Tea-Armed Ganese Faghth century Centra! Logha
Bull sandstone, bh 125.7 cm (4yte ‘The Asia Society, New York Mr
and Mes John 1D) Rockefeiler JM Collection, 1929 1%
Phoroyraph by Onto f, Nelsen

--- Page 162 ---
ey
&
aN
, 3
oy
Vv
.
{ - «8 een
ae a ind ‘ ‘
. .
r,
i
es: On
”~
—oc ~ -.
Poster Ganess Care centh to early elesenta certury bats Chole
Penal 6 8 rocer Seuth Tera Lamiagca, region of Lasqere
Bronze boar ime cite Phe Neison Arkins Maen Un Now
ands Aansas Cra Mester:

--- Page 163 ---
‘ . .
? . Py oo
a
woe f tee *
, on po
we 7 et
pty
hk .
4 ‘ . °
” 4 7, on Prate 3 Gajalasksmi (Ele-
eo -- 2%,” phants lustrating Laksmi).
~~ ” Second century 8.¢. Sanchs
ne, . Detail of a pillar
f Photograph by Job Thomas
. wo.
4
La z é
>
. . a ~ ‘e
4 or" %
Sex ae
ys mg
AE
.
-. Od ae
. 2s SAL RNS .
. Wig, S
mAs
f A ef os 7
, Pee gh &
BY i P 2
~ p
€ a 1 ew
Prate 4 Gajalaksmi ease - pete
with Ganesa 1°
Contemporary Uitho- rae .
graph Maharashtra d
+ Author + photograph

--- Page 164 ---
°
¢
ra a
a an
on . ‘o
~ ° Re °
“HG «@ Vv
?
sey . : ‘
Os . ‘
-J art A
. <, $e 4
7 oie -
Ve lg \ + ns
‘ hes \ + id
Facey 4
v <
q *
c
TH ¢
r w tf j
oO ws .
ve _ &.
a, 7 .
. ~~  e oh
,
Pian 6 Ganasurasaniharanurt: (Sia dances on the head ef the de:
fealed clephant demon) Twelfth century Darasusam
Tamilnadu Photograph bv dob Thomas

--- Page 165 ---
. ». 7 ¢ e « .
1g Nooo ts SL +?
ot “ez
? \ *
' . an * |
i
vO aoe
wa by : .
» . A, ~, 4 - ™ ' :
z ary pet i . ‘
a . s ,
een ON:
. ‘
1% By
-, age” cA \ ve
a, ~~ &@ . -
. 6 yee
bond) Py A: tw f- = oul
°
hd a. es : aed es
Piats 7 Gaycndramoksa (Vignu liberates the elephant kings bith
century 40 Dasavatara Temple. Deogash. Citar Pradesh
© American Commuice on South Asian Art

--- Page 166 ---
Ger se ag a
we: .
DD - =
, {le
“4 }
aie ry oy . |
slins ve
= 0 ~«Y. .
7 > Wh ‘ '
OD ny Vow
. ot td
o 7 @
' Poste ® Gunes images of
a the aytavindvska shrines in Ma.
harashita Contemporary
a : athograph
ike Authors photograph
Poste © Yams tates Seserd sealers be Sangh Stapacne rb west
atch Ar rear Comectee tin South Usnat Ver
. . ‘ — -
Te _ -_ *
"_ «© ‘SSS
n.d ame
, whew = “ t an .
Ae . “ a6 > > \? d
. _— ~~ ore Oe Re.

--- Page 167 ---
5 ays ‘a
Lee
“™~e! , : r-
fo GREEN Po Ganesr ava chi
hoe :
wake
te ow o iy 2

--- Page 168 ---
RA f
WW 7.
. .
u .
Pt \ u®
“9s .
wot + ‘ ’
aan ROR pee
e 1 ae ‘
: Aw. : s 4
¢ i
Purr) Ganesa mage in procession
Mabarastirs Photog aph bs OP Tipres
Peaver2 fmmets.on af Ganesa image in the river
Mahatastits Lanes phos graph
s
oN .
. ’ . \ .
. * ° wv ‘ |
‘ ? : re
: .
. A\ ) '
Ld :
Re ri. 79
\ ‘ NN & ~ rf

--- Page 169 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 137

Hear, O Parvati, what this son of yours will become He will be
Vike me in might, heroism and compassion. This son of yours will
become one just hke me because of these qualtties. He will make
obstacles that Jast unt death for those evil and imptous ones who
hate the Veda and dharma, And those who fail to pay homage to
me and Vispu, the supreme lord, they will go to great darkness by
the obstacles laid before them by thes lord of obstacles. In their
houses there shall be quarrels without end

Because of the obstacles your son makes everything perish ut-
terly. For those who do not worship. who are intent upon lies and
anger. and are committed to fierce savagery, he will create obsta-
cles. He will remove obstacles from those who revere the trads-
tions, knowledge and teachers. Without worshipping him, all ac:
tons and laws will become obstructed (SkP 6 2.27.8-14, LP
10§ 12-16, of. VarP 2a)

In this account of his role, it appears that Ganesa's energies are
to be spent defending the cosmological status quo: protecting the
interests of the gods. routing demons, shoring up the authanty of
the Brahmas. and generally looking out that the flow of sacred
power moves upward toward the gods and their earthly represen:
tauves. Ganesa does battle with the demons, fighting heroically
and victonously, as in the following myth in which he defeats the
demon-mother Danu:

The gods went to Maunt Arbudha with Ganesa in the lead then
the demon Danu, powerful and feared by all the gods. saw Ganesa
and created through her power of illusion many demons cqual to
her in size and strength, each ane knoweng ull the skills of warfare
Then there followed a great battle and the demons which Danu bad
created conquered all the armies of Ganesa with theu various obsta-
cles The gods became tered, thinking Vinayake [Ganesa] might
alo have becn destroyed “If he were killed in the bate ee don't
know how to protect Indra.” they thought: Ehea Sea. Indtg. and
Visnu drew then weapons and struck Danu and fought bee back foe
awhile And as the gods were fighting with Danu Gaoesa got up
from the ground, and in a rage he took the missile which Seva bad
given him and cut off the head of Danu, and he atterls destroyed all
her demon fotlowers, the ones she created by her awetiism and
valor, tying them with a noose Then Ganesa returned the gods
ther kingdoms and took away all thew tear (DP 4:8)

As the champion of the interests of the gods Ganesa removes
ong obstacle by placing another Phe demon Danu was the obsta

--- Page 170 ---
138 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
cle thwarting the gods. The gods called on Ganesa to remove the
obstacle of the demon.

A story 1s told in Sarasvat) Gangadhara’s Gurucaritra—a devo-
tional text of the Dattatreya tradiven wn Maharashtra that was
written in §38 and remains a chiel source of bhadt: (or devotees
of this deity that Ganesa prevented Siva’s fngu from being
stolen by the demon Ravana. the béle noe of Rama Ravana
attempted to carry the precious form of Siva away to Lanka and
establish it in hts capital where it would remain invincible and a
threat t the gods. Siva’s devotees would also thus be deprived of
che object of their worship) Visnu turned to Ganesa to place an
obstacle to prevent Ravana’s theft af the dmga Siva had sard that
Wf the fvtiga were established in Lanka. it would reach down to the
lowest world and remain immovable It would be impossible even
for the gous to take it back once it was installed Taking the form
of a small boy. Ganesa gamed Ravana’s trust: The demon asked
him to hold the dtga while he ceheved himself and said his mora
ing meduations As Ravana was thus engaged in fis morning
mtual, Ganesa placed the fiaga on the ground and it at once tuvb
root. The place of the faga has become a center of pilesmage.
called Mahabalessara (“the great child-lord”}. and serves ay a
ceoter of worship for both Siva and Ganesan aertherm Ratna
taka and southern Maharashtra (Ghugye. pp cies cn ef Tak
Pule, pp. as2-sa)) In this stors Ganesa’s cleverness saves the day
for the gods Unhke Rama he does aot confront Ras aad directly
with fore of arms but by the power of disguise and his own
devious imagination

In other contexts, however. Gunesa teverses this pattern and
places obstacles before the gods. as he dees in this version of the
story of the churning of the cosmu ocean:

fhe yods churned: the oven yntd posed began le spill out

Netrada warned them that they should pay homage lo Siva. but the

fod were eager to full their desties and so. they ignvred bim

Sean the posnn spread to the upper reetons and the gods sages

and demons ded ia all directions, ay thes did atthe time of the

sacahee ot Daksa. and tnally took tetuge in Brabma But Brahma
could do nothing. and hg led them to Venu. who was also power
less fa stop the burning poson finally wal the gags and world

Ruardians came to Siva (or refuge

Then Ganesa said tr Siva. “Just to amuse myself [have crested

--- Page 171 ---
Ritual. Psychological, and Religious Themes 19
this obstacle which is difficult for them to evercome Because of
fear and illusion the gods do nol worship you or me, and so they
encounter terrible obstructions te their actans © Siva then said ta
the gods, “Even though this world «6 thought to be perishable,
there ts also that which ts imperishable Look to soursetves What
is the use of sacrifice, asceticism, of undertaking any action, or
thinking whether all 1s one of many” Together you attempted the
difficult task of churning the ocean to obtain nectar But vou ex:
cluded and ignored me. and thats why all ot vou fell mto the jaws
of death. there 1s no doubt: We have created Ganesa to bring
every action to successful conclusion, hut you did not honor him
and Durga, that 1s why you have become afticied with dilbcultcs
(SkP 1 ty ot 199.75) cf PP Srotikhanda 67 22- 66)

In this verston of the myth of the churning of the ocean, the
gods get into trouble partly because they are greedy for the ben-
chts to be demved form possessing the immortably-conferring
elixu—but more importantly and mmmeditely, tis because they
fall to honor Ganesa. who removes obstacles tron all undertak-
igs. Lyen the universe self cannot be created without first pro-
Pivating Gagesa, through failing to Jo se, the gods encounter the
obstacle of the powon ‘That obstacle ullumately drives then to
Siva, who uses the occasion of their distress to castruct them on
the proper way to worstop Gagesa The story tollows the pattern
of the carer tale of Siva’s destruction et Daksa’s sucrittes be
cause Daksa excluded Siva trom it In this story. the exclusian,
together with its disastrous consequences. alse has seference ta
Ganesa—Siva’s son and the one to wham Sia’s powers extend
In causing the poson to be chumed outat the ocean aad threat
ening to devour all that has been created. Genes for sheer
enjoyment at watching the gods squirm in ther predwament -
brought it forth as an obstacle to the gods in order to femave
from Siva and himsclf the obstacle of noarccogartion by the other
gods At one level the myth serves as a degitimaben for the
worship of Ganesa at the begeimogs of undertokanes There sae
action pnor to the creation of the universe. cxcepl OF course
worshipping Ganesa. As one text ceassuringly puls 0" Whenes or
there is calamity or whenever one wants to abtain bry clesires, he
should worship Gajanana [Ganesa] and all bis plans 41 became
successful. there 1s no doubt" (BrP 2.3 a242-as) The story
brings order out of chaos by turning the agdicty of the pods at

--- Page 172 ---
tyo GANESA® LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORO OF BEGINNINGS
seeing their efforts devoured by the poron into devotion to
Ganesa Disaster proves to be the appropriate precondition for
religious instruction.

In addition to placing obstacles for demons and gods. Ganesa
also obstructs the efforts of the mghteous to obtain salvation
when too many of them are going to heaven and crowding out
the gods. The story is told of Gayesa’s efforts in this direction in
connection with the famous Sawite shrine of Somanatha

Just before the dah vuga. women, barbanans sudras and other
sanners entered heaven by visiting the shrine of Somanatha Siva as
lord of the soma]. Sacrifices, ascethisim. gilts to Brahmins, and
other obligatory ntes ceased (0 be performed. and heaven became
crowded with men, old and saung, those skilled in the \edas. and
those ignorant of them Sacrifice was desteaved and the earth
emptied, heaven became so overcrowded that people hed to stand
holding then arms straight up. Then Inder and the gods became
distressed at heing overrun by Mea, and sought refuge auth Siva
saving. “IL is because of vour grace that heaven is crowded wah
tnen Give us a place to live Yama. the lord ef fharma. as struck
dumb whkeo be tinnks shout there ex) deeds and the sevca hells
which are now empty © But Siva could do authirg [or he was the
one who had granted them entey into heaven So Pana ste wed

Ganesa from tne dirt of hee own body und said te the gods, “For

your sakes Ehave brogebt forth this Berng to place obstacles Before

men se that thes will become filed witb great delusson their wits
deteated Dy desire aad they wll not come fo Somaratia. but te
bell nstewa ~The gods became happy and the fest of men vane
whed (SkKP tri uc Reaneds pp oss sn. Oo RRaherty

197. pp 267 46)

As a sated ceater. the shrine boa “phice outside of and op-
Posed to the sa of time and the corruphon that eme brings
about” (Shulman, p24) Devotees who go there obtain cntrs
Into Weuven regardless af sex. caste. rituai purty. of kaowicdge
of sacred texts and rttes: The shrine undercuts all other means of
obtainme ment snd power. such as sacrifice und ascctenm: Afast
Important, Cie shone negates the negation of death. Yama be-
comes unemployed This upsets the balance between pods and
humans. Reavco and carth, and chaos results from this excess of
Sis grace When the gods appeal to Siva tot help he can de
sothing for he has already green bis uncenditional boon to the

--- Page 173 ---
Ritual, Psychologicat. and Religious Themes ri
devotees who come to the shrine. It 1s Parvati who gets the gods
out of their predicament by creating Ganesa to stand at the
threshold of the shrine and corrupt the devotees with worldly
desires, As a center of pilgrimage and offerings, the shrine serves
the needs of the gods. bul it also potenuully threatens their hege-
Mony because the sacrednes of the shrine overcomes death and
thereby causes crowding among the immortals in heaven The
shrine’s sanctity must remain uncorrupted. but access to at must
be made difficult. the promwye of salvation to pilgrims must stand
without condivons. bul the realization ot the spiritual benehts
Must, nevertheless, be hard to win As David Shulman points
out: :

No man or woman must Se sowed to reach the shrine The

sccunty of the gods depends upon the corruption of men

Sull. the implication of thes mvth ty thatal aman. be he righteous

oF evil. can succeed 10 getting past ine gatekeeper. be is assured of

salvation The gatekeeper thus comes ta represents teal of nace

Strength, the devotce must overcome his leary ty doubts and bes

humar weakness, in order to accomplish his pilgrimage Up say

Ganesa. the gatekeeper. removes obstacles from the gods by
Placing them betore bumans He dees aot corrupt the shrine
uself. but rather corrupts those who attempt to enter ito. delud-
ing their minds with desire He pases as the challenge to the
devotee. the one who must be gotten past The devotee whoo
not deluded will know that the “secret of entermyg the shrine
and taking advantage of its sacred power hes in “remembering”
to worship Ganesa at the beginning, at the point of catrs lo the
shrine and its etual processes The bsiance between god and
human depends on the devotee aor recommiztn Ganesa as he
stands at the door, justas Siva did not recognize Ganesa when ke
sought entry into Parvati’s bath The difference between Siva and
the devotee as that thas ime 11s Ganesa who holds the ave. and it
w the devotee’s head that, metaphorically at icast, must be
offered in order to get past the Lord of Obstacles Ganesa sub:
verts humans to protect the gods, but the trus and uacorruptible
devotee subverts Ganesa’s subversion by paving him homaye at
the threshold, an homage Ganesa ts obhyged to reward

A similar theme of the corruption of humans in onder to make
life easier for the gods appears in the story of the ayhteous King

--- Page 174 ---
42 GANESAS LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Divodasa of Kasi (Benares) and Siva’s efforts to regain his be-
loved city:

King Divadasa lived on Benares At this time Siva and Parvati
were marmed and lived with his in-laws But his mother-in-law
took offense at Siva’s behavior Parsau pleaded with Siva lo take
her away. and so Siva looked over all the worlds and deaded Kadi
would be the most pleasant place to live But when he saw that
Owodasa already Ived there he ordered Gunesa [Nikumbha] to
empty at, by means of subtle decent Then Gagesa appeared in a
dream to a barber named Kantaka. instrucong him te build a
shrine and install his image there When the shrine was established
many came there and recensed gold, sons. and other booms Then
the chief queen of Disodasa worshipped there. usking over and
over fora soa But Ganesa did aot tant her desire. hoping to
atouse the king's anger When, atter a long lime, the king became
enraged at Gagesa for not giving him a son, he angrily destroved
the string ‘Thea Ganesa cursed bim, aed the city became empty
Then Siva came there vith Parvati und ibes deeltin Kad CH app
1, na 7, §o-tgo; BrP 2 2.67 30 65, VayuP 2 3028 95. cf
O'Flaherty 1976. pp 18y 204, Shulman. pp. t7 75)

Like the story af the Somanatha shane. thn myth turas on the
assumption that gods and humans caanot line in the same place sf
the same time. For Sivacto take bis bride to Kast, he must fist ad
the city of its tnhabstants. 1 falls to Ganesa as the lord of obsta-
eles to delude the righteous king. which Ganesa does by creatine
asbane that confers tavors on all comers, expecially the low -caste
barber, but not to Disodasa and bis qucen Ganesa denies the
qucen atlspring and Kastan heir to the throne When Divadasa
unpetuausly destroys the shane. Ganesa uses ths occasion as the
opportunity to emply the ity. making way lor the divine couple
to take their pluves Lu this way balance ns restared Siva finds 3
home and settles down with by wife But Drvodasa is not simply
thrown out of his city to become a homeless martye Ganesa
seduces him into aa cnraged gesture of atual defilement by ab-
structing the flow of bencheal power from bes shrine to the king
and tus wife, meanwhile geinting all boos to others By placing
the obstacle of delusion before Divadasa, Ganesa removes the
obstack: of homelessness from Siva and Parvati In another ver
sion of this story. Viynu and Gagesa take the form of Buddhist
monks and convert the king and his wife to a heretical faith, thus

--- Page 175 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes cre)
leading them to abandon sacrifice and temple rites and in that
way incurring Uhe withdrawal of divine faver. At last in their
apostasy they abandon the vity, leaving it to Siva (GP 2.47; cf
Kennedy, p. 251).

In a South Indian version of this story, Ganesa assumes a

different form to accomplish Diwadasa’s removal fram Kasi
Vinayaka took the form of an astrologer with a book under ts
arm. He gave the town’s citizens bad dreams, and then appeared
and interpreted their dreams and the position of the stars as augur
tng the impending muin of the city. The people Hed, forgetting to
perform theu rites (Vindvaka Purdgam 81 109 ff, quoted in Shul-

man, p 80)

Here Ganesa uses his now familiar strategy of delusion. this
ume by giving people nightmares and then interpreting them so
that they would flee the city. The Sétra and Smrti texts we exam.
ined earlier make the puint that one of the ways in which Vinavaka
or the vinayvakas appear is in mghtmares and hallucinations

In a version from a sectarian Ganapatya purana. the story of
Divodasa becomes the occasion for a reversal of roles between
Ganesa and Siva

Tortured by the pain of separation trom Kasi, Siva pertormed
asceticsim until Ganesa appeared Then Sawa said “CO Land of

Obstacles [Vighnaraya], bam beset with obstacks. therefare please

free me fram them Protect me from this pain ot separation Ue be

past vou gave me a born that by cemembenng veo atthe begin
ning of actions I would become like a son to ypu

Then Ganess made a Brahmin name! Dhund our of tis body
and said to hum. In order lo pring success to Siva ge to Kasi and
delude the peaple witk the tenhings of the Buddha“ Then

Ganesa summoned Vignu und said. “Assume the form of 4 Buc:

dhist. and al my command go woth Dhuodr ane serrupt the ats”

{n the meantime Kast ws alse practuiag ascetigism ten a thouysnd

years and Gianese came to her tod granted ker the boo tnat hee

husband would be returned to her (MudP or go 3th

Siva suffers trom the obstacle of separation tram: bis beloved
Kasi, understood eather as the city or bis lover, and seeks rehire
in Ganesa, assuming the posture of a devateg ot the elephant
faced lord Ganesa makes Dhundi out of bis boos. much as
Parvati made him out of hers Dhungiraya. the ford ot Dhuadt. ts

--- Page 176 ---
144 GANFS$A: LORD OF OBSTACLES, 1 ORD OF BEGINNINGS
the name by which Ganesa is worshipped at a mayor shrine in the
middle of Benares (SkP 4.39ff: cl Eck 1982. pp. 187-88) In
cach of these variations of the Divodasa story. Ganesa’s role
remains constant’ he is the one who places the obstacle before
the nghteous king so thal Siva may take the city for hs own. He
makes use of disguises or creates other beings out of himself to
delude the king GaneSa is the one who actually redresses the
balance by his deft placement and remosal of obstacles Placing
and removing. as it turns out, are two sides of the same achon
Giving to one means taking from another
In other contexts Ganesa comes to the rescue of humans af
every social and religious stature. heiping them to overcome ob
stacles. This pattern cames into focus i several thematically
related stones Ina parr ot myths asaut kings who meet with
obstacles in their efforts to expand of overcome their treacherous
appetites, Ganesa makes it posable for them to realize therr
goals
‘The first tale in the pats a reworking of the famous story of
the quarrel between the warrtor-king Vissanutra and the Brahe
min sage Vasistha Vasvamutra had cuempted to become a Brah-
min but he was either seduced from ies asceticism by a gandhana
or, When he had performed bis ascetasm properly, Vasistha ree
fused to recognize him vs a Brahmin Our seesian of (ats story
opens vith a conflict over the saves wash-tulaling cow that
Vidvamitra desires to take for his own
Tormerls Vissanutes was Asaeso atthctcd with burger Once
while hunting he vame upon the henmnige of the great sage
Vasntha where he Soa the besuititul sash granting «ow Nandiet
Vievanutra desired the cant and tied fo peeuade \asigtia te trade
Hootferng him every sent of riches. ames and hemes But the
sage refused Thea the king stole the cow As she was being car
ned off, the cow opened her moucr. and from at there poured
smoke, fire and great armies of warnon When Viesamura sa
the power of the sage scow he thought. 1 wall become a Brahmin
loo. and attain the asuvstouy powcr he has Ned se the king
performed axcctician, but thogygh hy meditation was herce he soll
did not attain brabmioneed Chen he went to Kaildsa, and) pray
ang Siva and Panate asked that the obstacle to hu asceticism Be
removed Theo Siva Giught him the proper means of worshipping
Gagesa, the remover ot ubstacles Viswartutta performed the wor:

--- Page 177 ---
Ritual, Psychological. and Religious Themes Mas
ship [pija] and all the obstacles disappeared and he became a
Brahmin. which 1s difficult for anyone to attain. (SkP 6 214 19.32)
Visvamitra desires to become a Brahmin out of jealousy for the

sage’s supernatural powers—in the form of armies of celestial

beings issuing forth from the mouth of Vasistha’s cow. When

Visvamitra’s ascetic practice tails to produce the desired results,

he resorts to devotion to Siva. Siva then instructs Visvamitra (and

the audience of the story) on the proper ways of devotion to

Ganesa, who, once appropriately honored, renyoves the king's

obstacle to attaining Brahmin status.

In the second myth, King Somakanta tinds the worshup of

Ganesa to be salutary for curing moral as well as physical ills:

Formedy Somakanta. the king of Devanagara. became all with 2
leprovy. Instathag his son on the theane. he and bis wife Sudharma
retired mte the forest One day while fetching water Sudbarma
mel the sage Bhigu whom she tuld about ber husband's alfichoa
Then Somakanta went ty Bhrgu and asked hin to cure bis Jeprosy
Bhreu explained that in a previous lite he [Somakanta] has been a
sasya and wes reealess and given be killing Brahmins ‘Then, in his
old age he had become penntert and desued to give avay his
Ul-gotten wealth to the Brakmuns. but thes ai refused to accept it
So, instead he spent hes fortune refussishing 29 abandoned Ganess
temple, and then he died soon aller Allowed vy Yama to reap the
rewards fram (hs pious acl the King was ¢cbare ay ine Eahicouy
king Somakanta, but finally che retabubon tar hes carler Brahe
minicide caueht up with human the form af lepross and basing wild
birds devour his flesh Bar Bargu cured the bing by sprinkling
water on him while recting thy one hundred acd coyhe names of
Ganesa and sent his esil nature out of bes body CGP bf ie) »
Like Visvamitra, Somukanta’s affliction cs the consequences of

having injured Brahmins Giving all his tortune foe the construc
tion of a shrine does not create a sufficient wealth of ment ta
overcome the’ previous evil karma. just ay Vissamutra’s here
asceticism fails to transform tint inte a Brahmin Both are saved
by the power of Gagesa’s presence. manilested te them through
worship and recitation of his divine names The bord ot Obsia
cles alone has the power to remove tne obstrugtons that preyent
the two kings from realizing ther obievtives. and Hott mi thy
serve as examples of how the unpossble cam be accompished
with the help of Ganesa Of course, Ganesaiy not umque in hs

--- Page 178 ---
146 GANESA’ LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
ability to rescue his devotees, many gods and goddesses do that;
and many such stories of divine deliverance are told to ilustrate
the saving power of the deny ‘These two stortes indicate some of
the particular ways in which Ganesa rules over the terrain of
obstacles

Some stones portray Ganesa ay a particularly clever character.
a trickster. outwitung his opponents to gain the advantage—as he
did with his brother in the story of their contest tor a bride
wherein Ganesa circumambulated his parents, whereas Skanda
returned breathless from running around the whole world Phere
are a number ot stones of this type that besides being wonderful
tales of wit and surprise reveal the deeper ambivalence inherent
in Ganesa’s movements:

The chief of the guaus led a troubled life. and be gave hime?
over to acts of mischicl, Once when be weet close to the ocean of
milk he dipped tis trunk into it, sucking up wll the ocean including
Venu. Brahma, Lakymi. Adisesa. and Garuda A few moments
later he <pat oul everything be had sucked in Han [Wisnu] and his
companions were spal out, thrown this way and that, aod struck
dumb Regaining his senses, Vignu realied that his conch was
gone and be grieved because of th Thea, at that moment he heard
the sound ot his conch and knew that one ot the ganas had wt He
went to Mouat Karlasa and asked Sito retucn his conch to hin:
Sia rephed that he would aot intenene in the actions of ane of
hus gues but thst he could get bis conch retutred it he established
a shrine for Ganesa at Kancipuram (Desvigane et al 1964. pp
16-16)

This tale of the founding af @ shrine is in some ways remins
cent ot the stom ot the churame of the ocean in which Ganesa
obstructs the gods fram obtaning the ambrosia Here Ganesa
confounds the gods bs sucking thea all into himsell and spating
them out. as a child would spit out bud-tasting medicine The
Story thea gives an account of the ganas playing keepaway with
Vigou’s conch— the nughts instrument made from the demon
Pancajanva’s body which Nignu blows to strike terran inte: this.
oppuncats The gatas demean the great god by treating tim bke
a toy, dad Siva uses thiy occasion af Vignu’s vulnerability to force
him to establish a shane for Gagesa in the famous temple at
Kancipuram

Gagesa Plays simoar pames with boly sages and Brahmins in

--- Page 179 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes 147
the following pair of tales, the first from South India, the second
from Maharashtra:
An exceptionally hot summer set in once in South India ‘The
whole land became parched So Agastya (the sage) went to Siva
and requested some holy water, and the losd pul Kaveri, wha was
worshipping him just then. into the kamandalu, (waterpot) of
Agastya, and sent him back Indra. who did nut relish thes action
of Siva, asked Ganapati to somehow or other upset Agastyz’s
kamandate of holy water, and Ganapati in the gune of 3 crow
weat and sat on the brink of the kumandalu aod thus upset it
Agaslya and the crow quarscled with cach other Then the crow
assumed his original form as Ganapati and blessed Agastys More:
over, Ganapati filed Agastya’s kamnandala with holy water which
he later distributed among devotees in South India, and that ts the
Present nver Kavert (Mari. p. 273: 6 Dessigine. etal 1967. pp
79-80; Mate, p to) msp 197
Like the story in which Ganesa saves the gods from fiery par.
gon at the ame of the churning of the ocean, as this myth opens,
the world is being devoured by 4 drought. symbolic uf the fire of
doomsday The only water to be found was that in the nver
Kaven, who had left the world to worship Siva, When Agastya
appealed to Siva to save the world from ils distress, the ascete
lord answered his plea by filling his waterpot vith the sacred
river. But Indea, ewer a toe to Siva and jealous of his creative
powers. persuades Gancsa to spill the water. Agastya is said fo
have been born from yuch a waterpot, much as the gods were
bora from the churned ocean. It is abso said that Agastva once
drank up the ocean and uncovetcd the demony who were hidden
there, thus enabling the gods to destroy them) When Ganest
takes the shape of an inauspicious Crow un order lo upset Ags
tya’s waterpot, he fulfills India’s request: but the story takes at
unexpected turn and becomes an epiphany of Ganesa, who re
veals himself inthe midst of the spilled water much ay his
father's Laga emerged out of the cosmic ocean Atter the spline
of the water and the revelation of Ganesa Arastya finds the
waterpot running over in such abundant supply that i sataies al!
the devotees and there ts a sulterent seepluy to form the sacred
twee Kaven. The theme ot breakage and restoration. bhe lie
theme of beheading and adoptian as ait appears in the stongs ut
the creation of Ganesa or the sacritice ot Daksa. pons to the

--- Page 180 ---
148 GANESA” LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
theological and cosmological dimenstons of the story: the deity
appears suddenly in the midst uf chaos bringing a new and more
plenuful order In this tale Ganesa is the master of many sur
prises. He tricks Siva by upsetting the waterpot at Indra’s re
quest, but then he tricks Indra by restoring it He oulwety Agas-
tva through his clever use of disguise. but then he reveals hunself
and fulblls the sage’s wish for water. Insofar as the symbols of the
drought and waterpot are analogues to the Hery dvomsday and
watery creation, Ganesa takes on a cosmogome sole as the ong
who distributes the water Thus he saves the world from the fre
of drought and establishes a continuing source of qourishment
both matenal and spiritual. in the nver Kaveri as the sacred place
for ins self-revelation.

Many tales of Ganesa’s exploits of deception are funny. and
thes evoke much laughter when told in temples and at gssembhies
ot desatees, but they also teach theological lessons One such
story is told by the Maharashtrian poet-saint Namadesa (b 1270)
about the theft of sweeimeats offered to Ganesa Namadesa was
a Varnaite devotee of Vapthake at Pandharpur. and bis stor
beats strong resemblance to the famous myth about the young
ehikd Krona cating dut) When Yaseda, Kryaa’s mother. heard
that Rer child was eating diet, she scolded him for but he
denied domg it Then she demanded that he open he mouth and
show her She Jooked ite fis mouth aad saa the whole urine
displuved therein besond fis oral threshold (BAP dos tb-as) dn
the following tale about Ganesa. this theme af reselatian of di
Mamie through the open noe centers ground the canny ot
secetmeats rather than aber, but it comes to a sembir cometusiaa

Yone i anade ol the preparations for the wecship of Ganesa ind
placed stray of wwcerme ats [itd at westmes simlie te ney.
dakalon the alla belore the cigphant bised lord Bet Kana kept

Pesteniog her, “Metber he ered. “when ate seu going to ee

Me some ot the fade” Vasota answered tat he could have some

oa they were altered te Ganesan) and then she went into the

thes coon: to hag, back seme cncenye Thea Rryag tealzed that
there aay ne ane ele in the toum he stale ali the swectmeats and
ale theer quiealy Whee Yusoda ceturned and waa that the dadde
wete gene. she abseil ake Krau what heppeoed te them He
Tephed with ammated expression, “Thousands of mice stampeded,
a here led 6 Ganesa niing on a huge mouse and swept them up

--- Page 181 ---
Ruual. Psychological, and Relious Themes M49
wath one sweep of his mighty trunk and ate them ail He was fierce
and his mouse was ternfying I was paralyzed with fear and could
aot call out But now | am very hungry. won't you give me some
of the ladgic?” Yagoda was suspicious of Kryna’s story, and she
demanded. “Open your mouth, for bam sure at is you who have
eaten all the faddi intended for the offerings ~ Bul.’ Krypa pro-
tested, “there were so many fagdu. bow could thes all At in my:
small mouth? ft ws Ganesa who stole them You accuse me
falsely" The she began to beat the child. but when he opened his
Mouth she saw the whole universe filed with moumerahle Ganesas
made out of the swectmeat affermgs These Gancsas in Kisna’s
mouth said in unison to Yasuda “Why do sau worsnip me? You
Should be worshipping your own child” Thea Yosoda fell into a
trance and saw that Kina filled the whole universe But then the
seal ot illusion [anavay returned and soe saw hum agaia as her van
soo. and then picked him up and caressed him tenderly (Ne
madeva Gdthad, 90 83. pp gat ef Bachinger Perre-Luzer g72b.
P. $08)

Lake the story of Adit, this tale plays with the theme of steal
ing the offerings intended for the gods, only this story leads to a
more auspicious conclusion, Ganesa emerges here ay a co
trickster with Krona. cach plays @ role te facilitate the revelation
to Yasoda that Ganesa and Kryna are embodiments of the whole
umverse Yusodz slips back behind the vel ot tliusion. but the
divine epiphany in the Mory comes through ta the audience The
story 1s also an example. at least in the regian of Maharashtra, ot
how Ganesa does not remain exclusively within the faamework of
Saivism but becomes incorporsted into Varynava mythology

Ganesa's capacity for ceceptier: takes comme form in a North
Indian tale about two neighbors, ang ach andthe other pour One
day the poor neighbor had a Mruke of nocd fortune and became
nich, and bis rich friend asked him the cause of My success He
replied that on the previous might he andl hrs wite had worsupped
Ganesa tn there bome wath offerings of sesame secds nd sugas
Then while they were sleeping. in the auddle of the night, a yee
spoke to them saying. “Lam pleased wath vou ~ Whon the couple
asked who wt was, the vone rephed, “Hos b. Chauth Gosain
[Ganesa] ~ Suspecting that the soice ought actnally heleag tea
thief, the wife asked what the intruder wanted Phe vores aske lio
reheve himself; and, ternbed at thes equest. the couple told him
to use the corner of the room Finally. at dawn, the anteuder de

--- Page 182 ---
150 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
parted. When the dawn’s light appeared the fnghtened couple
found piles of gold and jewels in the corner They felt ashamed
that they had treated the god so discourteously The rich neighbor
listened intently to his friend's story and inquired in detail about
what procedures of worship he had followed that had yrelded such
impressive results. Then. on the next sacred day for the worship of
Ganega, the nich man and his wife worshipped the god in the same
way his formetly poor neighbor had done. in the middle of the
night. the same voice made the wWennical request from within the
worship cabinet. The rich couple gladly invited the voice lo relieve
himsell in the corner of the room) When the hght of dawn broke
the couple was astonished ty find that the room way “filled with
human excrement, flaoded with urine. and giving forth a horrible
stench!” (Mukherji, pp. 15-19)

This marvelous tale of the unexpected rewards for the humble
and just retribution for the arrogant also explores Ganesa’s ea-
pacity to insert the expected order of things. The humble couple
had worshipped Ganesa without thought uf reward. but vals out
ot true devotivn, and were wilhag lo receive any ent from fis
hand, even one of filth. To the mech couple who thought thes
could manipulate Cragesa’s rituals to praduce material reward
Ganesa gave them the “reward” the poor caupte has onginaily
expected to find. In thi story Gagesa’s dirt manifests ityelt as
both goid and its opposite

Ganesa’s power to help the undergog and embarrass the
powerful by making unexpected nocturnal visits iy al ulus:
trated ino a story from the Mahats, a scheduled caste of
sweepers in Maharashtra

A Mabae [aceper| south named Ganapan whe used to be one of
the gual over the Shana. Palace on Poons. was tar and cle
fant te Jook on One of the ladies ol the paige carned an in
Trigues with bin The misconduct was discovered. and the Peshwt
put the xustd to death The gbost ot the ded man hepl appeazag
te the prince io by decay, and seuld ene him no peace unlit Be
made an eth ob ibe Mabie an the tarm af the ged Garapat and
set her oup atthe Eastern cotrance to the palace where all «ould
deobers ime to the Manars name (MeKenee. pod

Thes stacy turns on the ideatity of name between the guard and
the po. both at whom stand at doomvays. The Mabar Ganapat

--- Page 183 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Rehgrous Themes 150
became involved in a forbidden sexual liaison with a Brahmin
woman at court and was killed for it. just as Gaoesa had lost his
head for being too close to Parvati in a potentially incestuous and
likewise-forbidden relauonship The Mahar Ganapati haunted his
murderer until he was resuscitated. as ul were. in the form of an
image of the deity Gapapate at the threshold, just as his divine
counterpart received a new torm from a repentant Siva and a place
of privilege at the gateway of the gods. The story further tlustrates
Ganesa’s protean character. in that be removes and places obsta-
cles. regardless of the social. pubtical, or religious status of the
people involved. He operates in the same way in the divine world
(as we have seen), placing and removing obstacles for gods and
demons alike according to the sttuation and his own fantasy Its
likely the myth may also be un etiological myth about the worstip
of a Ganapati image by Mahars in service in the Peshwa’s palace
Here, asin the story of Divodasa, where he sppears in an image
established by another Jow-caste devotee. a barber, Ganeda breaks
through conventional religious hierarchies

The theme of obstacles and tncks appears in the story about
the compositien uf (he Mafidbhdrata Une tale speaks of how
Ganesa helped the poct Vyasa to put the massive oral epic into
wating. Vyasa called on Gangsa at the outset of writing the text
to grant the new undertaking an auspicious conclusion

Vyasa said. “Leader of the ganas, be the sombe of the Bharata
that | have formed in my mind ard am now about lo recite

When Vighnesa heard this. he replied. “fe my pen docs nob stop.

voting fora mamenl. thea Pwil Sc your seabe "Vaasa snd lo

the god. “Ef there es anything you do not ube rstand. cone ent
ing Ganess signthed his agreement by repeating the syllue
om”. Nyasa began to recite and ayo divenier he Katt the kevts
of the texts close together (MIB s gp or apes tors uth of

Mbh 1862 tt 68-74)

By scholarly conseasus the tale isa late interpolation inte: (hes
important text that otheraise makes noo sienittcant mentan of
Ganesa in the rest of its massive corpus Phas fact avcaunts tos
why the editors of the critical cuilion consigned the story lo aa
appendhx to the appendix of the text Indeed. thy Ganesa W vist
story may reflect an attempt to gel Ganesa inte the epic of which
it is said anything that is not included within it does not exist: The

--- Page 184 ---
1§2 GANFSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
slory is well known to Hindu audiences. however, who generally
tegard it as part of the epic, as did the 1862 cdition of the
Mahabhérata ‘The story illustrates (he obstacles or “knots” in-
volved in the transmission from an oral to a written medium The
condition imposed by Ganesa for serving as Vyasa s scribe is that
he must never stop wrung. a condition that places the poct under
no small amount ot pressure in return, Vyasa makes Ganesa
promise that he will stap writing when there is something he docs
not comprehend ‘This gives Vyasa time io his seettabon to keep:
slightly ahead ot his divine secretary bs throwing consaluted sya

tactical constructions ur dhffcult: philosophical arguments -
vkaots” —in his was The act of write. the (ansformatian fram
face-lo-tace oral commumeation to unmediated text. is itself a
threshold actiaity When the reenter diappears tato the 1c as its
author. the “knots” appear, for the text aniy transmits the words

it cannot consey the subtle but essential gesture and imtonatans
that the speaker uses in communicating the text Vaasa kat
eighty-crght hundred koots into the tev. sven the wise and clever
Ganesa had to ponder over their meaning betare he cowmd write
them down and thereby claim to usderstand them As Lord at
Beginnings and Obstacles. Ganosa ean appropriate sre This
MOLY appears at the very Pegiaming of the cpr The abel writiog
isa mattcr of making a beymnnineg, to bong word and sense into
form. a form that tikes on a his et i own once it leaves the pen
obits author As the text takes an an identity and life af st own
apart from the author, 1 initiates ambiguity and creates opstacles
fo us understanding Muchos gamed un the wrting of tests. the
text becames available an amare dunitle way then tt aauld at
depended solely on the cectation of the poet But seaething is
lost as well The reat as spoken word. wath its animadest trom the
vital breath of the poet and the ummediies ef response between
poet and audicnce becomes disembodied and romed Ubes transe

fon ws evoked by the sembotat the knot Che celipenstip be
tween Vyasa and Ganesa inverts the expected role regarding au

thorship of sacred texts: Csuaily ity the god or divine sage who
recites and the human disciple who hears and secords the sacred
speech Here the human poct dictates to the duine scribe, and
they spar with cach other ina hanle of wits: Ve asa teving to stay
ahead of Ganesa, who will only wate so long as ¥ yasa does not
stop talking, Ganexa attempting to befuddle Vasa as he recites

--- Page 185 ---
Ritual, Puychological, and Religious Themes 192
under the pressure of Ganesa’s nonstop pen. As in many other
contexts having to do with thresholds and beginnings, here
Ganesa both thwarts and faciitates Vyasa’s efforts. The epic does
get written down, its sacred words preserved, but the teat is tull
of “knots” that impede mere mortals as they struggle to fathom
tts meanings.

tf Ganesa makes it posable for Vyasa to put the Mahabharata
into weiting. “knots” and all. itis bis forgetung tu invoke Ganesa
that leads to the composition of another text, the Gartesa Purdns
which ts important for the sectarsin Gagapatya tradition Whale
narrating the Gdnesa Purana to King Somakanta, the sage Bhyzu
tells why the text was composed in the Brst place

Vyasa divided the original siagle Veda into four, and then ane
deitook io write the Puranas in orders to clanty then meaning But
ovtof pade he failed to begin any of the serves with the worship:
of Ganesa. and 20 his memory left hum at certain points: When be
could nut understand why he dost his memory, Bethea caploined
to him that it was because he had neglected Ganesa Then Vyasa
wanted to know more aboul Ganesa and so Brahmas instructed

him (GP 1 10 2-9)

Asin the other stones dealing with the misfortunes attending
those who neglect Ganesa, here Vyasa’s pocuic lapses are a con:
sequence of his pride and his forgetting to worship the Lard ot
Obstacles. Because Vyasa forgot tis nites, Ganesa placed a
“knot” of another sortin Vyasa’s recitations Kaots and forget:
tings are forms of disappearance of the text, things nussing trom
or obscuring the text's words and meanings As such. Urey be
come obstacles to the communication of the text and thearnt the
text's purpose In the case of the Mahabharati story, Vyasa re:
members Ganesa and includes hun when he undertakes to write
down the epic: but as a consequence of the agreement they make
before the beginning, the epic contains ity own adstacies In the
story about the composition of the Ganesa Purana. Vyasa s ne:
glect of Ganesa prevents the tet boing understandable. tren
being untangled, and requires that the Purana pe taught by
Brahma to unravel the “knots” of forgetting in the prestous
texts

In looking al these myths of obstacles. we see that the patters
of Gagesa’s actions Is fluid: he places obstacles lo pods. demons,

--- Page 186 ---
154 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
and humans; he also removes them. At the same time he es the
obstacle who must be gotten past if one is Co possess the prize. By
beheading Gayesga, Siva gets past him to possess Parvati, the
devotee gets past by remembering him at the threshold, Vyasa
uses poctic sleights of hand to slip by his scrbe’s relentless trans-
cribing, and so on,

In many of the myths we have seen Ganesa’s movements are
full of surprise and humor In these respects he resembles the
figure of the trickster. In his pioneering study of the tnckster
figure in the mythologies of North American Jadians. Paul Radin
offers his summary definition of this elustwe charactes:

Trickster 18 atone and the same time creator and destrover. giver

and negator, he who dupes others, and who ts aleays duped bin.

self He wills nothing consciously At all times he as constrained to
behave as he does fram impulses over which he has ne control He
knows nether good nor evil yet he rs respoosible for both He
possesses no values, moral of Sosa! wat Ibe meses OF hes pass:ons
and appetiies, yet Urough his aeGens all values came inte
bong. Trickster hiasclf. 6 oot inircquentl ieantied «uh
specie ammals such as raven ovate, hare, spider, hut these
animals ase valy secondanls to 3¢ equated with concecte amuma’s

Bastcaliy he possesses no well-defined and fred tora he as

pamanily an inchoate being of undetermined proporhons. a figure

foreshadowing the shupe of man (pp 1-3)

There are a number of tackster clement. in the character of
Ganesa he creiles and destroys. fe dupes others, and he os
associated with animab—the elephant and tat be bas a soraciaus
appette. fis bodily form backs cheor detaiben, and his bodily
form undergoes redehniion throught beheading and detusking
Radin identifies as ong of the traits af the tnckster a detachable
penis he cannes around ina bow (pp tS 1g) Leach sees this
characterptic as Ganesas closest link to the tackster Ganesa’s
broken tusk and severed head with the long flace traak are the
clearest signals of his sexual ambiguity, he placing and removing
obstacles indicates his moral and behavioral embuvalence (p. 82)

These simikines are compelhug. and Ganesa as the child.
theriamorph, placer and remover of obstacles dacs move about
in his myths wath ath the unpredictableness of the trickster Yet,
we should be cautious in labeling Ganeda as a Hindu incarnation
of the tickster hgure There are important dissimilarities as well,

--- Page 187 ---
Ritual, Psychological, and Religious Themes $5
and the distinction between being a trickster and simply mischiev-
ous is useful In the trickster myths, based on Radin’s sample of
North American Indian tales, the world and values come imto
being in spite of the trickster’s haphazard actions Ip the case of
Ganesa, there is more of a method to his actions and a location
from which be acts, namely. the threshold Gagesa plays a crucial
tole in the scheme of things. Standing at the threshold, tke the
keeper of the locks on the river. he serves to regulate the How of
power according to the needs of the cosmos as a whole, When
the gods are tov powerful, as when they get afl the nectar from
the churning. Ganesa turns it inte porson When hurnans become
arrogant in their ritual privilege. as in the story of the gold aad
excrement. Ganesa turns the tables When gods or humans or
demons are unfairly victimized. he comes to their wd. As the one
who himself was an obstacle to Siva and fost his head for at he as.
supremely qualified ta be in the business of obstacles at the only
vantage point fram stich to manipulate them, in the margins
where (he power and possibitties as well as the dangers ie Gen-
crally speaking. ticksters tend to be small and apparently insig-
nificant creatures, although ‘ular and outrageous Ganesa’s
childlike qualities suggest a smaltogss of stature in relation to his
Parents. hut brs cdephannine torm also evokes roa) power and
authorily There are things tacksters tend to do that Gatesa does
not do he dors not mock rituals and myths nor does he undo his
own fugic. Ae docs not act in ways that defy imterpretanon fo
evaltating the appropriateness of Che trickster model as applied
to Ganesa, we should say that Ganesa mitkes use oF wit, Ligks
and surprises in hes actions, that he ts mischiesous at times and
that he sa “cousin” ef the North Amenvaa Indian trickster
But.oa the contest of Hindu mythology where all the gods make
use of disguises and sleiphts of hand trom nme to time. all are te
some extent ticksters, We must resist Che lempiution simply ta
graft the UUe of trickster onto Ganesa

Although we should resist scermy Ganesa sumpty os a Eling
trickster hgure. he ws clearly ¢ protean. Imaal chopra teen many
situations. His body has removable parts anus seit camposity
of other previous forms: vaksa. child. and elephant He stands ra
the himinal point of crossing or the intersection between ie orders
of space and powcr. His sexuality comiins ambiguous. 4s his rela
tionship with his mother and father, tis detachable tusk phallus,

--- Page 188 ---
156 GANESA LORD OF OBSTACLES, LOKD OF BEGINNINGS
and his similarities to eunuchs all suggest. He remains heroic and
“manly” in his capacity to destroy demons although this masculin-
ty frequently ts overshadowed by his more usual mode of over-
coming his opponents by outwithing rather than simply smashing
them As the keeper of the gate and the Lord of Obstackes, he bas
the power to bless and curse. to uccept and reyect the petuons of
others. In this respect he resembles another lamous gatekeeper.
St. Peter: not the sober and austere St Peter of the New Testa
ment and early Christian church. but the St. Peter of folktore. who
is. a rather devigus fellow (see Hynes and Steele) For all his pro-
tean dimensions. however, Ganesa is not infinitely changeable
There are things he clearly docs nat stand for He dogs aot stand
for sexiness or martial power, He ws not the embodiment of bound:
less mercy and self-sacritice of ascchic niger as ate some other
deites in the Hindu pantheon, Ganesa’s territory ts that of absta-
cles, Within that terrain he reveals and conceals bemvelt and bis
actions as he sces fit,

For the devotee the act of worstupping oa: remembering
Ganesa at the outset of undertakings is both a gesture of grat.
tude for hes protection and propitiatien tor his noniaterterence in
the successful completion of the undertaking The devotee’s
offering of coprous quantities of modakus both expresses un:
bounded generosity in fesponse fo Ganesa’s accomplished cr
anticipated aid and bribes him pot to obstruct thy desetee’s ful-
fillment of the desired goal

Ganesas tole as the Lord of Begtanmys and Obstacles illus:
Irates seme novons at acon imple in the Hindu tradi The
Sanskrit werd tor obstacle is vigdata. Chiesa i somenmes called
Vighnesa or dare [ie] ot obstacles [ragima| The word vrghens iy
teeth a compound made up oot the prefix sa meanmp “oar,
asundce.” and gaa. a fer appeanng wh compound that means
“stoking wath. destroying. tem the coat haa. strikes Kell A
beeAna can by invthiay Chet presents. antesrupts. slverts, or ime
Pedes amvthing else Thus aim kind of resistance Every action ar
undertaking: is the the low ols river ar inhskog and exhaling a
breath Te has us “mature” coupe uf achon aecording to the
Agama ot ihe one pertorming it But, qust as at iver can be di
verted oe a rreath can be held. ats How thereby redirected. the
underbihing cin test ais from the course iptended by tts au.
thor Lhe diversion ot rmpedimeat os the actan’s vaghad The
forces that cone inte play in relation io a given action are com

--- Page 189 ---
Ritual. Psychological, and Religious Themes 157
Plex, many of them not known to the actor and some are appar-
ently circumstantial Hence in every action there 1s the kehhood
ot some form of resistance. The task of the actor ts not to elimi
hate the resistance (the vighna), for that i impossible, but to
attead to the task in such a way that ity potential to impede is
turned to the benefit of the actor. Iisa mattcr of overcoming
the opposition of action-resistence by including the cesstence in
the action, just as the sacrificer does when he offers toud to tie
demons or the devotce does in worshipping Ganesa The clual
gesture of paving homage lo Ganesa at the oulset of an undertak-
ing reminds the devotee that he does not act alone in the cosmos
and that his actions must fit into the larger scheme of things. By
enhsting Ganesa’s aid. the devotee acknowledres the imevitabihty
of obstruction, one’s own limited powers of control over the des-
tuny of the action, aad the necessity of including the power mber-
ent in the resistance—that is. Viehnesa. the deity residing within
the obstacle — as an ally in the undertaking. By assuming such a
posture al the outset of an action, recognizing and welcoming the
Tesistance to the act wahin the act itself. the devotee becomes
free te carry on wrth the undertaking with greates contence so
that the undertaking sail tulhlt ds gual Psychologically. the ama
ety of iniuating an action is dimimshed and ifs destiny becomes
ted to the power of the god The devotee proceeds in the beltcf
that he ay not alone. that ds individual action Ats harmoniously
within the larger framework of all actions overseen by Crates vy
ultimately benevolent presence Pherctery the devotee dues nut
feel as vulnerable as he nughtothcesise Only the you who has to
Power to place obstacles can he of any usc in removing obstacles
Time and ume again the texts stress that Gancsa ts accessiale by
means of offerings. marino. and ocher lors of remembringe
ths actions frequently appear to be contankvors But inrough
tis ambivalent movements. he resulats the How at divine aad
human power in the comteat cf ume and dure by putting down
or picking up obstacles cathe interest ot mvatasning an ote
mately harmonious cosmologiead valance He remsins aviniable
to all. He belongs only to himself

The obstacle 1s tound at the bouadanes of me and space
temporally at the bepinaing. spall atthe dhrespuad hese are
the points of entry—the Jucr ot taghest risk and possibility
where tajectones of acon headed toward teuthud fesatatint oan
be shifted off course by the shghtest niual or moral ector These

--- Page 190 ---
158 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS.
temporal and spatial thresholds draw much of their symbolic rich
hess by association with the mythologies of shrines The paradox
of the shrine as that the deity wants ta keep the devotce ata
distance, guarded from intrusions by impure of unprepared dis-
ciples. just as the king wants his privacy protected tram every
supplicant and hanger-on secking 4 favor Ganesa’s task. he that
of other doorkeeper tgures in Hindu mythology. is to keep the
intruders out, as he does with the devolegs at Somanatha, de-
mons, und even Sia fimselt. On the other hand the deny wrest
be interrupted His or her divine status derives in large part from
the honor accorded the deity by the devotee Where would the
deity be were the devotee nat there to sing ats prawes’ So the
boundary between the protane world uné the savred enclosure of
the shrine surrounding the deity must be breached for divine and
human persons to live out their respective celegious destintes The
devotee must be humbled in the process. broken by dosing his
head. bis ego. and bis abachment to false understandings of real:
Hy os the price to be paid fer totamacy with the deus The deor
keeper embodies this paradyy of the string. tor he bimself is
paradoxical and plays a crucial mediatoral cole In the case ot
Ganesa. bis physical form ns an insention, made up fram other
creatures, so that he mediates between the reais of Deasts and
gods and all that hes between He mediates bebween his scene
father and his mother eager tor domestic fite and ds resands He
isa son but ina peculni sorted way Brom hes tather he dees hes
ascete tendencies, set be remysias an eternal child close to his
mother and her shones. either in agtual location ae in his loag:
ings Ganesan inediates between the cosmic torces a the ssmbor
of the obstacle demonstittes, torees that cin lead fo happiness
[sukha} or muses [dutAhal Son, chiid. thenomarph, door:
keeper. obstacle placer and remover. farmedahle and fearsome
mischievous sad tigkstemsh. Ganesa canneets muliple worlds
while mamntaming them as decrete cntites His role inthe Hada
mythological and cosmologiead scheme ob things 1s crmcsl He as
the pod of all seasons, wort of attention belore all others.

The figure of Ganesa gives civthic and iconographic form toa
fundamental insight sbout the nature ob actin. the realm over
which Ganesa rules ss the creator and remover of obstacles. In
commencing an act cach person brings to that undertaking a
complex set of Motivatans. awarenesses, desites--all the latent

--- Page 191 ---
Ritual, Psychological. and Religious Themes 19
and manifest tendencies of which he oF she 4s neither fully aware
hor totally in control. This accummulated karmic inheritance
makes up a screen or hiter through which one books in imagining
an act and ts fruits: Therefore say action is inevitably unpredict-
able, vulnerable as to its ortgins. motives, and consequences An
act is irreversible. set ity consequences can be a reversal of that
which was intended when the act was undertaken. The Hindu
mythological tradition repeated!) bears witness to the expected
reversals taking place in any action, whether undertaken by
deity, sage. mortal. anrmal, or demon.

In seeking Ganesa’s support at the moment of passing over the
threshold of an undertaking. in both tume and space, the devotee
acknowledges--rituatly and devotonally- that hy ar her under-
takings are pervaded by vulacrability One cannot act alone: the
forces and consequences of an act inevitably. and appropnately.
somehow encompass all the cusmos HH moves outin all directions of
time and space. lke the mpples from the pebble thrown into a quiet
pond, Within the realm of samisdra alls contingent “This recognie
thon should lead not to despair, but to wisdom, to a sagaciaus asyeny-
ment of one’s own cosmological predicament and uUsopportuaiies
Such a moment ot recognition rs sought when the devotee worships
Ganesa as the lord af wisdom and obstacles: Ganesa---the one who
has been broken and restored, the one reyccted by his father and
returned to him, the dweller on the houndary where all beings are
vulnerable- can spprecile the realvation that bongs the devotee
to worship him) Ganesa’s wisdom i notso much the transcoadenta
metaphysical wisdorn taught by the Cpaniyady aul by Vedanta phi
losophy as itis practical wisdom-— prudence cleverness, wit. play-
fulness. and sagacity that mavasates onc successfully through the
perilous waters of the ocean of vemvara In aysistung or Keading Hy
devotees through these charlless expanses, as his nume Minavatka
(leader’) suggests. Ganesa lends power and amilints to the io
tractable process of action aad consequence Except lar thoy rela
tively few Hindus who are bis sectarian devotees Gans nots
deity of transcendental realization - thatis Saas cole Instead he
rules the concrete world of action and is trails. success ard fadure,
triumph and pain He ws the pod with fas tect planted heel on the
ground. in the midstot the world, rad as olable at the dows, just as
you step into the reality of a world made vivid by tie shrae and ats
rituals

--- Page 192 ---
4
Pa . ’ ¢

The Worship of Ganesa
In our evptorations of Gaunesa thus far. we have concentrated on
mvthology ay the context in wlich to eet acquainted with this
remarkable deity With this narcitis contest now sketched. it
can serve ay the baskground lor the next sisge Of oun inquin AL
this point tos appropriate to caisk The guestens How de Hindus
worship Ganesa? What are the igor rituals and settings by
which Hindus express there attection tor Ganesa? To thes chapter
we shall take a close took al Que mater forms af religions res
Sponse to Gaines oi prgite ang pubic settings: The fest as
worship perlormed tbe hore. oc pid. Uhe sccoad ts the annual
pubhe festival in the chets’s honer or uisava

Intormanon on the werstip ot Gane can be found in as
maay chtfecent phives as tis images Ritual rastructians are lo-
cated in some et the SansQat Puroaas embedded in and around
the myths Vhese instructions usually collect the patterns of Brah
man prachee wad semeumes Tantei tradivens In coatempo
foun Jada ntual manitals as be purchased uv imexpensive paper
editons thal offer instnaghons tor worshipping Gagesa witb or
without the ad ot a Brahmin prest| There is comiderable late
tide in permissible ind recommended patterns ef worship. de-
pendbag on the means desags ec the tradifions of the worship

the:

--- Page 193 ---
The Worship of Ganesa 160
per and his family. Yet, one has to look beyond the ritual texts
fo gain an understanding of the devonion Hindus express for
Ganega An obvious place to look os at the actual performance
of the rues and forms of deveuon Because patterns of worship
vary from one caste group, region, and lamily to another, it has
not been possible for me ta observe the full range of ritual
practices to Gagesa, so the following discussion of worship will
be limited to research conducted primarily among the Brahmin
community in the central cegion of Maharashtra, an area called
the Desa, in the cites of Abmadnagar and Pune. Gagesa enjoys
considerable popularity in this part of Maharashtra A few bref
side-glances will be taken al the mtual practices among interme-
diate castes in Maharashtra and Karnataka (for the latter draw:
ing on the fichd research of Suzanne Hanchett) The focus of
our inquiry into ritual will be that of contemporary practice. In
the foltowing chapter we shall eaplore the history of the sectar-
jan tradition of devonon to Ganesa in Maharashtra and the
antecedents to the contgmporary public testval

As vath other dermis in Hinduism, there are many contexts for
the worshep of Ganesa Acts of prsate prever and meditation.
communal singing of desotiungl songs. calendrical nites and vows,
Pilgrimages to sacred shines. and the annual public festwal to
Ganesa together make up the whole fabric of means ov which
Hindus articulate thei telanenstip to him) The approach ft have
adopted is threefald. to desenibe the mayor ceremomtes in there
social contests. ta analyze exegetical thy iMporLaNl svabals
gestures. and ntual transacbons thal Hendus penne te take
place between them and Ganesa. amd tosses the sencal and
tehgious coles of these patterns ard vyetes at worship iu the
larger configuration of Hinduism ity Maharashtrian coatest
The center of my forus will coma the ileal thease bees and
their internal textures of meaning

Reeendy a great deal of eacelleot research his Boon tece that
focuses on how rituals and festival mm indus general sense as
dramatic expressions of social processes, Cle bomtorcag: the
prevailing soural structure by inveruie’ Cpe fodigals This ailows.
for the release of accumulated tensions and py telowsd by the
reassertion of the social structure’s fundamentil auttonty tf
Babb; Hanchett, Marnott, Ostart. Sundar proposes cat be scent
at work in the case of Ganesa and mis worst My pent al

--- Page 194 ---
162 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BFGINNINGS
departure and goal here lic in a somewhat different direction My
grounding methodological assumpuon 1s that religious practices
must be understood on their own terms. they have their own
internal logic and coherence. Rehigivus actions conshitute there
own world of assumptions. purposes. expectations, and satisfac-
tions on the part of those who perform them These religious
actions must be seen in relation to the claims thes make for
themselves (their own ideology) rather than secn simply as win-
dow dressing for a more fundamental reality of a social or pohu-
cal nature—a reality the actors ate not aware of but which the
observer has access to by means of models drawn from the social
sciences. Although such an approach might seem an obvious
choice for a histonan of rehgions. other receat studies under
taken by anthropologists raise similar methodvlog:cul quesbons
For example. in his analysis of the indigenous ideclogs of the
Bengali festwals of Durgapija and Siva-gayan, Akos Ootor re-
sponds to the “orthodow” tradition of anthrupologinal analysis
Mx aim is to study the festivals themyelves. without posinag uns
ditechon from society to religzon the question ts what these
calcgoniey ate io indigenous cullural terms Thus we are led to the
ideologies ot the festival participants. and descad to the system of
meanings that ideologies and actions express. In the testy als them:
selves we see souety realized tn a certain way thal may not be the
same as “caste.” “kinship.” ot “poles 7 FOstor po
For the purposes of this study. we shall lock at Hindus on
those occasions on which they devote ther whale energies to
Gauyess through words. pestures. actions. moods. and assump:
trons so that we mas cathh a glimpse ot them ur the midst of that
world, whatever other worlds af caste, society. and politics thes
may also hive in during these and other umes As Ostor argues
festivals are a soul and svmbohe process in then own agbt. to
be understood interes of thers own rides gad assumpuons
Gagesa as otten sad to be the most popular deity in the
Hindu pantheon He enjoys carly universal adoration because
he ws the ene who removes obstacles from new undertakings,
Protects warshippers, and provides access to the other gods and
goddesses: Betore commencing acts of formal worship, lite-cycle
eeoremynes, pilgamapes and other journeys. courses of study.
openings of new businesses, or simply beginning the routines of

--- Page 195 ---
}

The Worship of Ganesa 163
the day. Ganesa 1s to be honored with varying degrees ot clabo-
tation—from the bref mantra, “Om sri ganesdva namah
(“Homage to Lord Gagesa"), to the much longer prayers in
vernacular languages of Sansknt. such as the Sri Gayapat
Atharvasirsa, a Sanskrit Upanisad celebrating Ganesa as the em-
bodiment of the ulumate brahman (sce Appendix). What-
ever other deny a Hindu may worship, whether as part of his
househatd shrine [kudadevard|. as the guardian of the village
lerdmadevara]. or as that god or goddess who has the place of
special honor in the devotce’s life [tsfadevaia]. Ganesa is the one
to be worshipped first. He stands at the doorway and allows the
devotee access to the other deities and whatever blessing may
flow from them) Conseguently, Ganesa looms large in Hindu
worship, whatever devonon may be paid to other deities
Among orthodox Brahmins of the Smarta tradition, popularized
by the mnth-century philosopher, Sankara, Ganesa takes his
place among the fivefold divinity, the puricdyatana, along with
Siva. Vigpu, Surya. and Devi. to be worshipped 10 the house:
hold shrine on specified occasions

Giagesa’s image may be scen almost everywhere in India, ina
vanety of forms He may appear, like his father. as a rough stone
covered with red paint located neas the boundanes of a village oF
the intersechon of roads He may be found atop doorways ot
homes and shops. in niches at the thresholds ol temples, just
inside the doorways but before the devatce reaches the dwelling
place of the regnant deity of the shrine Framed copies of inex
pensive lithographs adorn shops and tea stalls, alone wath pie
tures of other demes the propaetor and tis chentele may seacr
ate Schoolchildren frequently write the Ganesa manta at the lop
of their examination papers. and books on rehmous subsesty
often include the same mantra al the lop of the ttle page. alony
with a drawing of Ganesa’s imape In most houschokdls an imap.
of Ganesa may be found on the southern side of the Cimily alon
protecting the other gods of the houschold from mguspricus
influences emanating from the dangerous south, the ede of
demons (see Kane. vol 2.2. p 71), Dus. pp zoe is)

Ganesa’s crucial and pivotal location, both spatially and tert
porally at the beginnings, assures hima welcome and a gesture ut
homage In contrast to this pattern of adoration, however. rele
tively few Hindus regard Ganesa as thor primary deity of desae

--- Page 196 ---
|

16g GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
tion [ofadevaid]. and the sectanan stde of Ganesa’s worship re-
mains. in Bhandarkar’s phrase, a “minor religious system” (pp
147-49) Instead most Hindus focus their altentvion on one of the
forms of Vignu. such as Krsna. Rama. Hanuman. Sia. or Devi
or on one of the myriad regional and local deities. deihes that in
Maharashtra include Vit{hala, Dattatreva, Bhavani. and Khao-
doba There is no contradiction in viewing Ganesa as the embod:
ment of the ultimate reality [brahmen} in the context of hononng
him at the outset of an undertaking but not worshipping him as
the center of one’s religious affecuons and obhgations at ather
umes.

Gagesa’s threshold location and patterns of action as the re
mover of obstacles have led poets and devatees fo compose in-
vocatory prayers, found appropriately at the beginnings of texts
or dramas, thal celebrate the elephantdord’s auspicious torm and
call on tim to tend his benevolent presence and grant success to
what is to tollow. The teath-century poet Somadesa, author of
the Kathdsaritsdgura (fhe Occan of Story). a collection ut fanedul
ties, invokes Ganess in his form as a daacer to protect the
hearers of the tales from obstacles as they listen

Muy Ganesan the adsanemg mht as be dances his temustucus

dance with hoy trunk cused up and making 4: whothag soung cnt

spraving forth lybt and nourishment te the shay pesest yee

ORSS tog 1

Max Goines whe throws ag bis teu in pas ireund enh ss

Cem inh sagen et bees ithy a teach pillar cesgred wath tetters

cteeted "o aimagnye the destruction of obstacles pretest van.

(RSS 68 3)

We nonor Games wh disperses clouds of otstucles as me Lins

wa WHEN Ae Mappeap etn. Ibe clods ef tees inal ty Treen ms

Iruna (RSS f1a 3)

Phe amazes of Ganesa as the owilight dancer, the trumphal
palar evoking the fate and as Lanaing away bees all porat te has
lose asscciation with the sambols of his tather whom he serves

fo Mubocishtra the most poputsr devotional sony [dear] to
Ganesa ois altebuted to the seseatcenth-contury Vargnava Brahe
te sgint Ramadasa. asserted by some scholars ta be the precep
tor of Sian. the founder of the Maratha empire and the “father”
of comtempotan: Mahsrashtta, The song viidly evokes Ganesa’s

--- Page 197 ---
The Worship of Ganeta 165
appearance and conveys the experience of darsene or the auspi-
cious presence of the deity transmitted through the medium of
sight.

Maker of happiness, remover of miseries, whose grace extends
love to us. and ducs not leave a trace of obstacle remaining. you
have a Javer of red lead around sour whole body and a necklace of
pearls shines brightly around your neck

Viclony t spa. victory to seu, © god of auspreious form AL
sour sight [darsane] all desires ob the mind are fulfilled

O son of Gaur. sau have a jewel studded ornament, cuntment
of sandalwood: paste, red powder and saftran, and a diamond:
tnlasd crown They all look Reaurtiludon you Anklets with taking
bells make a jnghag sound around sour fect

Victory to you, ete

You have «lerge behy sou wears yelles lh garment you are
Prascd by Sea [the demturee) Your tana wy strargat sous tusk
bent © tireeesed one This Jesotee of Rama watts far you 1
he home O god who ay revered by el the great gads, be gracious
Tous iad omes of difneudty and protec us in times et salamaty

Vielory to you. cto (Bhat. seat top an
Other wmvecutions ideauhy Gunesa os the daine Puruya. the

embodiment of the cosmos the underworkds are his feet the
continents are hes thighs. and the sacred pilgrimage comlen ate
contained an his belly CEP Bt ate ts) The adentheanen ot
Ganesa with the Vedio Pucusa, the divine pemons whose sac
ficed parts make up (he universe, becomes an important theme in
the mites of instating the image of Ganesa on the tamily altar
during the domestic worship (as we shall see)

A somewhat ditferest and more claborste set of homolartes is
advanced in a Jong invocabod to Ganesa by the thirtcenth:
century Maharashtrian poet saint. Jnunudesa Cor Jnenessata) in
his Jnanesvari, a commentary on the Bhagavad Gaia that oxtals
devotion to god and teaches the path of liberation through de
votion leading to knowledee [piureal Jnanessata Begins his text
with a panegyne to Ganesa, ideatitvine thy clephsot taced lord
with the totality of sacred tevty and knowledre

The Vedas in thet perfecuon are as the beautitur image of the
god, of which the Hiwless words are the resplendent badly

--- Page 198 ---
166 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS

‘The Smritis are the himbs thereof. the marking of the verses
shows ther structure, and in the meaning les the veritable tea:
sure-house of beauty.

The exghicen Puranas are the rien ornaments, and the theories
propounded in them are the gems. tor which the rhythmic stile
provides the settings

The fine metrical form is his many coloured garment of which
the composition es the fine shining texture

So the epic poems and dramas in ul. cod with debeht, ate ay
jrngling bells giving out the music of the sense

The various principtes carefully expounded in them and the spt-
ness Of the world expressing them appear as precious yoweds set in
the bell

The wisdom of Vyas and the others is the warsteloth, is tassled
end gleaming with punty

The ix systems of philosophy ate the sy acm, und the diferent
theanes propounded an them are the sae weapens Belt my his
hands.

The ant of reasoniig is the hathet logic the gead tne Vedinta
philosophy oy the Juscrous sweeimeat [held in thy hand!

{ro one hand ss hetd the broken tusk symboirzing the rejection of
the teachings al the Buddha, reluted Sy the Vedants comment.nes

Then the dovtcne of the Universal Spiatins the lotus tke band ot
Dlesang. the establishment of role is the Ram ob easstranes

Pure discriminabon the stnght tran wherein daily the
highest jay of supreme bhss

Impartial descusion nthe pure white tusk 'Gunesn the
small cved elephant god. remover of obstacles. [representing the
subtle eve of wodom.|

Bregand the two svstemts ts his cuts, and the aves thay ceny oct
his temples} as the sages whe tists of the neste at thes own
teaching

The themes of duality and nonduahty come together onthe
temples of his eh phant head as lustrous corals

The Trageint flowers adormeg thy ctowalat toy head are the ten
Upamshads. contain ia tull the bones ef know ledec

The A ef the Onis the legs Uo tne Lite belly and the Stas
the great rele af the head

When these three ate united. the sired werd ny lonned
Through the grace of my preceptor, P salute Cais the primal cause
ob all bomg. the Our (aueescue, Pradhan trans t-201
fo thy len io wien prayer. Jddneseara cally forth the ch

siuat omagery at “sccimp™ the whole tradition of sacted text,

--- Page 199 ---
The Worship of Ganeta 167
poetic meter. philosophical wisdom, refutation of heresy. and
religion itself as the “form™ of Gagesa. Written and spoken
word, religious discourse itself, has its visual, physical form
{riipa] m Ganesa’s conte appearance As a metaphorical device
and a theological athrmation, this invocation identifies Ganesa
wath the totahty of the Advaita Vedantic vision of brahman as
Sarciu-dnanda, being-consciousness-bhss, for Inanesvara. even
though he himself was a devotee of Kryna. This invocation mitkes
only oblique reference to the myths of Ganesa. but it presumes
famiharity with them and redirects their meaning trom the narra:
tive to the metaphorical level) The broken tusk becomes the
weapon used to defeat the influence of the Buddhist heresy
rather than the one Ganesa used to destroy the deman adversary
he transformed into his rat vehicle The setting for the defeat ot
the opponent ts not the held of bloody combat but the field at
Unscoune and argument in which the opponcat is defeated by
Persuasion rather than by force of arms The overwhelming im-
pression conveved by the invocatian is visual turame teat. ward,
and intelicctual tradition into 4 farm. an omaec. thal can be div.
closed by the deity and apprehended by the devotee In this way
the words of the invecauon draw out the visual expenence ot
darsana, the susprious self-disclosure of the deity through its
visual form
Moments of Danger and Power
Besides these invecutional pravers und songs, to be rected: ac.
cording to one’s inchaations, Guanes t reeeives specni) worship: ot
fixed times gunine the Hindu rebpous sear Bach lunanieeatk ot
the yearns dividee into two parts abriphh Rall [adtaped sa] when
the moon waxes and a dark butt pAratapad sa] when tig mood
wanes The bright hall bongs with at ascot and auspremusiess
and Hindus regard it asa more appropriate lieie te besa nets
undertakings in the conhdencs that ibuy wall prosper Une dati
haf is angusprcious. atime ot decline when the possiiitigy ol
chaos and failure are greater and new proicets are to be weeded
The fourth day of the dark ball of cach month called
samkastacuturth? (dangerous fourth) Tor 4 day when itis pare 4°
ucularly inauspicrous to begin any dew undertaking A vow

--- Page 200 ---
168 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
[¥vata] to worship Gapesa on this day during each dark half of the
month may be performed in the hope of averting difficulties and
avoiding obstack’s. Such a vow includes offering modukas and
other foods to Ganesa. fasting. worship. feeding one’s preceptor
or, traditionally, twenty-one Brahmuns. A myth associdted with
this vow says that Siva was able to defeat the wicked demon
Taraka on this day because he had worshipped Ganesa belore
going into battle (Kane. sal §'. p 436. see abko Ghusse pp ou
too, Underhill. p. 60). The observance of santhastacaturthi as a
day of concentrated imauspicious power by worshipping Gancsa
with fasting—food may be caten only after the rood doses in the
evening—and ather acts of devotion points to the ambu aleage ot
the god’s character as one that both creates and removes obsta-
cles. As the creator of obstacles, which he dues especially in his
form as Vinayaka. he must be proprnited 1a order lor worship:
Pers to avert calamity —yust as one would gue the demons feod
to sanate them and thus distract them wade the performance of
the sacrifice of other sacred rite as Gikiag place. thereby to keep
the demons from stealing food intended ton the gods One diso
surships Oaaesa on this inauspicious day begause he ws the one
empowered to overcome obstacles, to render the time thats by
Mature inauspicious Powerless to harm the desaree The bas
ritual posture the devatee takes is ene of sceking proto tien by
eeing devenon to the deity through etlerngs of taod sell
Testeaint, and praise. in turn the devotee reserves the bencnits of
Ganesw’s obstaclesorling power in the broydest contest. at hry
life

The fourth day oof the bight half of the morth ww called
Vindvekacatioth: (OGanesas tourth’? Un contrast to sanrkuas
facanerthi, this day generally reeds Ganesas positive silo. bis
Powers (0 Brant success in undertokuigs On thoy day itis pacieue
larly auspierous to start new: projects. ily mood a happy and
energetiy Qu this dav at cach lunar manth, Garesa usually re
ektves spect recagmiian in the darm of attesnes. prayers. and
songs Tn Mehargsbtra. the most important annual testsal boner:
ing Ganesa lakes place on the betavedacanerthi that tolls in the
myath of Bhadtapada (August September} [bas sometimes said
that this din is Ganesa’s birthdays, his day of ausproiaus begin
cings Ehiscon this day that his image 9s taken to the home to be
installed and worshipped on the family altar Although Bhadra-

--- Page 201 ---
The Worship of Ganesa 169
pada Vindyekacaturthi ts in general the most auspicious day asso-
ciated with Gianesa, as the day sacred for the commencement of
the festival and all that follows it. paradoxically itty also the must
inauspicious of days in ong respect. It is on this day Ganesa
cursed the moon because it laughed at him when he stumbicd and
spht open his belly, which was overstuffed with modakas received
from his devotees According to some versions of this story,
Ganesa not only cursed the moon fo waa and wane but abe
extended his curse to include all who looked at the moon on thiy
day. causing them to suffer from false accusations of theft made
against them during the coming sear. The reason for this associa:
fon between the calamity of false accusation and Ganesa’s cure
of the moon ts given m the myth of Kryga and the ssarantaka
(wish-fulfilling) jewel. The myth is attributed ta the Skanda
Purana and ts retold ay a kathd (sacted story) on the occasion uf
Ganesa's worship on the fourth of Bhadcapada (Vitavakacatur-
thi) This complicated story is an important nyth of Ganesa in
Maharashtra. It is summarized as follows
Once there was e Vidase numed Sutrayt who. after performing
much asectionm to Suva, the sua, recenved a houwn Sutrapt asked
for the wamantaka jewel {4 prectous gem seid to yield erght heads
of pond per day and protect one from all dangers Irom around
Surya's neck. the yowed that yields all wealth and protects agsins:
all calumiues Avened sith this magnal gem. Sugapt then weet
to Dearka fKegga ys celestia! ents | and so darzled ds wohabitants that
they took him te be Apsna himself Fearing that Kesag enight lesen
of thes imposture Sutegpl gave the yewel to ty drother Prasen.:
Later Kryna. Sulzayt and Prnsctis weal bunting together, and Peas
sena was Aided by alien. who touk tho ewe Thea the hen i tus
was killed by a bea named Lambavants whe gave the jewel to hes
lovely daughter: When Krona aad Suteapt ecturacd tram hunting
Sutrant accused Krsna of killing his brother iid stealing the acl
Krona ectusned to the forest and ecelaime Fiber teem Jamo
vanta’s daughter and gave it back to Sutrapt
Then later. while Krona was away soother Vadis wamed Sut
adhanva, yealous of his magical possesuan, murdered Sutrapl sou
stole the jewel When Kryoa returned lo avenge bes murder sat
adhanva gave the yewct fo Akrura who took Ute Kast and uscd ts
wealth-hestowing: properties to build temples anid: sponser saver
fives, thus bringiny much good fortune tthe Gly cmd remo aag ity
disrases and suffering Meanwhile, Balarama, Kraay hecther

--- Page 202 ---
170 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
upon seeing Krsna’s return thought he had only come for the jewel
and accused him of being greedy. and so a quarrel broke out
between the two brothers

Distressed over these turns of events. Krsna went to Narada and
asked him why things bad been going so badly for him and why he
had suffered these tao Jake accuyations Narada replied that it was
because he had seen the moon on the might of Bhadrapada

Vinayakecaturthi, a cursed tight which causes people to expen:

ence the calamities of having false accusalians made about them

Clavadckar. pp 18-24) ce also Gupte tyiy. pp 81-66)

This entire myth of Krsna serves as a setring in which a second
myth is related in response to Kryna’s queyton as ta why it is
iNauspicious to look at the moon on the mght af Vinavakacanuer.
thi Narada’s reply both tells a story and gives instructions on
how Ganesa’s worship is to be performed

Once Brahma aftered worship to Ganesa and was rewarded with
the boon that nothing in his creation would be obstructed Luter

Ganess went to Candraluka (he word ruled over by the moor)

and stusibled and fell to the ground (and, according to some vaee

ants spulliag his bellyful of erodadacl Whee thy moon iaughed ot
fis musfortune the god cured tym Thal aw one woul ook Epon

The moon's vaio and arrogant Lace, and i thes did Ges would be

falsely accused by others and suffer the mofortune that would

follow: Waren the moon caulu ne ionger be seen by anvone the
world began te wane The gods and sages asked Brahma te ap:
proach Ganesa and ask bint te relent in Ais curse The gods began

to warship Ganes.c on the bright taurth |b sedvakacateeshi] and fast

on the dark toueth [seeekesta ater) Phe moon soehipped bim

alse and opologized for his cirogance: Pigased with thet desea,

Ganess relented in fis cup). moshifying i thal anky anvang seeing

Ihe moon on the Venvudacuterte of Rhodarapads would be vn.

Med wuk the chstacle of fale accusation He gave further sastcue

fons el how Re oe be be woeshiaped with dowers. food. stares

Setting ind feeding Branmins Claisadekor. pp tae te. sce abe

Gupte rata. pp 66 6%. Russland Dabs a. pp tw ao Kane

vel sa. pp ise gy

the Bhadrapada Veravedacanedie rs also called. an somy areas.
dagadh cauth (stone-throwing toucth’ 1, stemming from the prac
tice hat, of ane sees the moon on that nizht by accident ane
should throw stones onto his neighbors’ roof to avert any calam-
ity ansing fram the curse The reason for this ritual is obscure }

--- Page 203 ---
The Worship of Ganeta mm
Underhill suggests that it is a way to draw “abuse upon [oneself]
and so to avert the evil ” (p. 69} In the view of this text, it is
better to have a neighbor angry at you rather than god Another
possible interpretation of the story ts that the throwing of stones
in the ntual parallels the gods throwing away the syamantaka
stone in the myth, thus removing any suspicion of greed such as
Kona suffered in the story. This act of symbole renunciation as a
gesture to counteract the effects of an inadvertent glance at the
Moon on this most iMauspicious of mghts This complex set of
myths and ritual practices centering around the curse and the
moon further underlines the ambivalence of Ganesa On his mast
auspicious day of the year, he can act im ways that both create
calamity for his devotees. uf they sce the moon, and free them
from calamity. of they worstnp bun according to the practices set
forth in the story
Gagesa Caturthi, “Ganesa’s Fourth”
There are many contexts tor the worship af deities in the Hindu
tradinon. The most saciatly restricted level is that of the domestic
household where members united by tes of kinship assemble to
pay devotion to the deibes that are of particular significance to
the family The caste or caste groups another contest tor wor
ship m which communities united by bonds of caste gather to
honor a deity who ts of special importance to then “Theos latter
pattern is more representative of the silage Than the cts by the
city, especially wah regard to the worship of Gagesa. ios occupa
tronal groups—such as railway workers cigarette maken, and
others—and voluntary associations tormed in neqabarhoods,
around schools. and astound hbranies— that collect money fram
their constityenues to purchase an image of Ganesa and put on
various programs of relyous and cullucil imtcrest lar the popu
face In Marathi, ibese groups are called sarsagaetrk pucndads
(public groups) Phere are also occasions eben an eabre
village of several neighborhoods 10 the ote ior together for wor
ship or a festival

In the case of Maharashtra. religous observances in honor of
Gapesa occur over this entire spectrum In the crtigs and
villages. at the domestic level. particularly amoor Brehmins, the

--- Page 204 ---
172 GANFS§A: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
most important occasion for the worship of Ganesa is the piijd
performed on Ganesa Caturthi, the fourth day im the bright half
(Vindyakacaturth?) of the month of Bhadrapada (AugustSep-
tember). Although tms context for worship is the most socially
restricted, mtually iC 1s the most complex At the most inclusive
level of participation, there 1s the public festival to Ganesa in
which entire villages of a substanual proportion of a city’s popu-
lation may take part. The central ritual event im this context iy
the procession of images of Ganesa through the streets and their
immersion into an available body of water, be i the ocean. a
ver, or a tank, Worship in these contexts likes place ina
rough temporal sequence. The domestic ceremomes occur on
the day of Ganesu Canerthi with the installanon of the image on
the family altar as the centralevent: Atteabon then stilts to the
larger communities in which images of Ganesa are setup as the
foc tor sanous performances open to the public These inctude
singing of devonianal songs. dramatic performances. dance.
films, lectures, and speeches by various public ngures This con:
text represents the mayor innovation me the tesoval tradition
instituted by Bal Gangadhar {Lokamanya) [ak im the rhgos
(more will be said about this in Chapter Vi) These occasions
for worship in a community context take place oc successive
mighty over a period of ten divs until the fourteenth das of
Bhadrapada Avantacuturdast These lest two contests merge to
form the public processton of the images of (he deity na grand,
tumultuous -but curctully chercographed « cisplas of desotian,
play, tension. and socal cohesiveness Ths sequence es more
typed of the urban areas in the svillines the middie part ot the
Ctual process. the neaghborthoed vad soluataes assocaton cele:
bration. is less im evidence. and the evcle moves drestls from
the demustie settiag te the all silage procession

Domestic Worship

The central event in the worship ot Ganesa in the Hindu house:
hoid. ar least sniong Brahmins. ny the estabbshment ot a clas
fmage On The comestic allaa on Gavesa Cuturtia Ws endowed
wath lite. woetipped asad honored guesi in the home ter o
Peued oo trom one taco dass (varsing according to the family’s

--- Page 205 ---
The Worship of Ganesa 393
tradition), and it ts then taken out of the home and immersed ina
Rearby river or other water source where ut quickly dissolves
This immersion may be a tauly private atiair, of, as frequently is
the case both sn villages and im cites. it May comnade with the
public immersion procession.

Most simply stated the word pid means “worship.” It derives
from the Sanskrit meaning to adore os respect. Pijds are richly
and varied sets of religious expressions in honor ot 3s particular
deity or group of deities They torm one of the most pervasive
genres of ritual performance im the Hindu tradition Their ap-
pearance historically coincides roughly with the eclipse of Brah-
manic sacrifice and the rise of temple worship during the first few
centunes of the present era The lore on puyas is enormous:
whole sections of Puranas. rival manuais, and oral traditions
The status pajd enjoys is the baste turmal means ot relauenship
between Hindus and thew deities that is reflected in the claims
made for the beactt [piala. “trut’] that one derives from per-
forming such a ate of worship or tor listening to someone else
Perform itor trom financing its performance if one as nut able to
Participate

Piyds range in character fram relatively simple acts of private
devotion and bospitaltty to the deity by means af words. pestures,
and offerings to an image or symbol [ordre sigrafal thal in some
way “embodies” the realty of thar deus ‘They can be multe
leveled performances lasung days and cocompassing the pater
pation of legions of priests. families, and nerghborhoods. villages
and caties Puyas bring together the human and divine worlds at
specific times and places accarding to prearranged ullerances
actons, and ritual objects All these events ia turn rest ons
network of shared behets. assumpttons, myths, and Hnguiste and
gestural strategics In other words pans creaky or invake ther
own worlds of meaning

At the center of the phenomenon of pasa is transaction be
tween the worshippers and the deity or dembes The latter is
represented by some object, image, oF abst desgn in wan

| the deity ry understood to take hes or her place during the course
of the rte and for some specified time theseation Tbe worstupper
adopts the pasture of host. servant, and devotes [hrougs the
performance of pads, the deity and devotee move Coser loxether
into a spectal inumacy with one another the deus cecenes hom-

--- Page 206 ---
174 GANESA® LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
age and food; the worshipper gains spiritual and existential en-
hancement. The prevailing metaphors tor ptijd 1s that of hospital
ity and servitude. Both deity and devotee become dependent on
one another and receive benefits from ther mutual interaction

Ganesa’s paid shares many features common to pujds to other
deities. As a ntual process, pid draws on the symbolism of the
Brahmayic sacnticial tradition, with its promunent use of Vedic
mantras and the hymn to Purusa (RV to-go) that elaborates the
creation of the cosmos out of the sacrificed form of the divine
person, Prajapaty. Piya incorporates elements from traditions of
hospitality, highly valued an the Dharmasastras. the deity 1s
treated in a manner similar to the ways one would honor a guest
in the home, indeed, a royal guest. The piija also incorporates
aspects of ceremomes of installavon of images of deities in
temples as well as principles of internalization and manipulation
of the cosmos through the use of mantras topical of Tantne miual
tradstions (see Kane, vol 22. pp 7agtf ). There is great latitude
in the degrees of ritual elaboration in this puyd to Ganesa The
analysis undertaken here draws from two textual sources, both
pepular ntual manuals ueailable to anyone weshing ta: perform
the me (Javadekar, No Joshi) The pija as 1 saw at perfarmed
among Desastha Brahmins in Abmadnager was an elaborate per
formance, making use of the sersives of a family priest | pirodittal
who chanted much of tin Sanskrit a hile pring otual instructions
in Marathi to the head of the houschel (arndna] who per
formed a scoes of ritual gestures TE hase made a translated and
commenton on this paid ebewhere. here a will be more appro
Poate to present the maior epoedes i the tual and caplore
there meanings in relation to the picture wo hase derived so facof
Gagesa (Courtight 197g. pp ga yk. cl Barnouw) Ritual
manuals recommend the scovices of a Brahmin priest, but at one
Ws nut wculable or exceeds one’s metas. then the nite can sll de
performed wath the wad of the modal and same coaching fram a
prest One manual advises the potential worshipper. “according
to whats convenient bs ceciting thes pry tour, crete. or ttteen
tines wath the help ot one who altcdds Knows i. you should be
able to pecform it for voursel( aad narrate at for others” oN
Joshi, p. a)

Many sariehes of possible paya tormats and texts are available
to Hindus according to the intensity of thei devotion of their

--- Page 207 ---
The Worship of Ganeia 17
means to afford the necessary ritual items to be offered and priests
to be paid. However, what appears to be common to all pujas is
their goal: to bring about an enhanced level of ntuimacy betacen
the worshipper and the deity. Thus intimacy is realized through a
series of transactions. The worshipper prepares a sacred arena and
Provides an unfired. “raw,” clay image and establishes Ganesa’s
special presence in that image by invoking the hfe force [sire] and
vital capacities [2adriya]. This process of invocation of establish:
ment (pransiha] involves the transferring of both the worshipper’s
own and the cosmos’s yiva and ttdrivas into the inert clay unage.
thus bringing tt to Ife [tis astf Ganesa were condensed from his
universal presence in the cosmos into a particular and accessible
form in a time and place coinciding with that of ts devotees: The
worshipper then honors Ganesa-in-the image by bathing hin (the
clay image itself ws not bathed because mt would dissolve. but a
betel nut serves as the surrogate image for the purposes of buth-
tng) and by feeding. clothing. and giving the god gifts and an
entertainment of songs; in shost, honoring him as one would the
most valuable and royal of guests. Ganesa reciprocates by pring
his obstacle-removing powers to watch over the famuly ducing the
coming vear. After he has enjoved the offerings of food. Ganesa
“returns” to the family to be shared as prasady or [eltover spiritual
food In consuming this tood. the family members take into them-
selves existential enhancement or a tangible experience of this
inumacy with the deity thats the poal of the ritual’s performance

This divine food, or prasdda. is an important rehgious clement in
the ntual. The word prasada comes from the Sanskrit prens pre.
meaning “down.” and the roat sad meaning “sit” In ats barest
meaning prasada is a sctting down, growing clear of beconuag
satisfied. Specihzally. in relation te ntual. prasdda ws that loud
presented to the image of a deity or that lett for one s gure or that
which 15 available to the devotees to consume (Monee Walliams

p. 696) In eating this leflover food. the desatves Grke rate them:
selves the substance that has been in closest proximity to the pres:
ence of the deity and thereby recesse spatual seurebment

Prasdda 1s the edible symbol of the “rcal presence” ra the imate,
an assurance to those who cuttin the companys of Che you iat
their undertakingy sill be successtul and encounter no obstacles

In this way pigas create thew own reales They mark these occa

sions of enhancementin time by fixed calentini al dales, in space

--- Page 208 ---
176 GABLSAL LORD OF OBSTACEFS, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
by an altar, usually a bow table called a caurang. or simply by an
area marked out on the floor and by a home purthed of contamina:
tion by destructive influences. Through special speech. gestures,
forms of nourishment and ornamentation, the human and divine
meet each other halfway. giving and recewing mutual support

How does this rehgious reality come about” What are the
means by which the pay creates a world of its own within, set
transforms the workd of ordinary expenence? What methods or
Strategies and what assumptions about reality are emplosed to
realize this special context for the divine-human interplay that
brings worshippers and deity together sear after sour. generation
after generathon, at the appropnate season? A useful way to
address these questions a to examine the constituent episodes
and transactions thal make op the ntual, pausing along the way
to exegetically examine the ones that precipitate major turns ia
the ntual process

The name of the specitic paya to be analysed here ws the
Sripanthivamahaganapanpind. the “worship of the great Ganesa
WW auspicinus earthen form” The pid can be viewed structurally
in terms of the threefold dhaghrome of processural torm entre
into the ritual sphere. transformation of the conditions of reality
between deity and devotee, and cat into the world outside the
Ctual This tnpartite wheme. orginally sugeested by Van Gens
nep and elaborated by Turner. may be apphed te many rituals
(Van Gennep. Turner 1g69)

Before Ube rile Gan beri, die space of the household i which
it takes ploce and the worshippers must by brougat isto a mast
mal state of purty This is done bs cleaning and whitewashing
the home or more offen that pec ot the house un which the
imate is tobe kept Waorstippers bathe. and the patean at thy
mitual, the vazuended or male head of the hauschetd. wears a silk
lower garment (sonufé casita. or omksd]. usualy red aad a stawl
around bis shoulders Sakis the purgst of clath. red has frequent
associations with Ganesan. i beate the color at many of the im.
ages un his shoines in Modbarashtea The clis image whigh has
been tashioned by a sculptor. usually of the sith caste) ny
brought inte the home and pliccdin the area prepared fora bbe
altura marked ath asa sacred space wath patterns made with
colored powder frangad] Tir the wemea of the household who
drow these destans. ssomtar te anes frequents desma the

--- Page 209 ---
The Worship of Ganefa iv?
threshold of the house on other sacred occasions. They also as-
semble the special foods, flowers, leaves. spices, water, milk.
fragrant: substances. and other mtual paraphernalia and place
them in various containers 10 resemble the setting for a meal in
front of the altar. The image is brought into the home by the
family and as placed within this sacred enclosure. usually on a low
table called a caurang that is associated symbolically with a
throne. At the time the image is placed on the altar. at is inert
substance. a mere cura. [t possesses no special sanctity until itis
established with vital breath | prana]

The setting ws imbued with the svmoolism of kingship. The
deity 1s guest, king. and lord: to recense him into one’s home is
the ultumate expression of hospitality, Behind the image is place a
Picture of Ganesa’s self-created [seavambad| forms as they ap-
pear in the eight mayor Ganesa shrines in Maharashtra. the
@sjavindvakas (see pl 12) A brass lamp is lighted next to the
image The patron sits facing the imape and the Brahmin priest,
sitting to the neht of the umage. recites the Sanskrit maniras and,
should it be neeessary. instructs the patron in the appropriate
gestures acd ultcrances he ws fo make at cach stage of the pasa
Fannly members and guests sit behind the patron, also facing the
image. as a sort of audience to the proceedings “The ritual ine
volves the contributions of three different persons for rales). the
pest, who provides the sacred speech and titual instructions tor
the proper moves at each step ot the ceremony so that it may be
effective, the patron, who performs the gestures of offermes sad
service und accrues the benefits of the nite ter tiniscl) and his
fanuly. and. nally. Ganesa himsell, who reccies the Lemily’s
hospitality and im retura enables the househuld members to
achteve greater intimacy with bum and gives substansg te thas
transformation through the gift ol saqcahed tuaat [peasade] Unat
the tamuly consumes together at the conclusion of the tte tof
Kane. vol § f. p. 146. see pl to)

The puja formally begins atthe aime designate) oe the pagst
according to calculations based on the ritual caicndat (patie dive
orm keeping with the convemenee ob te fami The pian sips
water [dcamana] and regulates bus breadhing jpeciesaa]. be
then addresses Gagesa and all the other recs in an henonts
manner [rumaskdra] Then the patren (or tie priest os his be
half) announces to the dey who will appear ir ike omage the

--- Page 210 ---
178 GANESA> LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
nature of his commitments to the rte and his intentions to per-
form it properly. This part of the mtual 1s called the sarmkalpa
and, according lo one version of the ritual manuals for this pujd,
it is to be recited as follows:

On this holy day im my humble way. with ay much preparation as

Ppossitle, in order to gain the fruity designated in the revealed texts

[Srun]. the remembered texts (Smrt]. and the traditianal texts

[Purdya]. and in order to obtain sons, grandsons. wealth, knowl

edge. victory, success, fortune, life. and all other wished-for things

in this as well as in future births. and in order to propriiite the

deity Sidhavinayaka (Ganesa], J shall pertorm the worstup of

Ganapati. reciting verses from the hymo to Purusa and fram texts

of the tradition. while performing the giving of water fargéya]. etc

here the sialeen upacaras of "ways af service” ta be performed:

dunng the ritual are listed (Javadchar. pot.ocl Courtright 1924

p. 127; N. Joshi. pp 49-80)

The samkeipa expresses the intentions of the worshipper and
defines the relationship between the worshipper and the deity.
sets the boundaries on what ss to take place within and bevond
the boundaries of the rite, and articulates the goals of the wor.
shipper and the deity. If the ritual performance ws completed
according lo the proper conventions and it the worshipper is
filled with fatth in the deity, then the goals or fruits of what 1s
desired should be realized.

Once the intention of the worship has been declared. the pa-
tron, with the help of the priest, performs a senes af preparatory
geMures that make sacred the sarious implements to de used and
the person using them ttl tor the central transaction of the ritual,
the pragapratytha (the investiture of the emage wath vital breathy
First the patron calls an the goddess Bhu (earth). in whom the
world is supported tu support the patron, while touching the
ground theese times with his tett heet he cammands the demans and
harmful sprits jpaded ine dined] to fee (rom the sacted enclosure
of the miual sa thatthe worship of Ganesa to be performed may be
acwomplished without obstrucuen Calling on ali the gods to pro-
tect the rile, the patron sumbotically measures out the area where
he sity by placing the span ot bs thumb and foretnger on the
ground in trent of the image. 16 thy way he makes i sacred and
suildtme for continuing the cual Phas set of gestures is called
asunavidhi, (he preparation and purtticabon of the seat

--- Page 211 ---
The Worship of Ganesa 179

Reciting verses from the Purugasikta (RV 10:90). along with
single-word mantras, the patron touches his heart. the top of his
head, the tuft of hair at the crown of his head, his chest. his two
eyes and the subtle tlurd cye between them. Then, with his hand
raised above his head, he makes a snapping sound with his thumb
and forefinger. These two ritual episodes are called sedangan-
vasa, the investing of the six limbs, and the dighandhana, the
closing up of the quarters. Through these gestures the patron
identifies the various parts of his body with those of the deity and
the universe, thereby bringing into a single center the microcosm
and macrocosm ‘A similar series of identifications takes place in
the Purujasukta itself when the dismembered pieces of the sacri:
ficed Purusa are identified with various parts of the universe in
this way the patron becomes redetined, brought out of the merely
human realm into the sacred arena he will share with Gauesa for
the duration of the nite. Like the deity he bas invited, the patron
is now homologous with the cosmos. A simular process follows
with respect to the major implements used in the payd. The water
vessel (kalata], whose contents will bathe and nounsh Ganess
during the ceremony. 1s identified with the pitcher of the Vedic
sacrifice. and it becomes transtormed symbolically into the cos:
mos itself. The priest recites

Viyou resides at the mouth of the pitcher, Rudra in the neck.

Brahma at its base. and the group of the mother goddesses uz the

middle All oceans and the carth with ols seven coptinents ceside:

ints belly The Re Veda. Yayur Veda, Suma Verda and Athara

Veda, along with their appended texts sedan] ane an the ves

sel In tay the gaseei chant with Saweitr as it date wbieb rises

Prosperity and peace May these who rmave all ins cume here

for worship © Ganga and Yamuna, Godavan and Sacer

Narmada. Sindh aod Kavecs [the sesen mother ever poddesses

he present in this water] (N Joshi. p46)

A similar pattern is tollawed for conscurabag the other cual
implements. the conch. bell, and lamp On cach of these dents
the patron places Nowers and udsaia, unused nee erains
rubbed with red powder fAurAcea] Aa sata is used in many
ritual scttings and is not undue to Ganesan Free the sive thrown
at weddings, it symbolizes too and seed. the catblers uf nurture
and generation When subbed with red powder. ity generative

--- Page 212 ---
180 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
potential is enhanced The combination of red and white colors
indicates transiuon toward a pure or auspicious state (Beck
1969). Throughout the ntual when the deity 1s offered any food.
clothing, or ornaments, he 1s again sprinkled with aksara. in this
(ransaction the patron is the giver of thts power-bestowing sub-
stance and Ganesa the reciprent. This ws a reversal of the condi
tion of the world outside the nite in which the diets 1s ihe giver of
success and well-being and the patron is the reoaprent

After a tranational gesture of purtfication [suddéikaranal. the
patron offers sacred david grass. upon which, according to my-
tholonical tradition, the immortahty-granting amrta was spilled at
the time of the churning of the ocean Then he sprinkles water on
the ctual smplements and himself fer purification [proksanal
Now the moment has arrived for the investiture of tal breath
[prana} into the image. In some payas thy step ts replaced by a
sampler ritual episode of sthapuna, “placing” the image onto its
throne (Javadekar, po 2) Traditionally a Brahmin priest ts neces:
sary for this investiture of pranapranytha A bret exegetical ex:
cursus on the symbols of breath and iosesuture as sn arder here

The word prantaprenytha is 4 corpound made up of Wo paris
prana, breath of lite tore. and pranyta. establishment or sup
port The latter word ys deraed trom the prety pratt, toward ar
upon, goad the foot sia. stand tiemly orabde The term pransiia
expresses the pervasive Prdian colmeus and existental smpulse
from the Vedio pened onward doc what Jan Goda calls tthe
firm sad ulimate grotad ta rest upon. ar cmperishaale and in
Movable support of existences tor sky. cacth. tor (hemselyes, tor
the uniselse” Crysa. po) According wer different toxanomics af
reakly, the preene character of this support |pratgadtiat is os turns
ieatiicd wath a foothald of toad (metaphor dl, the earth pehyse
Mal The master al fie Reuse dsariab) Weds meters cinguistict
the breath of wame (hrolognal. lavess el the sgernen tar
(ritual) specuh. bradiaand (metiphysnai), and space delemental
{BAU 41.02. CbU § 19-24: SB a3.t.22)

Yo be established or greaaded in support ts to be ve stabihzing
power tor good, mamtunimng the conthcting powers of Ine costios
Ina state of Dalunce Thos a matter at hte and death. tor the dead
ate apratytiia without supper’. those who have ne bodes and
stand nowhere The descendents of the dead must ene them
support by providing them with “hodies” made ot nice [purda]

--- Page 213 ---
The Worship of Ganeta 181
that both feed them and place support beneath them. thus giving
them a place on which to stand in the cosmos (see Knipe). One's
own standing can be destroyed by means of a curse, bul it can be
tecovered through other compensatory nites (SB 1.6.1.18). To be
grounded 1s to have a world and to be secure in the mdst of Mux,
to have power over forces that threaten one’s security: indeed. to
achieve a profound rest and well-being. The noon of ground,
support. or standing Arm. 1s an capression of the ultumate soteno-
fogical goal of Hinduism standing firmly bevend Hux [mokse}
The sebicle oF contest tor this support is the siie breath that is
brought into the image. with the aid af maniray. trom the patron
who already has brought breath to the clay image through the
conduit of sacred diirvd grass

In the €hdndogva Cpanisad the five senses quarrel among
themselves as to which of them is superior [ievas] Unable to
resolve their dispute. they approach Prayapaty wbo tells them,
“He. who upon departing from the body, leaves it looking the
worst, be ts the best among you" (Chl $6.7) Speech, eve, car,
and mind then lett the bods. but, however Imuited it became after
losing ane of the senses. it remained alive because it sull had
breath. “Then.” the text continues. “praaa prepared to depart.
teanng up the other senses as a spirited horse mught tear out its
tethering Stakes They then ath gathered around him, saying.
“Stay wath us Don't leave You are the best among us.” 7 (ChE
S8r2h Then all senses took ther bem support [pratiythai} in
praga (Ch 6 tna) In the equaton of the cosmus with dena,
the text sees the air as the peana of the unwersal sell fbradunan|.
just.as the wind came forth out of the prang of Purusa (Ch
§.1.1a. RV to yo ray Hence prara as that upon which both the
cosmos and the individual stand, The breathe the sacanee of
one’s own self lo drafmnan. as tne sacred oblation, the equisa-
lent of sama (CHU: S219 1). Prana is the pomal animating power
upon which the sclt and the cosmos tad thers common support
thet pratitha

Continuing the ritual sequence. Ihe priest recites a terse dent
fying the sced syllables [bya maritra], the condensed ind poteat
sounds of Hindu ntual, which will scrse as the sebieles tor plac:
tng the prage into the image As the priest recites the muatras,
the patron holds (wo sprigs of dursa utdss touching the pnaire
Then the priest says." Dhis prania lof the patren| as the prong of

--- Page 214 ---
182 GANECAT LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
the god [devasya prana tha pranah|.” In thts way the distributed
prana of the cosmos, which includes that of the mtual patron,
becomes condensed into the inert clay emage Bringing Wito hfe A
similar pattern 15 followed in invoking animate lite [Jis4] inte the
image In that moment the separation between the patron and
the deity dissolves as they share common support in praga. [lisa
moment of profound religious ani metaphysical meaning. the
crux of the hminal phase of the rite.

‘The two vehicles for this transfer of praag and piva into the
image are the manira and the diund grasy. sound and substance
Manira can be seen as praga condensed into speech. a conseser
of sacred power. According to Gonda. a manira sa “word(s)
behteved to be of ‘superhuman origin.” received. fashioned and
spoken by the ‘insptred’ seers. poets and recutens in order to
evoke divine powerls) and especially concened of as creatine.
conveying, concentrating and teahzing itertioaal and etticent
thought. and of coming into touch of idenutying oneselt with the
essence of the divimty which is present in the wnantza “ (1G64 p
259). [tis as though mara ws that sound-speech appropriate to
the realm of brahman in which self and god, Knower and known,
giver and recipient of prdna recognize then tundamental mdivist
bility and eternalness This reatits is agtualized when the aera
is recited.

The durva grass acts as a conduit agross which passes the an
mating power of the prdna. actiwated bs thy marti ov the po
tron to the image. from giver te reaprent Orr thoueht te be
especially Lavored by Ganesa and some saturmants claim it has
medical properties in addition to relies cacy 1 tesembles
the ancient Ausa gris at the Sede sacrifice According to ong
version ot the myth of the churning of the ovean, when Garg
rescucd the umbroste from the thesing hands ot the demons, he
flew up vith the eatin his chiws and some of et spilled out. falling
on some durva grass below blence dita became the reveptacte
of the immortality bestuwsine anibrosta. the spilled lettasers at
divine creauive power POstor, poo@S1 Bs virtue ot this cantict
wath the ongingl and uncempromsxcd substance of Che wrcene
durva has come to possess tmportant capacities for temsquear
the power at prana

Withia this trimeswork of assumptions what appears to Re tah

--- Page 215 ---
The Worship of Ganeta 183
ing place tn the ritual as 4 process in which the patron first recon-
stitutes himself as the divine Puruya and gives his prana to the
deity. who thereby comes to reside in the image as a kind of
symbohe dismemberment recalling that of Purusa and inverting
the human-divine hierarchy. Gagesa receives his own prana as
one dependent on the largesse of the patron, Thus he is commit.
ted to return the favor by the beneficent use of his power to
remove obstacles for the patron and his kin. Patron and divinity
Participate ina carefully bounded and prepared divine world,
contributing to one another's identities and sharing in common
awareness and power. The image of Ganesa. in some sense of the
term, becomes “alive.” Some informants claim that the image
actually changes. it becomes lustrous, taking on more intense
radiance of color. Others say they saw the image actually enlarge
shightly This percerved transformation of the maternal form of
the image does not take place for the devotee in any other con-
text than that of reitgious behef and expectation. Is ita matter of
magical or alchemical change? As one informant put it, “Ot
course, magic is not magical to the magician ” For those who
come to the nlc prepared tor a transformation to take place
between themselves and the deity. the ritual effects it Other
Hindus take a more skepucal attitude and suggest thal such
ctaims of the matenal transformation of the image belong to the
realm of superstibon Phe most important transformation to take
place in the ritual. they argue. ws the merease ot bhava. or rele
gious scatiment or experience ‘This increase in bhava can be
achieved without the use of imaues [airguna]. but ter some the
presence of the image as a receptacle of divine presence [saganal
can be a uscful aid to religious realization: The pia provides the
location where the divine antessects the mundane. pervading ul
wath specail presence and enlarring the sense of whats possible

The sacred. in the form of the enlivened image. becames the
cosmic center, expanding in all directions aod redchning tac lin

its of the real Fram the perspective of ordinary eapenence nut

side the assumptions of the ntual. the enbvenme of the nmage as
the liminal episode wherein thy power of tne diving proseave
converges on the ntual enclosure that is sa sulaceaale to contama
nahon. From the perspective of the wotcotions ot the rite sted

that which appears so transitory fram the outside the enliven

--- Page 216 ---
184 GANFSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
deity: -1s the secure and grounded center of the cosmos That
some devotees “see” the image become lustrous and colarge
bears witness to thew faith and the grace of the dei

With the prang now established in the image. so far as the
intention of the ritual 1s concerned. Ganesa s (ull presence has
been made manifest’: Dwelling in his image. he has passed. slang
with the patron whose breath he abso breathes. from inert matter
into ling presence This phase of the puga mont cleatiy articu:
lates the transformational character ot the ntual Those polarities
that may have scemed most separated--carth and deity. -have
not become une another Afler the mvestiture of the praéna, the
image is not ta be moved until the udérapujd (Anal worship)
when the prana ws released trom the image and dispersed again
into the cosmos as a whole

Once the breath ws established, the tradibonal sxteen upacaras
(ways of serie”) are performed These ritual procedures
honor the image as one would receive a guest. indeed the most
honored of guests Rach of these apacdras 6 accompanied by the
rectlation of a stanza from the Vedic tym to Purusa (RV 10 90),
thereby establishing the homology be:wees the image of Ganesa
and the cosmos With cach reetaton the pation places a tew
grains of unhusked rive grains [ad sata] ard dazed erass ut the feet
of the image to quicken the process Other epdcadras imoke the
detty’s presence [dudfanal. offers hum a seat [asana]. wash hay
feet [padva]. and otter water atthe eeception oft a guest The ‘ast
two water offerings are made to a betel nut. semboiz np G.nesa,
at the foot of the image because the image is made of materials
that wilt dissolve of disthgure the umage Then a sip of water is
altered 10 the image Jacamana], foliowed by bathing the betel nut
with the five sacred Suds [paricametusauna] These five nectars
are milk. curd. clarified batter. hones, and sugar. cach 1s poured
in tur and Iolloweed by the sprinkling of a tew grains of ad sate
Collectively these substances. along with the water for bathing.
which are also pouted during the atual, make up what is called
drtha The same word is used to mean a sacred spotin a niver and
a crossmg place between the human aed divine coals In the
Tual tas the patron whe enves the deity these pertect funds tor
his bath, in the world way the god wha provides the bathing
Places. the firthas. tot hiy devotees in the form of rivers having
sacred qualttes This bath of sacted fluids is followed bv a sprin-

--- Page 217 ---
The Worship of Ganefa 185
kling of water [abAiseka], which completes the bathing portion of
the puja.

At this point in the te, the smage ts dressed and adorned with
Jewels and perfumes: a garment [-asiraj. an upper garment and
sacred thread (upavasira], scented sandal paste and other tragrant
substances [gandha], offerings of Mowers (puspa] and incense
[dhtipa], and the waving of a lamp is performed before the image
{dipa]. These make up the first thirteen of the sixteen upucdras
and serve to honor Ganesa through the bathing. dressing. and
ornamenting of his body. much as one would an honored guest
With the recitation of the Vedic mantras evoking the cosmic per-
son, Purusa. the hnkage between the divine and human worlds 1s.
reiterated at each point.

Next comes the offering of food [natvedya]. ‘Ihe foods to be
offered are sattvika (the most pure). Offerings of fruit, modakas
(sweet flour balls especially favored by Ganesa). various sacred
leaves. betel nuts, and a cuin are presented by the patron to the
image while the priest recites the verse from the hymn to Puruya
The patron pays homage to the praga present in the otterings
This festive meal offered tu the deity and sanctified by its proxum-
iy to the image will be returned at the end of the puyd to the
worshippers as the prasada {toad of grace) to be shared by mem-
bers of the famoly in the presence of the deity ‘Technically the
prasada is the leftovers of the deity’s meal: but because the food
has been in contact with a being of higher steture than the wor-
shippers and has gained transccadent status and power, ube.
comes sacred to the worshippers By cating the prasada the wor
shippers tangibly take a part of the deity’s presence into them
selves (cl Babb. pp. vt 6%. Ostor, pp 420 fod

Following the feeding portion af the para. the patron postorms
a Symbolic circumambulation arcund the deity | pradakyiria| ane
gives one final gesture honoring the umage [namaskara} Une pa
tron stands in front of the image and turns around three mes
reciting a mantra from the Purusa hymn, and he then sass 0 Suns
that f have committed in this birth and presieus ourths now van
ish with each step of my cercumambelation to the aebt ON
Joshi, p. 69)

Alter these formal upacéras have been completed and the un
age sustably adorned, ted, and honored. the patran’s ianus col
lectively parhicipates in the puja, As a lamp is waved before the

--- Page 218 ---
16 GANESA, LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
image by the patron, the family together sings « popular devo-
tional song [drat] in Marathi, such as the one by Ramadasa
quated carher (see p. (65). Camphor ts then lighted and burned
before the image and passed among the worshippers who pass
their hands through the flames and smoke and bring them close
to their eyes and foreheads in order to take in the purifying
Properties of the tame that has been made sacred by its proxi:
ity to Gagesa. The patron offers an addtional twenty one sprigs
of durvd grass. variuus leaves and flowers. and prayers The
prayer [prarthand] has a more devotional tone and reflects a
more intimate and emotional attitude toward the deity than the
more formal and transactional language of the earlier S:nskrit
episodes in the puja. Addressing Ganesa as the “Protector of the
Poor, Reservoir of Compassion.” the patron says. “Highest
Lord, you are my refuge. there 1s no refuge apart from you. Take
compassion on me and protect me. . the worship | have given
you without mantras, miual, devotion, O Lord ot the Guds, may
it become perfect” (N. Joshi, pp. 70-71).

At this point, as the ritual drawy to a close, attention turns to
the priest who is now worshipped. The patron offers the priest 4
portion of the prasdda. specifically ten of the twenty-one moda:
kas offered to Ganesa. He offers further gifts of a seat. Howers
betel put, sandal paste. eblations. and a small amount of money
[dad sad], With the pije now completed. us performance lasung
about forty five minutes, the family aad assemoled relatives share
the prasada, which may then be followed with a feast The priest
may depart at this time to perform the same mite elsewhere tor
another cheat (amily

For the remaimng days while the image ty seated in the house:
hold shrine. ot will be worshipped moring und evening with
wmple recitations, devotional songs. otfenogs of towers und in
conse. and with mtual amps Phe ethos of senive and hospitality
to the image temas as long asst stays sa the house It may not
be moved of us surrounding Otual space violated by polluting
objcets: When the number of days lor Ganesa s vist have passed.
a pened af from ong tu tea days depending an famils traditions.
asimple ritual [etarapive] of divesting the image ot tts special
status as perlurmed Thea vath sprigs of durva grass dipped i
honey. the patroa syimboheally closes the eves of the unmage and
thereby dispenses the praga in the image. which reverts back to

--- Page 219 ---
The Worship of Ganeta 187
its prior condition. The patron recites a sort of benediction,
“May all groups of deities now depart, having accepted this wor
ship of the earthen image of Ganesa, in order that all desired
objectives (of the rite] may be realized and that they may return
again” (ebid. p72). Then members of the family, alone or in
procession with others, lake the image to a nearby watcr source
and immerse it. It dissolves quickly and returns to tts formless.
state This final rite is called tesaryana (immersion) The visarjuna
brings around full circle the process begun with the forming of
the image out of clay and its installation in the home The life of
the image movey from tormless clay lo iconographic representa:
hon to anmatioa and empowerment lo dispersion and return to
formlessness In this respect it sephicates the cosmos uself, As the
devotees lower their clay images of Ganese into the water. they
shout together. “Gunapat Bappa Morava pudhacsa varyi lavkar
va. tbat ts. “Beloved Ganesa, Lord ef Moraya (Moraya
Gosast, the founder of the Jingage of Ganesa saints in Maharash-
tra), come again carly next year!” As the level of popular rele
gious practice, the paid ean occasion for heightened awareness
of Ganesa and all thats associated with him, a time of opumism
and celebration

To summonize this complex ritual process, we sve that the do-
mestie priyd Lo Ganesa follows a three-part processural pattern (1)
the deity Pecomes present ain the form of the image. (2) he era
clously resides in the houschoid for a pend of ime and (3p he
felurns fo a primordial cosmic sate when the image is immersed
‘This process takes place in the context ot a highly descloped core
monialism that draws on ancicat tradmons of hospitality to guysts
for ity dominant symbolism and ntiuabactions Ta thas etait conte
the deity and patron. together with the pest, cagage ma comply
relakonship of interdependence “The patron provides the ately
with breath. Ufe. and foods the deity cooprocotes bs yivine the
patron and his tamily the grace of Its presence and peneral wel
being This pattern of worship is not unique to Genes rather
fepresents one group of vanants of a hurge and pervasive form ot
Hindu rehgious Ife Piyas to Durga in Beagal. Saressati in Citar
Pradesh and Bihar, among other desties in Indra. make use of
disposable clay images. These paras alsa stress the Eye ot bospy
tality. auspicious presence, and distnbution of devine presence into
the cosmos as a whole. As Durga iy tor Bearahs. Gunes is the

--- Page 220 ---
1aS GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES. CORD OF BEGINNINGS
patron deity for the Marathi-speaking people At the most com-
prehensive level of its symbolism, the Ganesa payd presents 3 m-
crocosm of the rhythms of the macrocosm: from formlessness into
form, with its animating power followed by dissolution back into
formlessness. creation, maintenance. and destruction leading to
new creation. In terms of popular religious practice, the puja is an
occasion for drawing closer to Ganesa with all the joy and hope
associated with his obstacle-removing capacities As the deity
takes his place vwathin the wmmedsate and mundane frame of refer-
ence of the family. he enables them to step outside of the mere
immediacy of ts domestic world and share a ume of special and
transcending intimacy with its god As the image of Ganesa sinks
beneath the water and returns to its undifferentiated state. the
devotees experience both sadness and rehef Sadness that thes
deny who has become an honored members ot the family has gone
away, and relief that the complex ntusl demands of his visit have
been fulfilled [tis aut of this complex relemwus and ematonal
mood that devotees are able to say. in an atutude of hope mired
with confidence. “Beloved Ganesa. Lord of Morava. come again
eacly next year!”

Tue Pueiic Festivat

The worship and celebration that takes place outside the domes
tic context of maga os called weave (festyaly) Has an open event
with a more inclusis range of participation En cites at least
there are two dimenstons to Ganesa’s testval and thes are ob
sered in temnoral sequence the tehvious and entertainment
Programs that are put an by vanous assocnitions of eidadads
(Sanskrit. mandala. caccle of assemblage) and the testa! proces
sron in which all groups and Gamilies carey thee images i: proces:
sion in order to immerse them in the tiver, Che cauranda The
festival Uiees rmpartint duueustons of its present form te the cad
of the last comtur when it was revived and sopularvzed in Puoe
by the nationalist ieader and journabst Bal Gangadhar fLoka
manyas Tihtk Tilak saw the festyalas ao vehicle for facihtanng
greater solidarity ameng Hindus and opportunities for teaching
the Hindu minses the need for coahaing aspirations for selt-rule
This pactat the stony ot Gaines and hry worship wall be explored
more fully on the next chapter For now our purpese will be to

--- Page 221 ---
The Worship of Ganeta 189
concentrate on the contemporary form of the public festival and
see how it relates to the pattern of domestic worship we have just
considered

The location for our observations of the public festival is the
city of Ahmadnagar. located seventy miles northeast of Pune in
the central Desa region of Maharashtra. Culturally haked to
Pune and its tradiuons, Abmadnagar iy a medium-sized city, a
market center for cotton and sugar and rapidly growing light
industry. Its growth has Deen slow and steady. restuicted by Im.
tled wales resources and Hansportation facutes As a district
headquarters. at 1s a center for banking, adnunistration, and
hospitals Ht hay two colleges, and a number of private secon-
dary schools. It also has a major mibtary installanon nearby
Historically the city was an important Muslim pobtical and cul-
tural center It was the capital of Nizam Shah dynasty in the
seventeenth and cightegath centuries. poruens of the okt city
fortiticabons remain, us do a number of sites. shrines, schaals, a
palace, and a fort—some of them protected as histoneal land-
marks. Conquered by the Marathas and later by the British, the
city’s Mushm character has been largely eclipsed Today the city
has a large non-Brakimn populavon, and the Brahmins are
mainly from the Desastha subeaste. The Mushm population,
consututing about one seventh of the papulanyn before 1948.
Now amounts to less than one teath There rs a smd but altlu-
ent Jai community in the cry with a tempte te Parsvanatha and
a meditation center tor monks Jams support tae Gancsa festival
by contabuting moncy for the purchas: ol images and testa!
programs. Abmadrugar tooks to Pune as its cultural center, and
many in Pune tend te think ot Ahmdnacar as a rather rustic
place The city proved fo be a good Jacihen far obsening the
public dimensiens of the Ganese testsal The destivat iy the
largest single publi tobyraus event en the vee wih upwards at
one hundred thousand people participating al ooe stage or
another of the festa csele Yet, the city is small cnourh ta
enable an outsider to vet around te th: sanous groups that
provide leadership and partespation in thy festiagd Ga gar sane
sense of the festival as a whole To concuch a sania study of
the festival in Pune or Bombay would requive a teat af seveeal
scholars, and could. no doubt. be an undertaaing ci cnormeuy
value.

--- Page 222 ---
$90 GANESA’ LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS

There are not a great number of Hindu temples in the city of
Alimadnagar otself. probably owing to its Muslim history Two
temples are preeminent as dwelling places of the two guardian
dewues [erdmudevata] of the city, Hanuman al the northern gate
of the old city wall (now well inside the contemporary city) and
Ganesa the guardian of the southern gate The Ganesa temple is
located im one of the oldest neighborhoods of the city, Mahada,
traditionally the area of the Mali or garland-maker castes. and
todas a center of non-Beshmuins. The temple ts locally known as
the Majnada Ganesa Mander. Legend has it that the temple's
image once began to sweat profusely, indicating the superabun-
dance of power residing within it Only aticr the performance of
many ntuals way this excessive power brought under contral: The
name of Ganesa thal is specie to the mage of this temple is
Nighnaharta. Destroyer of Obstacles: The temple os an important
center tor Ganesa tn the erty and its gasitony Ina special enclo-
sure behind the maim image of the lemple is kept the ansavamnurn
Cesuval unage) Its carved from wood and brightly painted.
depicting Ganesa nding a horse and plunging a bince into a ger:
demon, Its a posture senmmycent ot Dured slaving the buffale
demon. Mahia. Each scar durne the festival procession, this
image ww profusch decorated with banana leaves. flowers. and
garlands and placed on a bullock cart at thy lead postion As the
Protector of the city and the remover ot obstacles this Majivadd
Ganesa ss patron to the civ and its inhabitants The priest
[pigare| ot the temple des next to the image and a aidnadal
consisting of devotces accompames the cart and image in the
fesuval procession There asa a small privately supported
Ganesa temple. maintained by a promimant Brahmin tamuly | on
the street through whieh the testvall procession pisses on ity way
out of the city toward the civer tor the immersion et images, but
it dogs not appear te play ag umpertint role in the pubhe part of
the Gaoesa festival

The asocuitiens on pubbe groups [sertauesk mmandals] that
gather together to celebrate the testvai Gob inte three categories
fehdorheod groups. occupational yroups, and voluntary asso-
cations Neighborhood groups or adndals druw thet member
stip intormalty trom among those who lve on the same street or
area of the city: The larger propertion ot members are voung
men and boys, hence they frequently name there associations.

--- Page 223 ---
The Worship of Ganeta 19r
“youth” [tarun} manadals. The members of the mandul canvass
their neighborhoods for vontributions toward the purchase of an
image to be set up in the neighborhood, covered by a temporary
canopy (Marathi, mandav: Sanskrit. mandapa). in front of which
various religious and cultural events will take place The more
money a group can raise. the greater nouce people take, and
status will accruc to the group Neighborhoods feel greater soh-
danty aunng the Ganeda testuval season. In one area of the city
where Hindu and Muslim inhabitants live closely together, a
manda{ including members of both Hindu and Mushm religious
communiues was formed and an image carried in procession. The
pattern was reversed during the Musthim festival of Moharram
This pattern of intercommunal rchgious observance however ts
an exception to the more general rule that Mushms do not par-
ucipate in the festiwal and have not done so since ats revival under
the leaderstup of Tilak at the end of the last century. a point we
shall explore more fully in the next chapter

To the extent that 4 paruculsr neighborhood may be made up
from a single or cluster of tclated castes. the mandaf has a caste
dimension to it In one neighborhood where mainly scheduled
castes hve, there a statue to Jyottha Phule. the nineteenth:
century opponent of caste evclusieness and adversary of the
Brahmin elite in Pune A Ganesa image ts set up in tront of thos
slatue cach year by a neighborhaed mandal In its songs and pro-
grams. the group emphasizes that Ganesa is Ganapati the lord
[part] of all the people [gana]. and sons a hind of patron deity ot
social equahty and anucuste weologs characteristic of the otticial
rhetoric of the nation Because Ganesa does nat have spoetic
associations with a pariiculurcaste -apart fram hes cult following.
in the region near Pune among Brahouns fas we shall seed bul
belongs to all. there are no purbeular caste mttcrests to be sereestin
promoting his devotion Ganesan an cmbtem ota new muy of
commurity that (raascends caste This eppears to be the pattern in
the cites of Maharashtra. in the villages, howes on, Gainese’s lest
vals a more recent inpesation and ws oued to the cmunience of
non-Brahmin castes inte greater prominanse alter land retorim
laws were enacted in the 19ses

Occupational groups ate mundals whose memberstap ys base!
on place of employment: Employees contabute. eequenty with
more substantial support of the ownerstop of maunigement ab the

--- Page 224 ---
192 GANFSOAS LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF REGINANINGS
company or industry. toward the purchase of an image and its
installation and programs [mn Ahmadnagar manda(s drawn trom
employees in the state bus and railway services, cigaretic manu-
facturers, weavers. and other groups have sponsored images and
programs. Recently there has been an increasing “commercializa-
lion” of the festrval as businesses have spansurcd: images und
associated their names and products with Ganesa, a tread that
many of the more orthodox Hindus find vulgar and out of heep-
ing with the religious character ot the festival

The third category of ondadafe is that of votuntary organiza:
tions These include school committees. travel and pilgrimage
groups, wrestling and athletic clubs. youth organizations, and 4
cial service groups Some peltical groups from the traditionalist
end of the spectrum. such as the Rashtave Syasumsevak Sangh
(RS.S.), have sponsored mandafs and participated im the proces:
sions from ume to tine. Maada{ membership ts gencrath ree
stricted to men, although wemen participate indirectly ds Making
ritual preparations, and they yorn in devotional singing and attend
other programs sponsored by the mandal This wpe of auardal
seems to be the successor to the mefa ar voluntary group of
singers thal were instrumental in promoung the Gaaesa fesusal
under Tilak’s Jeadership During the porod of intense eftorts
toward obtarning independence under Gandhys leadership, such
festwal argamzations underwent decline. but since the carky
tgsos. there has been a steady increase in populyany ot this Wipe
of voluntary orpanizauion sponsoring Ganesa images

There tsa wide vanets un the ranerraphy ind progsans of the
different mdndals Most are traditional Guinesa’s umage shows
fim in his conventond) pastures haldiag sarieus orniments
Some mandals simply place the mire under a canopy and deco
Gilet according to their Gistey and means. cither he the pate rt
eobverved in the domestic contest Ehes sponsor tesditional deve:
bonal songs [baujana] and songesermons [Ariana] open to any
one Other maadals dept Ganesa bs plrcing hum in the midst ol
tableaus taken from Puranic mvths. Their members putun dra
matic skits. again drawal trom tradition’ rehwous lore. of thes
sponsor a concert of chassical music

Other wnaydals are more mova in thes wanagraphy and
Progeamming Images of Ganesa may be piaced in secular cul-
lurai and politimal settings Granesa sitang on the moon neat toa

--- Page 225 ---
The Worship of Ganesa 193
spacecraft, Gianesa as a disco dancer. Ganesa surrounded by
drawings of political figures. which calls attention to current
events. The programs sponsored by these groups also depart
from the traditional offerings in thei programs In place of dewo-
tonal songs. one finds film music played over loudspeakers, plays
and skits of a political and frequently satincal character per
formed, and romanuc and comic films of recent popularity rented
and shown These innovations are more common in larger cities.
such as Pune and Bombay. and may represcat ‘a religious and
cultural expression of modernization or Westeraialion “The
manda{s that sponsor such programs draw the jargest crowds,
young people fad them most appealing. the older aad more es.
thodox Hindus objecting tu this departure from what they con-
sider the more rehgious and educational character the festival
used to have.

Apart tram these programs and iconoprapiic innosutions de
signed to entertain the crowds. other associations. principally
thase associated with education and culture. sponser programs
more in keeping with what they take te be the anginal vision
behind the festival These ntdndals sponsor clocunon contests for
students and lectures and panel discussions on current issues bs
distinguished crizens, kor example, during the 1970 festsal in
Abmadnagar, the distict brary sponsored a scenes of lectures on
such topics as. fanuly planning. student unrest. bank nationiliza-
tion, border disputes between Maharashtra and Karnataka, and
the necessity of national unity Asa pubhe insutution ia secular
state. the Library beard did not want to sponsur a specmeully
tehgious (uneven, nor did they want to overlook the “cultural”
character ot the festival and the upportumtibes co pros ded: far
educating those who would come to vast the sunous enendal
Programs Sponsoring an exphotly secular proesim ip thy mdse
of a religious festival was an appropriate way lor thy borane
carry on educational outreach to a Leeger audience Thin might be
possible otherwise. This approach yin keeping with thy spirit of
Titak’s intentions tor the testwal when he rovitelized ay we
shall see)

As the week of the festival progresses sack evening Pe conics
more filled with manda{ praprams aad The obs s noighhes te ous
and marketplaces take on a carnival atmosphere In Abmsdee
gar. during the evenings of the festival the pose rose the

--- Page 226 ---
194 GANELSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, 1. ORD OF BEGINNINGS
streets for women and children carly in the evening. allowing
them the opportunity to gu around to sce the various exhibits and
collect the dargana of the many Ganesas on display People pass
by the images, admire the workmanship and imagination that
goes into the desplays. meet friends and neighbors, and generally
enjoy themselves. Many of the mandals are organized by tecn-
agers and young adults who seem to enjoy the attention ther
efforts attract from adults. Although tt ts obviously a religious
occasion, it is alsa festwe and ptayful. Later in the evening the
Streets are open for men to go around and visit the images. which
they [requently do in groups from various neighborhoods, and to
take in films and other programs

In the contemporary public festival, to countervailing themes
can be seen tn those exhibits that depart from the traditionally
rehgious subject matter. national unity and rebigious parochial:
ism, One mandaf exhibit m 1970 seemed to express both these
themes. On a temporary stage was placed a large Waditional im-
age of Ganesa facing the audience To the deity’s neht, painted
on the backdrop was a larger than life-size portrait of John F
Kennedy standing in front of a cathedral. Behind Gagesa way a
similar portrait of Jawaharlal Nehru standing in front of the mod-
ern Laksimmarayana temple in New Delhe and to the dicts’s ceft
was a portrait of Zaki Hussain, the late president of India.
standing betore a mosque. Along the front of the stage was ert:
ten in Hinds (the official nauenal language). “Aan sab ch have
We are All One.” This festival display expressed the ealugs ot
Indian and internauend! plusainm Pre three men portrayed
both sccular politcal and religious athliatiens Phong Ganesa on
the nudst ot them expressed the view that he oversees the birgest
and most inclusive gura. that af ite mational integration of poly
ics and rehgion

At the sane ime associating these three members aba politica:
Pantheon with the specie worship ot a temonat vets sathin
Hinduisni also expressed more parochial religious sensibilities In
this context the word gaa means something closer to the aotion
of Mus sensus the “others infec fal ongiavally the Batish and
Mushos, but now that the British are gone, this attitude is mosey
focused toward the Muslims Some young men sce Gunesa as the
lord of a revitalized Hindus tradition that is assertive and
“manly” dedinenal ooa-Brahma values and see themselves

--- Page 227 ---
The Worship of Ganeia 198
as belonging to his legions [ganaj. As the Ganesa festival season
brings a heightened sense of unity among Hindus, it also brings
with it greater fears of communal conthet its celebration places a
heavy burden on city and district poltce officsls. At umes police
Officials have cactcised therr powers af preventive detention to
stop persons known for their volatile communalist views from
taking advantage of the festival situation to foment communal
unrest. Muslin informants have spoken of the anxiety they feel
during the Gagesa festival season because of the aggressive mood
some Hindus exhibit The processian route along «hich images
are cared curetully avoids streets on which mosques are located.

In terms of the intensity of particopation and sheer energy. the
culminating event of the festival ss the procession of trucks and
bullock carts with images mounted on top that pass through the
streets of the city to the riverbank where the mages are un:
mersed and the festival comes to @ close. This is the occasion
when all the efforts of households and madnda/s come together
like a nver, the great procession courses through the narrow
streets of the cily on its inexyrable way to the water, The proces:
sion is a time of collective celebration—tor some even cestasy—
with dancing, singing, acrobatics, and throwing sacred powder
[gula/] on the celebrants and crowds It ay a grand ypectacle tor
those who observe it fram the sidclings and balconies along the
parade route Emotions un high at this ime of greatest unity
and collective enjoyment tas also a dangerous tine because the
unity that 1s sought 1s so fragile. irritations and conthets mast oe
suppressed at precisely the moment when one is teaxt inched to
suppress anything (sce pl. 11)

The crescendo of “collective cllersexcence” = to borrow Duth
herm’s expression —does not came as a spontineous outburst at
the last moment Careful preparations belp io provide support
for this important but delicate soci and rebyious mument
Months tn advance, meetings Cake place among pole detect
officials, representatives of ail the nidadals scvking parte rpatest
in the testival parade Permits mast be obtained tor settings up
images and sponsoring programs Partapaots are required to
wear idenuhicalion tags fo assist police in. crowd control Pustiions
tn the procession - after the fesisal image trem tie Mapas
Gagesa temple at the head ot the parade are assinned to
mandajs on a first-come, first-served basis This is in contrast to

--- Page 228 ---
196, GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES. JORD OF SEGINNINGS
the festival processions in villages where the pkices celebrants
take in the procession frequently reflect their position in the
village social hierarchy.

In the carly morning of the procession day, Anantacaturdati—
ten days after Ganesa Caturthi—ihe mandals arnve with their
Ganesa images placed on platforms atop bullock carts or truck
cabs. They are profusely decorated with Mowers, leaves. cloth
streamers, some with electric hghts. on many there is a banner to
identity the name of the mandal and to indicate the number of
years it has appeared in the procession Pohce offtcials help the
mandafs ine up and settle diyputes that flare up over whether
one group has crowded ahead of another A wide sanety of
mandal atranvement 1s in evidence. Sut a typical midadal consists
of a bullock cart with a lavishly decorated image and ar attendant
to drive the cart: Sometimes a prominent member of the erdadal
ora young gil representing Ganesa’s taki rides deside the im-
age. In tront ot the bullock cartor truck. members of the etandal
walk and dance through the streets: The dances ure pertormed bs
groups—some using thethmie ustruments and athens ain pole
arrangements called dezhim and geph dances Seme ot the
wrestling club mandals perform acodate tuts along the proces
ston route Same sidedaf: provide tull bonds to accampans thent

Mans of the sandal carts carts bags of gefdl ating red powder
which the persan sitGop next to the page or drnvae the cart
throws in great handtuls onto the crowds and colebrarts, a practice
remimisceat of the squirting of colored water dure the Kysna
festival of Holi The veemiion color of the powder corresponds
both te the calor of Ganesa’s images and tke powder rubbed into
the vobroken rice grains [aksata] ottered ta Gagesa during his
pga Ina Jager wmbole context. red the color at sitolity be.
cause Of iTS association with blood. god i generally represeats 3
symbolic transition ian auspiciaus direction (Beck 1969) Gulal
symbohtcally distributes Gunesa’s graceful presence much as does
the prasada of the pu Guldl, however, also appears to be a
weapon. us when young boys delight in dousing one another, and
anvone else within canes. with it ducing the procession

Phe procession in Abmadnagar lasts about cyght hours, cover
ing adistanee of shehth more than a mile [tr assembles at the
eastern end of the cits and winds its was through the central
market are and out the west de of the city to the Sina River

--- Page 229 ---
The Worship of Ganeta 197
where the images are immersed There does not appear to be any
special religious significance to the route. the procession does nat
detour past the Majivada temple. nor dogs it circumambulate the
city. such as one finds in some South Indian temple festuvals. The
general atmosphere of the festival is one of merriment, even
ecstasy. as tranceltke movements seem to ammate some during
their dancing and drumming. By the ime the mandals and their
images arrive at the nver bank. the mood has subdued some-
what, at least in part owing to the exhaustion of the celebrants.
At this point in the festival, the final eprsode takes place: the
immersion of the images in the river

The immersion ritual is simple Final gifts of coconut. Rowers,
and lighted camphor. accompanied by the singing of drufis. are
offered to the image The mandals and familtes that have brought
their Ganesas to the riverbank, either in procession or on ther
own, bid their farewells to Ganesa, shouting the familiar “Gana-
pan Bappa Moravé. pudhacya vars: lavkar yal” (“Heloved
Ganesa. Lord of Morava, come again carly next sear'”). Then a
few members of the manda/ or family carry the image far enough
into the river to immense it, where wt quickly dissolves The festi-
vals over The cvele of Ganesa’s appearance im-animate form
and his return to the dispersed universe is accomplished. The
celebrants return to their homes ina mood of exhilarstion mixed
with exhaustion and relief (sce pl 12)

The Ganesa festival is a fairly recent ranosation ia seme
sillages on Maharashtra and the state of Karnataka te the south
Its observance has frequentl been introduced throurh the silhae
schools in recognition of Ganesa’s assocition with earning aod
asa festival pacticularty Juved by children

in her study of festivals and sound cohesion ina village i
northern Karnataka, Suzanne Harcbett descabes the Gane se Les
teal ina rural context (pp esi7 22; At the devel of vulage
society, any cooperate cifort requires the solidanty of the
village with cach indieadual and group dJomg ts Bart Peres to the
early ig6os this village had one annual festivai procession cu
honor of Narasimha, one of the nearmauons ef Visnu fhe enace
was carried through the streets ot the Brahmin acuhaerhood on
a temple car with members of various castes arrsbed IL praces
ston according to their status mn the village Ridiag or w aise
closest to the car and as deity were the Brahmins Non Brahmins

--- Page 230 ---
198 GANESAD LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OP BEGINNINGS
held the ropes and pulled the vehicle through the streets. and the
lowest castes pushed the car from behind with long heavy poles
As a procession. the festival simultaneously expressed the vil-
lage’s couperative solidarity and its social hierarchy

With the coming of land reform in the 1ysos and (gos, many
oon-Brahmins in the wilage improved their economic position
from bemg the tenant farmers of Brahmin landowners to thal of
landowners themselves. [n 1g6g a non-Brahmin patron intro-
duced the Ganesa festrval into the village as the second village:
wide processional festival, A Brahmin pricst from a nearby
village was hired to install an image of Ganesa in the hall of the
village Cooperative Society. the symbolic center of non- Brahmin
econome and political strength Members from the Jowest or
scheduled castes decorated the canopy for the image. av thes do
in ther role as decorators for festivals and weddings Contribu-
tions of funds came mainly from avn-Brabmeins. Brehiminy rarely
contetbuted. A dramatic skit criticizing corruption in government,
which was written by a local qea-Brahmin playwright. was the
Program pertormed during the week of the fesusal On the day
of the procession, Gunesa’s image was placed on a bullock esrt
rather than being pulled by hand as with the Narasimha fests ai
Non-Beahmins danced im troat ot the cart and sang devotional
songs As the procession moved through the Brahmin neighbor:
hoods. sume Brshouny came out of ther hames to mane after:
ings to the donty. The procession thea cootmucd through the
market area te the river where the mare was immersed

This torm ot the Ganesa testival retlcers the fragile selrdants
of the village, whigh revogm7es the ntual importance ef the
non Brohmons and ther testval Ina cantest thatiy least violent
and most conctlitocy. the change soguil and ecodoane circum:
Stunces ot the pon-Brrhons. expecially un relation to the Brahe
mins, are pasen ceremonial represcatauion At the same time the
festival reintorces solidints wehin the noa- Brahmin community
that sponsors at) Ganesa aives sembohe expression fo many ot
the asprratiens of non-Brahmins education for ther children as
the route to advancement, wealth. and flexibility i contact with
(he works bevond the sillige Phe festival provides a digsuihed
and apparentl) traditional, vet actually dud. setting within
wach te cxpress changing social relations As Lord of Obstacles.
and Bosinnmings., Ganesa belongs to evervone Of late be has

--- Page 231 ---
The Worship of Ganesa 199
been particularly gracious to non-Brahmins in enabling greater
success and advancement for them.

As a complex seligious. symbolic, and social performance, the
Ganesa festival accomplishes many things In both its domestic
and pubhe dimensions, the festiwal brings Hindus cluser to
Ganesga. He comes close to them. receives their homage. distrib-
utes his graceful presence, and infuses their hves with enthusiasm
and optimism, This is the intention of the festival on its own
terms, and ati the reasan most Hindus give when asked why
they participate in the festival—-to honur Lord Ganesa and re-
ceive his blessing.

In social terms the festival accomplishes a heightened level of
solidartty among people. At the domestic level the famuly draws
together in relabon to the image, receives prasdda together,
shares a feast and sacred time together. and thea at returns
Ganesa to the primordial source from which he emerged ‘This
solidarity is not to be equated with social equality. the hierarchy
of the family —or of society—is not overturned. but rather rein
forced. In realm of the public festival the various mdndal exhibits
and programs sometimes bring people ot different classes to-
gether i a camman place and soften the edges of social strathea:
ton to some extent “This seems to he the case particularly in the
urban context «here the houndartes of social Rierarchy are more
difficult to adenufy and maintain In the village the testival has
been a schicle for one caste group to advance ity status: of more
precisely, tO achieve mtual confirmation of the status it has al
ready achieved economically and politicaily fn both city and
village the festival semporanily creates a liminal situation wn which
concern for maintuning human ditlerences recedes while the
awareness of the commen relationship to the deity who. aller
all. belongs to everyone—as cahanced) People tead to eet a
greater amount of guod will toward ong another dunng thes test
val. Ina related was the festival opens up the structures ol evens
day life and reheves ils pressures. sulfusing it veth mew coutiaes
and life

The festival does foster social solidanty. but it also henmhtens
the awareness of differences within the society, During the test
val communal tensions sun Inghet. the munorts Muslin comme
nity feels more intimidated It would be a mistake. however, to
leave the impression that the festival is a tnderbox of communal

--- Page 232 ---
200 CANESA’ LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
hostitiues. [tis rather a barometer of communal pressures. When
the Hindu and Muslim communities have been under stress for
other reasons, economte or political, stolence may be more hkels
to flare up during the festival. Generally caretul anucipation and
Preventive measures by pohce atficials hase contained the timinal
character of the testwal and kept it from turaing unto chaos. The
time may be vulnerable. but so also are people more vigilant

Some Hindus. particuladly conservative Brahmins, complain
that the festival has declined tn quality and rehyiosity ast has
increased in the numbers of parncipants They objegs to its segue
lar character, to the use of populac movies in piace of devononal
singing, and to the iconugraphic innovations and what thes Gike
to be the obscene behavior of celeorants in thei dances during
the procession. Older Brahmins recall nostalgicully the earlier
years of the festwal when Tilak attemoted lo transtorm Cine aa
occasion for socal uphit: This cnticnm may alse mask another
complaint many Brahonns have To some extent these origins
may abo lament the relative dechag in Brohoaried sallienys
the festival and in the Brahmins’ stittus in Maharishtoen cultury,
society, and coonoms generally During this century the festival
has ceased to be the province of the Braborin community More
and more Ganesa belongs to all the people. cach group respond:
ing to him: according te ther own Gistes and Salues

The festwal. like the deity i hones. meduites a number of
opposiponal relaboos The tesGeal beth honors traditiernal rele
gion and celebrates change The semborot Ganesan standing on
the moon makes the sGetement that tyotnoloyy oad modernity
are net oatmical te Gaditonab rekon Te medtales rongieus pare
teularism ano uaiscesalsm Although Genes is a Hindu goa.
woh @ partculue mythology aud cult. he aevertyeless reaches
oul and embraces net only all Hindus but ate all rehgions,
svembolved by the auadad exhibit oa cogous uty Lhe sestasal
mediates the private sad puble words The umone pregtesses
from the houscheld with tty specific rebtous Uraditions inte thy
pubhe streets to jor sith others un recarmitien ot Ganesa’s
Power to embrace everyone fur Maharastirians. whose own
language and culture bes between the Aevan north and the Dra-
sidin seul, Gunesa as a mediator bas irresistable appeal [tis
appropriate that nes tesoval should be more populae in Maha-
rashtra than anywhere cise in India. He ws the Maharasbtrians

--- Page 233 ---
The Worship of Ganesa 208
patron deitw, a reflection of their image of themselves He is
wise, heroic, fun-loving, down-to-earth, and desirous of wealth
and the good life Gaoesa brings the reatm of the sacred closer
to the carth, and. for ut least the duration of the festival, he
establishes it there.

--- Page 234 ---
5 e
Ganesa in a Regional Setting:

anesa in a Regional Setting:
Maharashtra
Ganesa cajoys stitus in the Hindu tradition in all regions of India:
he os alka a Buddhist deity. although more utten portnived as 5
demon, in Southeast and East Asa (Geta. pp ize 81 He inspires
a pariculos follower, however, ithe Marath.-speaking region of
western Iedia called Maharashtra. a: the “Great Cauates "in shill:
ing the focus of our inquiry tram mth te rehyreus practice. 1b ts
importiat to sketeh how Ganesa tis inte the deatieesble cultucl
soul politual, gad religtaus contest of Mah aeashest
Maharashtra as a Cultural Region
Asa politieal and tecutenab unt, Maharasntea has only evisted.
since (g6o when Bombay State was diided along lingurste lines
Inte The lwo stiles oF Guin and Mahorashtrer Dhis act of polit
cab redistactng merely contiemed the cultural and limpuptie tacts
that a veable united terion had existed for several centuries
Occupying about ane hundred thousand square miles. Maharash-
tra falls roughly inta two parts: a strip of coastal jungle between
the Arabian Sea and the Western Ghats, called the Konkan. and
adry, rugged plateau region called the Desh [Desa]

202

--- Page 235 ---
Ganesa in a Regronal Setting: Maharashtra 203

The chief factor in creating a distinct Maharashtrian cultural
and religious tradition has been the Marathi language E-merging
Into written texts around the thirteenth century, Marathi has pro-
duced a remarkable range of religious and poetic literature. Ma-
rathi is the southernmost Indo-Aryan language. and it exhibits
grammatical and vocabularly influences not only from Sansket,
but also from Kannada, the Dravidian language spoken immedi-
ately to the south of Maharashtra. The disunguished histonan of
Marat language and literature, Professor Shankar Gopal Tul-
pule. comments on the role of Marathi in relation to the Indo-
Aryan and Dravidian language families:

Maharashtra and us language. Marathi, occupy the central posi-

tion betaceo the North and the South, or between the Indo-Aryan

and the Dravidian, und van be regarded ay the connecting link
between these two different cultures and fanuhes of language

(Tulpule. p 313)

Maharashtra’s character as what the late anthropologist Tras ati
Karve terms a “cullure-cuntact™ regton is also evident in Maha-
rashtrian social structure (Karve 1968, pig). A number of castes
from Karnataka to the south and the Telugu-speaking region to
the southeast have spread Dravidian pracaces into the region
For example. several Srahmin castes have a tradinon af cross:
cousin marrage. a common pattern in South India, but among
other Brahmin castes. principally the Citpavan or Konkanastha
subcaste, the north Indian pattern is followed In oats marrage
Patterns and childbirth traditions, Maharashtea mace closely re
sembtes customs and practices more frequently attested in South
India (Karve ig68a. pp 161-65. Trautmana)

Some have described Maharashtra as a Crustic.” “comer:
uve.” or “parochial” society (Bharat. porry. Cashman. p 3}
Unlike Bengal. withats cultural and economic coater an Calcutta,
Maharashtra lives in its towns and villages Although uty goo
graphically within the state of Maharashtra, the metropolis of
Bombay has its own disunct polyetha character. nals up of
Gujarat. Parsi, and South Indian communities in addition to es
Maharashtaan population During the dynasties of the Posie
rulers in the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries, Wo was Pune that
served as the adnumstrative and cultural center Danny the Bot
ish period Pune also served as the admuavtratye center tor Bom

--- Page 236 ---
204 GAYESA” LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
bay Presidency when the monsoon rains lashed Bombay. As we
shall see. Pune has had a particularly close relationship to the
fame and fortunes of Ganesa an the region as well For the great
majority of Hindus i Maharashtra the towns and regional
centers serve as the foe of economie and religious life Maha-
rashtra is a culture contact region because of its strategic location
between the Aryan north and Dravidian south Within its borders
there are few reltgious centers of subcontinental significance. and
the uncertain rainfall in the Desa region has precluded large-scale
muigrauons of peoples from other areas “These two factors may
contribute to its reputation as a provincial and rustic place

Maharashtra enjoys a relatively homogeneous populauon The
social structure can be divided roughly into four mayor groups
Brahmins, five percent. Maratha-Kunti (agricultural castes).
forty percent: artisan castes that closely idenuts with the Mara-
tha-Kunbi group in values and religious practices. twenty-five
percent, scheduled castes. ten percent. and Mushy. five per-
cent, The strongest cultural influence has come from the large
aggregation of agricultural and artisan castes that form the non:
Brahmin group, It was from this group that Sivayi drew his army
of mountain and guenila fighters with which he mounted a sue-
cessful conquest of much of ceatral and northern India during the
latter decades of the sudeenth century Wath this mibtary beritage
as part of their history. Known te chem ing mytholorwized form,
the Marathas have seen themselves as a Asaterve ar wasriar cam:
muruty. although thes perception has not always recensed ntual
conmmmation by Brahmins The Beitsh too tended ta see them as
one ot the “martial raves” of India along with the Sikhs. Jats.
Ruaipuls, Pathans, aad others (Cashman, 971

Wah the death of Sivap in céio poliiaal power quickly became
divided between he Afaratho-caste descendents in Kolhapur in
fhe movatuns and his Brahe scana|isteatocs the Peshwas.
evatered ut Peac Although the Peshwas were mitialh appomted
by the monarch. these tale beeing soliditicd and herediaty and
eeidualls celpsed Says hers: Akthough Brahmins by caste. the
Peshwas demonstrated mua of the weditanal Asanasa vatues
assocnttcd wilh Sivan tnd the Macath as

The rebgieus traditiens ot the segien hase coatnbuted imimea-
surebiy to the Maharashtrian sense of cultucabaniy Che prance
pal schicte Jor this bay been the bAdka tradition of the poct

--- Page 237 ---
Ganeta in a Regional Setting Maharashtra 205
saints. a tradition that Hourished from the end of the thirteenth
to the seventeenth centuries and that brought forth such men as
Jhanadeva. Namadeva, Tukarama. Eknaths, and others, froma
variety of castes These poet-saits poured out then religious
enthustasm primarily to Vighoba or Vigthala, the deity of Pan-
dharpur. who is (requently letmed an incarnation of Kryna The
tradition of pilgrimage to Pandharpur observed by great numbers
of devotees, called Varkaris. has gen Maharashtra a sital and
genuinely regional rehgious character (Deleury, Karve 1962:
Vaudeville)

The god of Pandharput ws an embodiment of love and devo-
tion He ehoits much the same rehgious tenor that Kpsna evokes
in North Indi. but the erotic emphasy ot the latter gives way (0
amore ascetic form of desononahsm in the case of Nijthala, The
fyries ot the poct-saiats celebrate his accessibility to all devotees,
regardless of caste and ritual status They preach against tual
ehtism and admonesh thet singers and hearers ta adapt ascenc
devotionals and religious ssacretism centered in persanal mys:
teal reabzaton The pilgrimage to Vighala’s shring draws devo:
tees from ail pacts of Maharashtra He appeals to all castes, but
the greatest share of bis devotees comes from the non- Brahmin
castes

Another mayor resional shieine as the any to Khaadoaba. at
Jeyun. Ubirty miles southeast of Pung Khandoba isa sword:
wielding horseman whose mythology wdeothes him with Susya.
and sometimes Sra. of the Sanskrit tradition He ts ats wor
shipped in the form of adage Heo the patron deity af facming
and herding castes His devotees menilest a vigotous and ageres
sive form ol popular rohgosity Male, pp re at. Soatheumes.
Stanley)

Other sacred centers in Mahorishina imgiudy .r shrine ot Ganga
purto Danateeya (celebrated wthe Maratha narrative, Gare
tra}, one to the paddess Bhavana at Tulyapur. and another to the
goddess Mahalukgmi at Kelhapur The Sanate centers at besa:
bak and Bhimashankiee and Pedh’s stinie ta Paresunings mae
tounder ef the Citpavaa Brahmin subsasts tres witb came the
Peshwa nulers and many witha. the relguaus pouleal ast intel
lectual elite of Maharashtra trom the cithteont to the twentett
centunes—fhgure as significant regionai religious conters Agaust
this background of the gener cultural and religions chotacer ot

--- Page 238 ---
206 GANFSA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
ars
trvauman & ny
a Afar von
«
tesvanm
nana gosnan
anmnenaze:
Pra SHANKAR .
ag
a 1
RaMsANGA On
ware va ry :
a EC :
4 .
wey a or
rd grmonarce
Bloresaon .
Me fee,
; Teg 8
stone ol
Mangnact ouvad :
eg Sere, ry
Panonanrun &
a.
GANGAR A |
oom Ces
Or scaeel fl
& eu '
° zs .
HINDU SHRINES oe
af MAHAKASHTRA Abertay
BOOTMER seme soem
Maharasttea. tas possible aow to place Ganesa as a deity and a
tradition that have thet own distinctive regional character
Sacred Centers to Ganesa
Ganesa hives in tas images un shrines special (a him all over Ma-
harashtra and throughout india. shames in which he grants his
auspicious appearance [dersana| to devotees who visit him there

--- Page 239 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Setting: Maharashtra 207
Unlike the temples to Sia or to other deres in which Ganesa
serves aS a threshold guardian, in these shrines his is the ceatral
image and other deities occupy subsidiary positions Shrines to
Ganesa in Maharashtra fall roughly into three categories. The
most important are the asavindvakas—the cight shrines to Vina-
yaka (Ganesa) that together make up a sucred complex about
which more will be said later. The second group comprises the
more than seventy-five shrines of varying size and atfluence that
are actively served by ritual functionanes [pijdrist and enyay lo-
cal reputations as centers of Ganesa’s sucred presence (Gadgtl,
2.1-§9) The third category includes the indeterminate number
of small roadside shrines and images at the boundaries of vil:
lages. Lisually made of rough stone and smeared with sed paint,
these may play important oles during tesuvals but do not receive
the regular service of priests Most uf the images in both the
agfavinavakas and other shrines in) Maharashtra are called
svayambha (“self-existent™) That as. they arc not carved by om:
age makers and installed by priests. Instead they are rocks that
bear a striking resemblance, in the eyes ot the tuthtul. to the
head of an elephant: Like the dlagrdmna stones of Vaignavism
and the banalinga of Sawism, wavanrbhts images appear without
human agency as embodiments of Ganesws sucred presence in
the world and require no ttes ob sucralizalion | praupratythal or
thew sacredness to be apparent to his devatces They tre “nature
ally” sacred. Temple myths tefl of ogcasiens on which Ganesa
appeared to someone in a dream and tstructed the person to dig
beneath a certain tree and find “him (in the form ot a srasambhie
stone This svavanbAd Wradihon bioks the warstap ot Ganesa with
very ancient Hindu mudes of apprehending sactyd power

The shrines mark places where ceeaty ot divine wgmihuunce
occurred in the mythic past or where Gaaesa acteatea a demon
of saved a god of devotee from being defeated Py same obstagle
‘They are places in which Ganesi ts said to have appeared lo gods,
and humans to order to tend them his satieg presence aad obyta-
cle-removing powers Ebological legends assogsued with these
shrines tell how bis desotees prospered in riatenad and spur tual
ways as a result of calling on Canesa in his doc at a parteubar
shrine The legends also celebrate the power te re deased trom
knowing the deity’s sacred lore. spectlically bis warteas As with
all Hindu sbemes, tales abound ot the tent jpiaie of ment

--- Page 240 ---
208 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
[punva] to be picked by the faithful at these fertile centers of
teligious power. Many themes in these temple myths differ little
from myths of other deities, however. the Ganesa stores call
attention again and again to the this god's spectal territory: the
terrain of obstacles and their removal This is his special work in
the interactions of gods and humans that is celebrated in relatien
to the concrete places in which these mighty deeds were done

Many myths of Ganesa that specifically idenafy themselves
with a specite shrine are variants of well-known Epic and Purame
stories. At one small temple in the ancient village of Adas. avar
Nagpur, for example. the story is told that whea Brahma was
creating the universe he brought torth a beauutul water aymph
[apsaras]. named Tilouamé. wham he then attempted to seduce
As he chased her. his lust for her became so intense that he
spilled his seed on the ground. and from tt sprang up three de-
mons. The demons quickly grew so powerful that tres destroved
the tiple world and smprisoned all the gods But the gods called
on Ganesa who told them te sit under a certain saan tree with
Swa and Parvati at ts base Then Ganesa emerged trom tie san
tree and slew all the demons (Condusamkar rugs pp &2 Rv
The sery tree from winch Ganesa emerged forms part of the
shrine thal presently stands on that spot The meer draws on
Puraow tales of Tilottama te pg. Shanda Purdie 6 160 2-570
OFlahedy 197%. pp 2a8-u4ab but rowarks ther with @ ditterent
narrative turn. one in which ibis Ganess wha saves the gods god
the untverse from the disastrous camsequcaces of Branma’s snces:
tuous lust. the linkage between Ganesa and the sae tree recalls
Bre and Purame ssaibolism of the saat tree as the one trom
whose wood the sticks [aranis} for Kindhag the Vedic tie were
made Agnes said to leap out-of the fire sticks as thes are
kindled (MBH ga cr 20) fn this story Ganesa fakes over
Agas tole Thus the local legend yorns teecther the specie
shrine and as teeriers with the “preat traditian oot the mivtho:
Jogical lore recorded in the Sarskeit tows by relatiag them oth
to the pariculir image This phenomenon is widespread in Hin:
dism. un example of what David Shulman calls the “lovatiza-
tion” of the disine (pp. yo-8gt

Other temple cevends tell ot Ganesa’s supremacy over the
atbee great gods of the Hindu pantheon ba the shine at Siddha.
tek, ony of the usfavenavada centers, this story ts told

--- Page 241 ---
| Ganesa in a Regional Setting: Maharashtra 209
When Brahma began creating the universe. two demons, Madhu
and Kaufabha, appeared out of Visnu’s ear and began to disturb
Brahma Visgu tned to kill the demons, but they proved too powcr:
ful Then he went 10 Siva. pleasing him with devotional songs, and
asked his help Siva scolded him. saying that if he had worshipped
Ganesa in the frst place he would not be in this predicament Siva
then gave Viynu the mantra of Ganeda After a long search for the
auspicious place to revite the mantra, Vigqu came to Suddhstek and
worshipped Ganesa there Hearing Vipnu’s devotion. Gagesa ap:
peared there and destroved the demans (Gadgil, 2 44-4)

This story turns on the realization that the power of the de-
mons to make trouple for the gods arises fram the gods" own
ignorance of the greater power to be denved from knowing
Ganesa and tus mantra. Their suffering stems from ritual error
Gapesa’s nse to prominence in the story, asin the tradition itself.
depends on his ability to displace the other deities and emerge as.
the one capable of accomplishing what they had failed to do

A smilar hattle between the gods and demons ts said, accord:
ing to the temple tradition of the shrine at Ranjsngaon, again an
ayjavindvaka center in Ahmadnapgar district, to have taken place
on the vers plain on which the temple stands. Indeed. its exis:
lence 1s a commemoration of Ganeéa’s Irumph over the forces of
chaos sn that place

Formerly the demon Tupura worshipped Ganesa and reeerved the

boon that he would cangucr the unsere Quickly Tripura de-

teated Indra and captured the teple workl Hy extinguished the
sacred hres snd protabited worship of the wods thea Narada told
the gods to take refuge in Ganess Sta worshipped bom ind te
cewed the atantea that made hun able te defeat Papure on that

spot (Gadgil, 28 9)

This myth illustrates Ganesa’s capacity to play both sides of the
game between the gous and demons Tripura tecened the boon
from Ganesga that made possible his conquest ot the tapie world
in the same way that Siva latee receives the atantra in order to
defeat him Gagesa first creates an obstacte foc the gods by graing
Tripura the power to conquer the taple world. but then he ce
moves it by granting Sea his all-powerful siaatca In the same
way, having removed the ubstacle of powerlessness trom Tripura
at the beginning of the story. at the ead be obstructs him: by
aiding Siva. Here. as im many other myths about Gages. in his

--- Page 242 ---
210 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
role as a threshold guardian, he regulates the passage of power
back and forth between the contending parties of forces. In this
myth it is between gods und demons; in others i may be between
gods and humans. gods and gods, or humans and humans. Like
the operator of a lock on a nver. Ganesa moves the levels of
power up and down according to which agent is sceking passage
All must pass through him, whatever their business may be. tf
they are to have their efforts come to fruuon, This mythic reality
takes on compelling concreteness and immediacy for the devotce
through its assocration with a particular shrine where the sacred
cosmos intersects the human world

Many myths associated with local shrines to Ganesa call atten:
tion to how he grants the desires of those who worship him there
Two stories illustrate this pattern The first is from a small and
ancient temple in the village of Kalam. near Nagpur The story 1s
a variant of the ancient tale of Gautama’s curse (RSS 07 017 -48:
MBh 13.4f-12-13. SB 3 3.4.18: cf O'Flaherty 1973. pp 85-86)

Out of lust tor Ahalya. the wife of the sage Gautama. Indra im-

persoosicd Gautama and made love with her When Gautama

realized this be cursed India’s phallus to fall off and hase Bis body
coveted with a thousand female sexual organs [bhuga’, hence be
became known as Bhagendra Then Brbaspat the preceplor of
the gods “ent to Gautume and recened the mania of Ganesa

He pase India the mantra snd told him to worship Ganess io the

form of Cintaman a KRadamba [Kalu] lodes brought the

Ganges to the shrine in ordes to bathe fubdisedat the image His

cure Was thus removed and his manhood restored Che sacred,

mver [Artha] and image that Indra worshipped there remain ia that
demple tes this day (Cendavankat i906. pp vot ot GP

129 (0 12, Preston. po tag)

The myth rearranges clements in the sters te call allzation to
the power of Ganesa’s mattra. mage. and shrine as tehicles
capable of overcoming the curve Gautama lad placed ot lodrs
for seducing his wife da the second story itis the power ot the
sow [erate] fo Gatese that is celebrated At the temple of
Mahagunapate (Gagesa) in the silage of Eitvala. near Bombay,
this story is told.

Wheo King Duyvanta marned Sakuntala he promycd ty Pring bee

to his palace in a grand procession But when he sid not come tor

her aller a while she Peoume deeply perplexed At tha: moment

--- Page 243 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Setung: Maharashtra zn
the sage Durvasay arrived there, but she did not notice him kn
raged at this lack of respect for him, he cursed her that ber hus-
band would forget her torever Then her preceptor. Kapva, told
her to make a vow [vrata] ty Ganesa lo overcome the obstacle of
Durvanas’s curse and Dusyanta’s forgetfulness Sakuntala came to
Ganesa to his shane and declared her vow lo him: He was pleased
with her devolon snd caused Duyyanta to remember hee (Cenda-
vankar 196%. pp. 14-28)

These vanous temple myths are broadly etiological in char-
acter, They function to “localize” the divine power associated
with Ganesa and eaphoitly link the particular place. image. and
ritual traditions with the mythological lore of “ereat tradition”
Hinduism by reworking weil-Known stones to ft them into the
framework of Ganesa devotion

Although there are many Ganesa shrines disibuted through:
out the region of Maharashtra, the Ganesa tradition is centered
on eight shrines thal together make up a complex known as the
asfavindyaka - eight: Vindyaka (Gayesa) shrines These are all
located tn the region around the city of Pune In the sacred
geography of the Ganesa tradition. they form a mandala trom the
surroundings of Pune and the temple to Ganesa in the nearby
village of Cincvad. where the shrine is associated with Morava
Gosaw. the patriarch of the cult [sampradaya] im Maharashtra
These cight shrines rose to prominence dunne the rule of the
Peshwas in Pune during the seventeenth ta minetcenth centuries,
and they continue to flourish today

All enght of these shrines contain ssavambhe (sellexesteat im:
ages) that are said lo have appeared lo devotees ~aarurally in
the torm of clephantfaced stones Devotional Iterature and
temple guidebooks admonih pilgrims te visit all crght ot the
shrines as part of a single pilgrimage [sara]. clammy that the
ment to be obtained (rom reccning the auspicious sight [darsana]
of the eight images dar cacceds that of a vest loa sungte serine
The pilgrimage to all eight shrines constilutes 2 creumambu} step
[pradaksij4| of the boundanes of the yucred cosmos thal is per
meated by the presence of Ganesa

Three of the eight shrines he lo the cast ana seuthy tof Pure
Moragaon, on the Kacha Rivec, Siddbatea. on the Bhima Raver
and Theur, on thy Mula-Muthia Rover De the notte ol Puac are
the shrines at Ranjangaon, one on the road leading to Abmodna

--- Page 244 ---
212 GANLSA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
gar, the rock-cut shrine at Lenyadn, and the other. Oyhar. Jo-
cated on the Kukdt River. Lying to the west. in the coastal moun-
tains, are the shrines at Madh and Pali (see pl. 8)

Although the tradition stresses the unity of these eight centers.
the temple at Moragaen is regarded as the most important. It
attracts the greatest number of pilgrims. and enjoys a generatly
greater level of religious prestige than the others

Moragaon 1s located on the Karha River about sixty mutes
southeast of Pune The pilgrim enters the temple from the north,
facing the shrine located at the south end ot the temple enclo-
sure, Phe arrangement recatls the sigmificance of the south as the
dangerous region over which Ganesa stands guard Jusi oulide
the main shrine are images of Nandin, Siva’s bull vehicle. and
Mugaka, Ganesta’s rat vehicle They guard the entrance and look
devotedly toward Ganesa’s image inside The shrine 1s faid out in
a rectangular form and traced within tis the outline ata lortone
It es at the center of sertical and horizontal axes. Vertcaliy the
shrine intersects the triple world. having Katlasa (Siva's neavenly
abode) above. Sesa in Pafalaloka (the serpent and the under:
world) beneath: and Bhuloka (the earthy in the middle The
center of the Bhuloka is Mavurapura (Moragaon) On the han
zontal axis the temple ts laid out with gates to the four directions,
each containing unages of Ganesa atiended by pans of gods and
consorts in portal niches bach gate simultaneoush represents 4
form in which Gagesa appeared inone of another cosmic age. an
aspect ot the divine principle [Arafat]. anane ot the four life
goals [parugartha| detailed in the dhareta teodiian On entering
the shrine the pilgero performs worship at each of the lout dire¢:
tional Gagesas

According to tradition the pilgrim shoutd begin suct a pilgtim:
age on the fust day of the month ot Bhadrapada (August Sep:
tember). taking one das for cach of the directional images and
then arrwing before the shrine at the center on the tourth day
[Ganesa Caturthe|. the most auspicious day in ihe Hindu sear for
the worship of Ganesa tn this way the pilgrim moves spahally
toward the central shrine an the most sacred day. hence spatial
Punts and temporal auspiciousness converge most advanta-
geoush for the devotee im the momeat ot contact with (ae sight
ot the image [darsana] As one enters the temple, keeping the
main caring on the right according to the practive of circumambu-

--- Page 245 ---
Ganega in a Regional Setting: Maharashira 20a
lation [pradakgina], the first image encountered 1s Ballalvina-
yaka, the form in which Ganesa appeared when he defeated the
demons Sankarasura and Kamalasura who had stolen the Vedas
and hidden them at the bottom of the sea. Ballalvinavaka 1s
attended by Rama and Ramesa (Sita) This portal symbolically
opens onto the realms of dharma and honors the domain of
Vigqu-brahman or the absolute principle of reality as itis mani
fested in the forms of Visgu.

To the south, the second stop for the pilgrim, 1 the image of
Vighnesa, the Lord of Obstacles. He ts flanked by Siva and Uma
(Parvati) ‘This gate represents the puncple of bradenan io its
form as Siva and oversees the domain of artha (accomplishment)
At the western gate is the image of Ganesa in tis form as
Cuntamagt, the fulfiller of all destres He is attended by Kama
and Ratt. the god and goddess of pleasure It is the domain of
asat-brahman (the absolute principle that is beyond manifesta:
ton) and the domain of kdma (enjoyment; At the northern gate
stands Ganesa in his form as Mahaganapatr, the supreme lord,
attended by Mahi (earth) and Varaha (boar dvatdra) This is the
realm of sat-brahkman (the absolute principle that manifests itself
in the world) and the domain of moksa (release from reburth)
When the pilgnm makes the four-sided journgy along the uuter
limits of the shrine, he traces the boundaries of Ganesa’s cosmos.
as he does “hen he pertorms a pilgamage to all cight of the
asfevindyeka shrines together “This homage to the portals [diare
piyd| serves as situal preparation for the most sgmhcant part of
the pilgremage. the auspicious viewing (dariuad} of Ganesa sim.
age in the central shrine

The main shrine conusts of an assembly hall [sabhamandaput
in frontof the shrine The wavambhd amape bs located ina small
sanctuary beneath the temple tower “Phes saat engtosure “womb:
house [gurhhagrha}” is the locus of the most intense consent
tion of Ganesa’s sacred presence Tu the right and lett sides of
the image stand Ganesa’s two consocts, Sidiihe eSuccess) anal
Buddhi (Intelligence }. thes are his sade (the feminine cman
tons ot his creative powers) fa tront of the imape also stand
Ganesa’s rat and 4 peacuck [musica]. a creature usualy asso
ciated with Ganesa’s brother, Skanda In thes shrine. however. ut
is said that Ganesga defeated the peacock anu consceted bios ine
his own devotee (Mate, pp 14-15)

--- Page 246 ---
214 GASESAL LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS

The shrine at Moragaon is particularly celebrated in the Mud-
gala Purana, dating from the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries
This text devotes various sections to recitation of the mighty
deeds Ganesa performed in eight different incarnations in respec:
tive cosmic ages These stories tell of brs many battles with the
demons in detense of righteousness [déarma] and extol the
powers associated with sucred places One such tale associated
with Moragaun is that of Ganesa. in his torm as Gunesa. the lord
of the qualities [gua]

Formerly the righteous king Cakrapane had no nsue He per:
formed wscobonet to Suna. who appested te him gad tak hen
that his wite, Uprs would bear him a san Howeser, Cakrspane'’s
seed Bas lov powerful for Uyes to carry. and the embryo leaped
from her wont inte the uccan where owes sarsed bya Brabmin
couple. Whea the child had grown the Brahoue couple returned
the young man to hrs Cather, and Cakrapar: named his son Sinvhu
Meaning “Ocean” Leaving bis Singdam to his sen, Caxrapons
relies to the furest After performer asceticin for a thousand
sears. Sindhu tevenved the pronine frum Sory, that he would gon:
quer the Inple world ang have amis the elvan ot ammoralty
churned from the ecean of milk) forever But Suna wasaed him
that he woukl fase the aesta uf the wontuner Rekieg ib were to
break As Sindhu s power merened he Became more corrupted
and imtevicated wich seasual pleasures, e6ea to tne pore fear:
INE smashing the images ot the pads an the temples Sindhe thea
pul all the gods rte prison Bat the gods ered aut ter Guagsas
help The lord of obstacles qurckiy appeared in his perce [uke
form and quakiy detested KRamyleura. the eenetal of Sindhy +
veiny cutting his mods inta three pieces Assembling we army af
Stas ctondants gare] Guness batthal Sindu’s army and de:
feated ot quicals Guiness cut upen Sindhu’s hods aanl emptied stuf
rs Le geting wate Vhe gods aed dharnia wcte ther festured and,
Brahma gee he ten daughters to Gunes in martisge Wath thas
odstacie tothe gods oxenome Guaesa vanished. aed Brahe s aod
the other gods established a shamg at Moragtan to cormmemonite
Gangsa's appottancs inthis farm (Condaseakarcuga ppor tet
Mate. pp nt ie. Mut? 6 5-441
In addition te the sanctity of the shrine itsel€. tere as the

nearby tiver Karha along which are a number of sacred ploces or
tirthas where pilgrims conte to bathe and expiaste sims These
tuthas mars places where Ganesa’s obstacle-removing powers are

--- Page 247 ---
Ganeia in o Regional Seung Muharathira 246
especially present. Indeed. the shrine and tts tirthas fuse together
in the expectations of the pilgrim so that the term firtha reters
both to the sacred places at the river and the shrine Vhe tirtha ts
understood to flow mystically through the shee itselt Above
the doorway to the temple. commanding the pilgnms’ attention
as they pass through enroute to the image. is a Sanskrit stanza
addressed to Gagesa. the lord who dwells at the blissful destina-
ton of the pilgrims) mystical realization. The external terrain of
the shane and the internal landscape of the devotee’s mystical
awarcness ideath canscrge in the act of crossing the threshold
The stanza reads:

You dwct on the bank of the sariva [the river near the shone
aod the fourlh state et Camscrausaess according to the LU pamsads]
which gives the greatess happiness [parumasuksa], bevond the
fealms of the dullwuted. in the innate places of vaur own bliss
lananda’ You are the jord of the peacock [Mayiresvara] ‘Thus 1
meditate on you. the progenitor of Siva. Han (Visnu]. Rav.
[Sarva]. and Brahma
The following myth celebrates the aaisanrtha at Moragaon. It

is a story of primal sin and expiation and follows that pattern of
myths associated with Ganesa in which bis powess overcome ab-
stacles where all else hay failed

bormerly. when Brahma created Kama the Jater struck
Brahma with dese Then be dusted for his daughicr. Sacass ati.
but by desire for her weakened hum and he was unable to continue
creaung the unnerse He went te the gods for help co seeking
Penance for hiy sin’ Visgu created the Ganges, Siva the Narmada
Surva the Yamuna. and Devi the Saraswati rivers out none of
ther waters could clense Brahma of hi vin of incest Then the
gods together called upon the fsrivatirtha ta appear Branars
dathed there and brs on was removed and hiy powers restored
Brahma pul the sacred waters in tis waiter pot jkamandalts| ana
went ta worship Ganest at Mosapgon As be entered the shrine he
stumbled and spilled bis pot causing the waters to fall ncatby | He
tned to collect the salir again inte his water pot bul Gants
prevented him So it remained there and became the Karha River
(Male. pp. g 10)

Ia this mvth of the ongin of the distha at Moragaon, Garesa
splendidly plays out two of his best reales he saves the universe
fram destruction when all other efforts have taled. and he tacks

--- Page 248 ---
216 GANESAS LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Brahma out of the waters that saved him trom the impotence
caused by his sinful lust’ This fatter sleight of hand—or more
accurately, sleight of foot—recalls the myth in which Ganesa
look the form of a crow and upset the sage Agastya’s walerpot
and sent him in scarch of the sacred waters that turned out to
reside at a tirtha to Ganesa. This myth combines clements of
chology and epiphany: it both recounts why the spot ts sacred
and reveals Gayesa’s divine obstacle-removing powers

The shrine at Moragaon is served by a Brahmin priest bkyetro-
padhydva] who performs 4 series of daily mtuals. He “awakens”
the image cach morning with the worship of sixteen upacdras
("ways of service”). which include oltermgs of bathing. food
flowers, incense, and prayers. At midday. a simpler ceremony
[paricopacara] 1s performed. At evening. the pricst concludes
the day's ntual activity by reciting a series of praises and “retire
ing” the image for the night At two other mes during the das
a priest of the Guray. a non-Brahmin Saiite caste. performs
more informal rites to Gapesa’s image called praksalana. Alt
food offered to the deity us vegetunan. Devotees may alse ar
taage for the prests to perform special ceremories of adoring
the image [alamkarapija], These ntual patterns are generally
followed at the other agfavutdveha shoes as well They reflect
Brahmanical practice and resemble more general Hindu temple
worship patterns

The shrines to Ganesan Maharashtra. especeally the agtavind-
vakas. no doudt have been sacred to Hindus for mans centuries,
pethaps exen proc to ther cesociaton with Guucsa In their
Present forms. however, these shrines and thes temtple structures,
date fram the period of Maratha and Peshwa cule. in the seven:
teenth century. as evatenced bs gragts of land recened for theur
support (Preston, pp t14- 22)

The Peshw. rulers in Pune supported the agtacatavake shones
with particular commatment hee ause Ganesa was the pateon deity
of thor Kiastaup lineauwe thers Addadevaia. and because ther hing
don prospered under Ganesa’s benevolent guidance ‘The shrines
al Morayaed and Phew were the ones most tequeatls sisted bs
the Peshiar rufens. particular Balan Baurae and Madhava |
(Preston. pp. ris. 121)

In addition to there financial support at the shrines in the re
mon, the Peshwas Liashty celebrated the annual testval to

--- Page 249 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Setting: Maharashtra 27
Gapega on Ganesa Caturthi, the fourth day of the bright half of
tie month of Bhadrapada (August/September). This festival was
beld in Pune at the palace rather than at one of the shrines A
clay image of Ganese was installed temporarily, as it was in many
Brahmin homes in Pune, and probably followed the general pat-
tern discussed in the previous chapter. Many Brahmins were in-
vited ta the palace festival to be fed: then the image was taken in
Procession through the streets of the culy where mt could be seen
by the populace and immersed in the river

Atter 1818. when the British defeated the Peshwa dynasty.
they continued the tradition of supporting sacted shrines and
temples. largely out o€ a desire to ensure the tranquility of their
subjects, The palace traditton of the annual festival, however, fell
into disuse. and the ceremony continued on only in the cuntexts
of individual houscholds. primarily among Pune’s Brahmin cam:
munity By the end of the century. however, the festival was fo
undergo a rebirth in Pune under the leadership of Bal Gangachar
Tilak. known ta his followers as Lokamanya--resered by the
people. Tituk infused the festeal with new meaning and purpose
and launched it on a course that would give it much of the char-
acter it presently exhibits
Sacred Persons and Traditions:
The Ganesa Sampradaya
Ganesa’s emergence ito prominence as a deity within the Hiadu
pantheon was impo small measure accomplished by those cove
tees who through the centuries Jooked on him as the cater of
ther rehgious lives No one knows how ald this Uadined at wor
ships. but a reasonabic rucss. based on Purasia aad other tex
tual sources and archacolorical evidence places the emergency ol
an advatitiadle colt af Ganese beQween the seah aad cahth oe nty
fies, although some suthortes plice fh clayer to the tenth cen
tun (Bhandarkar. p 1g. Ghurve. pp ce 8 Green tang p
178) The ares of Vidarbha. cn castern Manarashtna appears 6:
be among the carhest locations of Ganesa wurstyp Nodacbhay rs
midway between North and South Fouta and was an inpertint
crosstag point for cultural and cchgious influences As osidence
for the presence of the Ganesa traditan in this area. Preston

--- Page 250 ---
218 UANESA LORD OF OBSTACEES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
locates a Ganeéa temple at Kalam (Kadamba). near Nagpur.
Copper plate inscriptions indicate that the temple was Aourishing
there by at least the fitth of sixth century (pp 104-5)

The Ganapatvas desenbe their group as a sampraddva, The
term derives from the Sanskrit word, samipradd. meaning lo give
or hand down by tradition A sampradéya ws denned as, “a particu-
lar system of religious teaching. a religious doctrine inculcating the
worship of one particular deity” (Apte. p yoy) The Ganapatvas
patronize Ganesa ubove all other deities in the Hinde pantheon
Such a tradiuon appears to have casted for Ganesa from atleast
the tenth century 4 p.. probably longer A hagiological text trom
about this ume, the Sathararvasa of Anandapin. eres us a pice
ture of some aspects of Ganapatya thought and practue. The
Saftkaravyaya celebrates the victories of Sankara, (he Lamouy pro-
poneat of Advaita Vedanta. during the course of which he en:
countered in debate and defeated tanaus religious and padosaphi-
cal opponents. Anandagin describes the views and doctrines
[rata] ot six different: groups of Garupatvas, cach one meine
wonographic and aqual palierms. and sicws taught bs different
masters of dcurvas.

Gunjasuta tought devobon to Mohaganapat. the creator of the
casmos who remains after us cyclical dissonutian He bay sine
tusk and embraces his wét Meditunen oo Cutingsa in this form,
Gurjanuta chamed. would brag the devotee ulumate dliss Ane
other preceptor, Ganapankumiwca. worstioped aa image of
Ganesa wilh turmene powder His view of Gunesa as the ulti
mate deity was bascd on the Vedie reteremee to Gunupale ERY
2220) sa which he is described as the lord at the hosts ot gods
Devotees to this form of Ganesa branded themselves on thet
arms and face with the mark of Gangsa’s tusk Other groups ol
devotces worshipped him according to dhltercat wonographical
and ritual traditions -Navanita, Svarga. and Samana Ganupat-
yas calthough all chimed to follow the teachings at seat ore
vealed Vedic authority)

A sxth group of Gagupatyas. led by one Herambasuta, tol-
lowed the so-called lef hand Tantra path They are devotees of
Ganesan his ncchesta oc umpure farm The word weccdigfa reters
to foods lett aver trom the sucntice or offering to a deity Lemay
abo reter to food jefe in the aeuth, heave impure in offering
lettoser foods to Ganesa. the Ucchista Ganupatvas reverse the

--- Page 251 ---
Gageta in @ Regional Setting” Maharashtra 29
symbolism of Brahmantcal orthodoxy. 9 pattern consistent with
Tantric inversions of orthodox practice. Herambasuta lays out
the basic tenets of his doctrines to Sankara as follows

‘The true teaching of the Ucchista Ganapats i called Haucamba

(ve.. that tuught by Heramba] Thes mediate on Ganapati as

follows four-armed, three-eyed. each hand halding 4 noose, ave

and a gesture releving fear. with the tip of his ttunk he sucks up
wine Such is the form of Ganapati warstnp.

The image the Hawamba Ganapatis worstup is ante who ty seated
On a great throne. in whose lef lap sis thy goddess (Dew whom
he embraces while the np ot his trunk touches her sexual organ
[raga].

Phave become content that there i nu other view [masa] that
can compare vath this one According tw the teaching of the Ich
hand path. Gaoapat: and Deve are part al one another, just as.
though the seit [ate] is smaller than the Jord [ist] even so thes are
one This is my view Basing taken up both wass of thinking the
onhodoy and the Tantric] Pbave put tbe mack of thy sect on my
forehead and left off all other marks Now | have made the
Sandhya and all her Brabmarcee! otusds aptonal, T have deurk
from the well of highest knowledge Se. | am dora inte bliss aad
have acquised the knowledge of the three worlds

Furthermore, according te my view there are (eo teachings to
he followed first. all men boro of different castes ee of ene casts
Second, the wamen of all casigs are the same asthe men Eber as
fe sin if there is intercourse between men wid women fof diftere.s!
castes}, oF separation either, hecawse there ne tule that one
woman belongs to one man Ef thes are united in alercourse white
she cs menstevous, there wv greater Blos futaadal ta bo caper
enced. heeause there 1s much Plocd fowing There sae suck
arcangemcnt as marriage and all Uesses Lesene| are the same Ths
acl of engoyment should be taken os ary man who Reme He
ramba Ganapats i tis mind, lakes a woman us bes sek Suekitne
visaya. chap, 17)

Somehow Sankara fails to be perstsded by Herimbasutes ar
guments. He responds by saying that the Ceehisha Ganapetyt s
teachings are contrary to the Vedas ind that bes ation [aad sal
comes only through reaunciabon Foc those whe toma in thy
world, sacttice, worship, and adherence to dharma sae the sp
propriate paths to follow This Tantric tnterpretanon of Gans:
devotion docs not belong to the mainstream af the tadimien the

--- Page 252 ---
220 GANFSa:l LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD Of BFGENNINGS
preponderance of the literature reflects the orthodox assumptions
and practice, Indeed, Ganesa came to be accepted. along with
Visnu. Siva, Surva. and Devi, as one of the fivefold {pancava-
tana} group of deities worshipped by Smarta Brahmins of South
india. To what extent the ongins of Ganesa warship can be
traced to South [ndia remains unclear. but the elephant headed
deity enjoyed venerauion by Saiwites there from early times
Several major Sanskrit tests enjoy ceateal authority among
Ganapatyas. The most important ts the Sei Ganapat: Athurvasirya
ov Ganapan Cpaniyad (sce Appendix). This a a late upempad
attributed to the Atharva Veda The text identifies Gagesa with
the all-pervading Aratman and celebrates the powers of tne det
to overcome all otstactes Another important Ganapatya ( pan-
Igad is the Ganesatdpaniva Cpangad Two sectanan Puranas. the
Ganega Purana and the Mudyala Purana contain a wreat deal of
mnvthological and rituat iare pertaining ta Ganesa The Gartesa
Puraya is probably the older of the lwo. dating. acceding to
Hazra, from between the eleventh and fourteenth centuries (1961
p. 97). Included in the text ef the Ganesa Purana iw tae Ganesa
Gitd (chaps 1a8-48 of the Crarakhandal [tis patterned atice the
Bhagavad Gite. deed, ninety percent of tts verses ate nearly
identical tou (Yoror, po 4) in the Gantesa Gite Ganesa plass the
role Krsna plays in the Hhagavad Gitte He tew.hes Ge ingaiing
proce, Varenya, that he. Ganesa. i the supreme dacd. the em
bodiment of brahman. and that oy worshipping him, Varcay mas,
find the sure path to bberatian bn this theologial respect. the aa
Gités aw sen simile The devotional path tought by the Gaesa
Gita, however, displays a somew hat diffe cent Caphasts un oly anser
fon that the mystical umn achieved ia worship loads te bSersnee
knowledge [pid] (GG i 617) The text ale coataias a cumber
of features that reflect modes of Ganapatya mul practee It pros
claims, for example
Whoever fetes dt bones on banc er thrive Gt dieu oven BY seeing,
fh Cmgad whe becomes cdeaucal with Arata a mans re
teased He whe hemg well prepared ceutes (hit at al!
bimes, becomes thet Ganesa There ene doubt ihere) He wha
feces cin oa every: Qourta (mght et a dunae forloigbh!, wath
deseton as ale te for phase GG tat 4s. trans in Yoron p
Moe AP 5. BhavP nage ao, Gar big, MutwaP 260.52 - 65,
SRP Ub po St-1 br t 22.6 21g R727

--- Page 253 ---
Ganeta in a Regional Setting: Maharashtra 221

The Ganesa Gua then goes on to link devotion to its lord with
the performance of his festival, which ts the mayor sacred event
available to his devotees:

If a man. full of devonon, makes of cart in the month of Bhadra

trethe bright hal€, on the fourth (mght). the lowrarmed figure of

Ganesa, (and) whih is with his mount and with his weapans,

Praises (him), according to the prescribed rues. Cand) recites, ine

deed cagerly, then Ganesa. having been pleswed. gives hum the

highest eqjoyment: sony, grandsons. wealth, food grainy, an abun-
dance of cattle. treasure and the rest To him who desires knowl:
edge knowledge will belong he who desires happ.ness. will obtain
happiness. he who had a dewse will gain olber desses (then) they
proceed to release ut the eed Col their limes (GG oor ay 42, trans

m Yorou. p75)

When properly adored. Ganesa emerges as the giver of all gifts
and the remover of all abstacles. whether they be matenal or
spiritual All goals achiese harmonious realization through his
transformative power

The Mudgala Purdna, the second Purana sacred to the Gana-
patyas, 1s probably trom a later period then the Ganesa Purana
and shows more tanulanty with Maharashtrian sacred sites, par:
ucularly the shrine at Moragson Both Puranas play aa important
role in Ganapatya literature. a number ot commentaries and
abnidgements af there contents hase been written in Marathy to
make them more accesuble 1 wader audiences

Ganapatva Inerature im Marathi ww extensive but only a few
texts deserve special mention Karhadhars Ganesa Gitatka
(rog2). Yadumameka’s Sungerane 9726). Devas bunsvada Mahat-
mya (075th Gosavinandana © /ndaamodaka. Ganesayegindra’s
Yogetvara (c¢ 1775) (Tulpule, p 408)

‘The tradition of sacred persons ayeciited with Canesa in Ma-
harashtra begins with Moraga (Morobay Gosavi (1610 sa) He ts
widely regarded by Ganapatyas in the region as the greatest
devotee of Ganesa He was the tounder ol a dynasty of saints at
Cinevad. near Pune fndecd. his devotion fe the deity was so
pervasive that he came te be regarded as a teas carnation of
Ganesa, as did his descendents for seven geacratians Traditions
of Moraya Gosavi's birth place hint other near Cinesad or the
region ot Bidar (southeast ot Pune) cind ata Desastha Ryscdl
Brahmin family. The hagralogs sl tradition it Cinesad Ras at that

)

--- Page 254 ---
222 GANESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
Moraya’s father, one Vamanbhat. and his wife came to Mora-
gaon on pilgrimage and settled there Because they had no son,
Vamanbhat performed penance at Moragaon until he received a
vision [darsana] of Ganesa For twelve years he performed ascet-
cism there. but still remained childless. Ganesa then appeared to
him in a dream and told him he would not recewe a von Uae
daunted. Vamanbhay persisted in tis ascetic mor tor another
forty-eight’ years. both a Moragaon and Siddhatek Finally.
Ganesa appeared to him again. saying. “lam pleased by your
devotion, and even though you will not have a son. 1 will take
birth myself [through your wife|” (Deva and Bhingarkar. pv)
So Ganesa became incarnated in the person of Moraya Gosavi
He was ratsed as a pious Brahmin. trained in the Vedas, imtated
into the Dasaname orders of monks Moriya then went lo the
Gagesa shrine at Theur There he went into a meditative state for
forty-two days. after which Ganesa uppeared to hin and coabled
him to experience the Geivasastha, the fourth or highest state of
consciousness Moraya then retured to Moragaon, but his copu
tation as a saint drew crowds fo the shrine in such aumbers that
he was unable to meditate Consequently, he moved fe a small
shrine near the village of Cincvad

On the fourth day of cach bright hath of the lunar month
[caturth:|, Morava Gosivi went on it pilgrimage back to Mora:
gaon. a three day walk from Cincvad After taking the darsana ot
the image of Gagess there nd worstupoing the deus. he thea
returned to Cin id On one oggancon whe he made his monthly
pilgrimage to Moracaon, be arrived ater dark to had the gste 10
the shrine locked. this making it ampoysibly for him to have the
deity’s dursuna Sting under a sacred wishing tree [Aadpar rAsal.
he meditated an the torm of the deity Ganesan responded ta fas.
meditations aod came out atthe shone to give iim bis darsaca on
(hat spot Phas story ys trequeatly told among Ganapatyas to
illustrate both the power ot Moras.c Goyases spirituat lle and the
grace of the deity (Deva and Boingarkar. pp as)

Another stor iustrating the special bond between Morava
Gosaer tad Ganesa tells ot the ime Morava Gasavt was worstup:
ping at the ftha im the Kartha Ries near Moragaon. While
Pouring water inte the river faredval as pant of his atual coutine,
Morava Gosavi reached into the river and picked up a stone in
the shape of Ganesa He began to worship that image, and he

--- Page 255 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Seinng: Maharashira 223
brought it to Cincvad to worship i when he became too old and
weak to make the arduous monthly yournes to Moragaon and
back. The image remains at ( incvad and 1s carned in procession
to Moragaon wice a year to have the dursana of the image at
Moragaon, after the practice of Moraya Gosavi himselt

Moraya Gosavi had @ son named Cintamam (d. 1658) who
succeeded his father as the incarnate form of Gauesa at Cincvad
and came to be known as the “Deva.” a name that would serve
ay a surname for the later descendents to the present day

In 1659 Moray3 Gosavi declared to his son, Cintamani, his
intention to pass from the human world One hagiography of the
Cincvad temple recounts the story as fotlows.

Then Moraya told Cintamans kis decision to enter samadht

Crotaman constructed a cave on the bank of the Pavana River at

Cincvad After performing the proper rituals in troat of the deso-

tees. he led hws father to the cave. lighted the lamps and placed 4

copy of the Ganesa Purdqa in his lap there Desoters sang sangs

Of prane to Ganesa, all were thrilled at the sight) Thea Moraya

Gosavi satin the lotus pastore, meditated on Ganesa, and then

became Ganesa himsclt [Ganesasiarupu shate| While all chanted

devotional songs. Ciotamant and bis twa wives worshipped his
father. and then plaved a slah over the cave (Deva and Bhingar

kar, pp. 10-11)

The following year a temple was built over the cave The
center of religious focus at the Cinesad temple is shared by the
samddiy of Morava Gosavi and the unage of Ganesa The anni
versary of Morayd Gosavi’s samddAr marks one of the mayor
annual ritual events at the shrine

Cintamani Deva. Ure son of Moraya Gosasi. bhewnse obtained.
a reputation for disclosing Ganesy’s form through his own ac
liens. Mahipata (1715-90), 19 bis hapyioeraphy of Luadrama -the
Maharashinian poct-samt associated wath the gad Silhala and bis
shrine at Pandharpur-—telly the story of Lukarama, a low-caste
devotee, and Cintaman: Devs dining dorcther at Cingsad

ft was rumored that the terd Viyau. an tis amave at Pensharpur

dined with Tukarama. andes and se Ciotiman Dow axited bam

to ding witb fim Takatame chatlenged Cartan ante call Gangs

fo dine with them. msnsuing Chat al pod sees ae: esas st hin, £

Vesibly to his devotees. then worshas eer yin Fuksrame geet

posed two devotional songs [elie] te Ganon aed then ibe

--- Page 256 ---
224 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
deity appeared in [sugera] torm im front of bis plate and -ate
Meditating again. Tukaruma brought Vithoba [Vitthala] to that
place also Cintaman and the other Brahmins looked on with
wonder at the forms of the two deties dining together before
them. (Mahipau. Bhaktudifamet i4 75-119 in Abbott. pp 187-92,
Sykes, pp. 67 70)

Cintamanpr Deva was succeeded by his son Narayana (do ittg)
Narayana’s years as the reigning incarnate Ganesa at Cincvad
were a time of intense polivcal turmoil that say the demise of
Moghul rule and the rise of the Maratha empure under Sivati At
Cincvad the story 1s told that when one of Aurangzeb’s military
officers came to Cincsad to plunder the temple, Narasana re:
fused to Jet him enter the temple compound The othcer decided
to send the temple a “gate” to be oflered to the image of Ganesa
in the temple. When the tray bearing the gilt was ceremonicusly
brought before the mage and vaveried it turned oat to be a prose
of caw cow's flesh However, when Narayana Deva placed the
offering before the image it miraculously turned inte an oftering
of fresh Rowers So impressed were the Moghuls at thes miracle
that they gave the shane a large grant of land (Moor ier. pp
381-82)

Dunng Narayana Deva’s Iictimy the temple at Cinesad grew
into an important center for CGanesa devotion in the region,
equaling Moragaon in importance Narita Desa became in
volved in Hindu resistance aasinst the Moghals dacng the aan
ing years of therr cule Inthe Rag bavaltare Nese—a dichonary
ot administrative ters in Marsthi. which Sivan had prepared in
order to change the teraunologs fram Persia to Matathy tb is
sa that Sivan recened inituanen fareerahail from Narayana
Deva. By this tine several ef Narivana Desa’s brothers abo
served as temple priesty in several at the ayaconvaka shenes
Narayaua Deva was succeeded an turn ev has sen, Ciatamiane ET
and hs grandson, Dhatamdar id rez Dhacamdar Deva plaved
arole inthe poliial ble of the Maratha empire and was induen-
tial in the management of a comage mint inat operued at Cine
vad from the mid-cightventh century vot it was closed by the
British East India Company aiter ther conquest of the Peshwa
empire in 181X Dharanidar was succeeded in turn by tas son,
Narayaoa [HI (ud e802). and his grandson Cintamanor LL. who was
the seventh and last of the dynasty of incarnate Ganesa at Cine:

--- Page 257 ---
Ganesan a Regional Setung Maharashira 225
vad. In 1800. Edward Moor, the British captain assigned to the
Peshwa court in Punc, visited Cintiman (fat Cinewad and skep-
tically noted his observabons of this human incarnation

The ations of the Deo [Deva} are atky minutely watched, as

his actions as well ay words ate but the Transient manilestitons of

the Almghty sill, totally uapremeditated, and unrecognized by
the Deo. they are noted ay prophets Should he remain the night
thrauph in peaceful repose. avtional repose is hemeforth pre-
dited should hes slumber or his wing moments be perluthed,

Semin mushaps threaten the pubby weal [as hath happened, he

Sarts wildly from fis seat or couch seizes a wword or spear or

Makes aay movements snd aung mMarbsl measures. a war. it

tended by Grcumstunces deduced trom the aature pt such move

ments ns foretold Ever circumstance of thi kind carefully
fvled by penny emproved hy the government. a) caretully
considered. aad reported accordingly, wath appropriate interences

(Moor rot. page)

Moors obseratons about the doanatory character of this
avatdra, the ling embodiment of Ganesa al Cinesad, are in
strucuse The Cinesad center enjeyed the patronape of the
Peshwa court at Pune Twice cach sear the image of Ganesa that
Morass Gosavt had miraculous found im tae Morsguon firtha
and laler brought to Cingsad was geremuniousls curried in pil:
grimage to Meragaon and returned When the procession of this
pilgrimage passed through Pune, the Pushes came eutto receive
tts darsang personally and to feed the sests of Brehmins who
accompanied it. The city of Pune and its rulers were surrounded
by Ganesa shrines for (he avaimavaka complex mas be viewed
asa mandala cmbracing and protecting the city and the empire
that was centered there

Although Ganeso dad notin the eihteenth gad ninetecath
centunes engoy the same popular desotien tbat fe dees in con
temporary Maharashtra, he henetited tram the support of rafio-
ental groups of people. principally the Brahmin castes of the
Pune subregion the Konkanastha or Citpavan Brahmins Shiny
of them worshipped Ganesa as ther famils deity their Auda-
devata GS Ghurve maintains that Grrnesas rise to prominence
parallets the energence of Brahimi influence ie the Pune reer
from the seventeenth to the bwenticth comlunies and that the
Brahmins promoted the Ganesa cull party as a means to bint

--- Page 258 ---
226 GASEGA” LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINAENGS
the influence of Jains in the region (p. 96). Genesa received
special attention from the Peshwa court Several of the Peshwa
tulers worshipped Gagesa as their isfadevatd (personal deity)
Balaji Baysao and Madhavrao [ both visited the ustasindvaka
shrines at Moragaon and Theur on many occasions They contnib-
uted substantially to the renovations of the temple properties
Madhavrao { moved the scat of government from Pune to Theur
just prior to tis death at Theur, and his wife commuitied sadi there
after his death (Preston, pp. 120-21). With the rise of the Brah-
min Peshwa rulers in Pune in the cightecnth century. the
sampradaye had not only a spiritual center at Moragaon and an
administrative center at Cincevad but also the best tnend at court
one could hope for in Pune

With the demise of the Peshwas in 1868. the Ganapatya tradi
lion expenenced a temporary eclipse that persisted during the
remainder of the century By 1894. however, Ganesa would have
a ncw champion in Lokamanya Tilak Tilak saw the annua!
Bhadrapada festival as potentially a great nanonal event in which
the intellectual, rehgious. and political aspirations of Indians.
under the leadership of the traditional Brahmin elites. would tind
few and potent expression under the banner of the overcomer of
obstacles Through Tilak’s efforts at the end of the moeteenth
century, Ganesa’s appeal was broadened to include more active
parhaipation by non-Brahmin castes And Ganesa’s mythological
character as the one whe guarantees success in undertakings ond
temoves obstacles that thwart them became identified sith the
Nahonalest aspirations tor bome cule othe culls parlot the teen:
tieth century
Ganesa and the Lokamanya: Religious Symbols
and Political Conflict
Whee the Briuyh deleated the Pesta dynasty. thes brought toa
close a tematkable era un the history of Maharashtia As Brab-
mos who gspaused Again values and stmbob. the Pestw a
Fuleds had achieved a measure of integration of the polical aod
Tehgiens woods Ehes functuned as priest and kings in the
mirds and tmagiatiens of Maharashtcans The Ciupasan Brah-
min community, bath the rovgh and poestlh caste. had overseen

--- Page 259 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Setung: Maharashtra 227
the mse and fall of the Maratha empire In displacing the Brah-
min government of the Peshwa. the British “faced the task of
assimilaling. pacifying. or neutralizing the single community
which had functioned both as the spiritual and temporal elite of
the region most difficult for them to conquer” (Wolpert. p. 2)

The new British administrauion under the leadership of Mount:
stuart Elphinstone recognized the power latent within Maharash-
tran cultural and retigious unity. He regarded it as a genuine
threat lo the effectiveness of British rule over this last and most
resisteal of conquests. Elphinstone wrote at the ume

one talisman that while it animated and unsted them all. could
leave us without a single adherent. This barbarism is the name of
religion. a power so obvious thal tty astonsinng our enemies have
fot more frequently and systematically employed it against us

(Quoted in Wolpert. p. 4)

Throughout the century that followed. the British remained
deeply suspicious of the pohusal fidehty of the Maharashtrian
people and the loyalty of ther Waditienal ehte caste. the Citpa-
van Brahnuns. The main concern inibally was to kevep things as
calm as possible. They continued to pay the traditional dak send
(payment) the Peshwas had given the Brahmin pandits, to main-
tain grants of land and revenues to shrines and centers of trade
tional learning, and to’ discourage the spread of Christian mos
sionary activity in the region Historian Stanley Wolpert notes

The peasant majary would be pacited so long ay they were as

sured s munmal reture on ther tod on the land the wbaliy was a

small chough class to be wooed of welche, paid otf or purishe.t

depending on the vanetes of thou indisidual temperaments. but
the Brahmins were a persistent: problem. As cotelletuals thee
loyalty could really only be wor and retained by Captliming: ine

minds (p 5)

Within a decade there began a fundamental shane i thy aut:
look of Brush rule regarding ts cuitural rele an Incin Chosty
Babington Macaulay represented the nsw Batish civilize mies
ston. to transform India into a new and sn sentenest culture by
bringing tot the fruits of Western science and wisdom Co Mode
cashtra: Brush support: shitted rome the esnters at tradi
learning to those emphasizing Western adeay methods. aed vs
ues In 182g the Bombas Educational Society ostariphed on

--- Page 260 ---
228 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
English-language school, followed three sears later bs the found-
lng of Elphinstone College In Pune by 1840 the English language
and Western learning had become available to selected students
from the Sanskrit College The old Brahmin elite provided the
early reccuits for the process of “Westermzation.” a process that
deeply divided them. Ia sponsoring and financing these educa
tonal opportunites, the British attempted to win the lovalty ot
this displaced group and therchy preclude any serous challences
to tly hegemons in the region A consecuence of these develop
ments was that some members of the Crtpavan elie became com-
mitted to social revolution and retorm based on Western neuons
ot mdniduahiy and society, whereas others became equally dee
voted to the necessity of protecting octhodos tcheson tom far
ther ctosion by external torces Both groups spreed ther statis
under the Britwh Ray had dimomtecd. but thes differed tunda-
mentally on baw to recover it and shat role the British could or
should play in that process .

A number of influential Brahimen famubes produced sany who
eothusiasheally cadored British cule and pursucd ¢lterts ah saul
reform according to Western model Dydote Panduring [i814
s2) advocated the abolibon of caste and defended widow cemar-
rage. Bal Gangadhar Jambhekar toste 46) published the reform
journal Order Serdar Gopal Hen Lokahiasade” Deshe
mukh. from. tormer noble family under the Pestwasantued
thet British rule bed been sertby God to awaken Hindus [rear
theue tortie sleep. asleep that had talented widow nmelation
female intanteide and other seal abuses His vane wars ec toed
by Jvatba Phok (is2c-9o) trom the eacdence [Who ; caste bor
Phole the British fad cangucred Indie to lit the intolerable
worhted Brahano (60a. fem the shoniders of the appressed
Sides Then Covalty te Botan did net ve cuncescitded: Phe ree
fee efforts ot these pranvers helped ta orale a new ches ut
Westeenived Hindus whe cnreseul tie appreciation et their rulers
ane teconed Me sage condenimeton ob many of there orthodoy
{eHow caste members

Within less thas or generation the serve of reaction against
Westere cottagnee begat to be Agata Vishau Bhikayt Gokhale,
hnows ale es Vishnu Guse Brahmacan U826 01). called: for
the mtu to Neda rehyien, and Vishaushastr, Chiplunkat
Cisse ¥2) wrote sizorous deauneratons of missionary evangel-

--- Page 261 ---
Ganeta in a Regional Setting Maharashtra ng
ism in his monthly Marathi journal Mibhandu Mala Beyond the
battle of words. some defenders of the old order took more
violent action. Insurrections agamst Brittsh rule in Maharashtra
broke out in 1844. 1857. and 1876. In 1829 4 Cupavan Brahmin
named Vasudeo Balwant Phadke (1845-83) fed a revolt from
the hills in the name of Sivayi By the mid-izos not even the
most daring of political extremists atlempted revolt: by force of
arms against the British in the Marathi speaking region. More
effective means of asserting the tradstionalist cause were used by
Vishnu Chiplunkar. the son of Vishneshasins After becoming a
teacher in the Poona High School, he wrote a series of essays
cntical of British cule For bis ctforts he recensed a transfer to
an obscure viliage school in the coastal repton of Konkan. He
resigned this position and returned 19 Pune to start, together
with Bal Gangadhar Tilak and other associates. the New Enplish
School as an educational institution run dy gad for tadans I
opened us doors ta students on January 1. 1880 Within five
years it earotled over one thousand students and quickly
achesed the highest rates of students passing the Bombay Unt
versity @aminations: all this without aay financial aid fram the
British gaxernment in Bombay Presidency Chiplankar aad Te
ak shared the Siew that Indians were slaves in thei awn coun:
(ry: slaves to foreign rulers and slaves to igmorines and supers

ton Much of India’s traditions: so quickly ndicuted by British
scholars, mossionanes and Indign admiters of Western culture -

contained vathin them much thut wos noble and worth presens

ing and building an fora uniquely Faden lular. The auestion
was which parts ot the tradition were vieble cad how contd thes
be reapproprated ra the hight of thy current circumstances.

Ry the 18708 two identifiable yroups emerged within tag: lite
of Pune and Bombay (an elite made ue in Pune predominaatis
of Citpayaa Brahminsp the retarmers: tee by MO) Rastade
(tRg2-1g01) and Gopat Krishna Gokbole Gesaé yrs ind the
Aeo-tradmionalists. Jed by Puak €rxs6 igaes The relormers
had the greater measure of support fram ine Keiish admin st 1
ton In pressing for fundamental chaness in dina sac tot sires
ture and thereby Bringing oo more into ting wath tin wanes ot
Western culture. the reformers cretted a community that ap:
peared to be more open and free than that ot tedipana. Brak
manccal culture They saw themselves as the sunguaird ot. ae

--- Page 262 ---
230 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
and inevitable era of progress into the modern world. an cra
that would see an evolved relavonstup of equality wath Batain

The nco-tradstionalists, on the other hand, held a different
vision of what the direction India’s future should take The term
“nea-traditionalist” is used by Robert Bellah to describe those
persons and movements in Asian societies thal “use modern
ideas and methods to defend traditional cultural values, which
are held to be supenor to those of any other tradition” (p 200)
‘Tilak and his compatriots looked to India’s past as the paradigm
for tts tuture duections. To them the British represented ahen
domination. and they saw efforts at reform advocated by the
British and thes: Indian albes to be purely aad simply a mutter of
cultural and political control For thes ereup the politcal impera-
te was to nd India of tureiga tule and restore the essential
character of its past. To displace thy powerful aben rule. a rule
whose power was so dazzling as to bead away the brightest and
most able among the Brahoun elie, a revitalization of Indsas
Masses would be nccessary These masses of Indians would have
to be taught the meaning and value of their ancient heritage
Formal insatutions, such as schools and unverstites, could only
hope to reach a tiny fraction of the populace. new. more uit
and less expensive rastitutions would have to emerge ay the veh
gles for educational and cultural revitalization The challenge be:
tore the neo-traditionalists was lo create a mass political Mose:
ment. onc that enabled Indians to feel solidarity with eng
another, one that would embroce the past aad look te thasy
classes of leaders that tad created. in large measure. the great:
fess of that past the Brahmins The neo traditional did net
have access te the mechanias ob iw aad polios-myeking te
change sauety a the reformers did. thes bad to rely aa the more
ambieuous areas at celuen and populir sentiment to create a
vounterforve powertul and disciplined enough te prevail against
the British and ther Indian admirers

Bal Gangadtar hiak came trom an orthedos Citpasaa Brahmin
Lamy in the coastal Kenkan regtien He was the son ota schoal-
teacher and small Lindowncr Muacnied at the age af fifteen and
orphaecd avecar bates. the soung Tilok took bes aaherilunes and.
the many others trom ais subsaste ducing this time. meved to
Pune Ie race he corolcd ay a student in Deccan College

Tak displayed romakable talent tor mathematics. asteonomy

--- Page 263 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Setting: Maharashira 2
Vedic studies. and law The years of famine and political up-
heaval in Maharashtra from 1875-79 saw Tilak unemployed and
searching for his own directions In 1880 he joined with Chiplun
kar in founding the New E:nglish School, A year later he
launched two newspapers: the English-language Afahratta and the
Marathi-language Aesari tls papers reltected his strongly na-
fionalist consiciions The tone and stvle of Maratea was more
subdued than that of Aesaré. The latter appealed to the anxictics,
frustrations, and hopes of 4 mass audience and established Tilak
as the most powerful and peruasiwe Marathy journalist of his
time His rhetorical skills from time to ome got hin into trouble
In 1882 he served four months in prison for bbel agaist M. Vv
Barve, the divan of Kolhapur. Tilak bad written that Barve con:
spired with the British to have the prince of Kolhapur judged
insane Tilak’s imprisonment carned fim no small measure of
sympathy trom the Maharashtrian pepulace He had a volanle
and awesome personality: it evoked passionate responses [rom
admurers and crucs alike From his vantage point as 2 journalist
and political leader, Titak pursued his efforts to revitalize the
social. religious, and poltucal world of Maharashtra.

The burning issucs tor Tilak were not those of the status of
widows, the dsabilities of caste. unsanitary health condihons,
inadequate public services, oF religious superstition. all issues to
which the reformers devoted so much attention For hun thers
was only one issucs foreign tule The traditional sovtsl structure
had is abuses in’ Tilak’s judgement: butt represented the wisdom
af thousands of sears of eaperience and reflection Twas aman
festaion of divine presence brought into beme through Ue work
ings of karma and sustamed according to the teachings and duties
of dharma. The relormers. Tilak areued. had heen scduced by
British fraud and force inte abandoning their worthy hentage of
language, religion, and soqety in exchange lor, at best. a second
class citizenship ina racet empuc As Stanley Wolpert oteerves
Tilak “refused to concede that India’s brads poling needed thy
plasuc surgery of Western institutions graticd upeern a” Welpert.
Pp. aoa). Tlak’s constunt cnibersm et British policy ona vanety ol
issues made him a prime tarect. Althourh he always demed that
he engaged in seditious activities, he spent. number ol eears 1
poson for them, To the Brinsh, ‘Tikik represented everstans
about the Poona Brahmins they most feated aad hated

--- Page 264 ---
242 OANESAD LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS

In the 18708 the Poona Sarvayamik Sabha (Poona Public Soci.
ety) became one of the most vigorous poliucal groups in India. ft
was the place where Western-cducated Indians met to press for
wider levels of participation in the British administration and
greater influence in formulating policy The benetits of expan-
stons of British rule in this direction would fall primarily on them
as the educated class. Although Phadke’s revolt in 1s7u was
short-lived and politically meffective. it spoke ot the continue
Brahmanical hosulty toward British cule Wilham Temple, the
Governor of Bombay at the time, saw little difference belycen
the vetormers and the Aco-traditionalists From bry penpective 11
was the Citpavan conimunity that was pressing its advantages on
all troots. from open rebellion to reformist social change been
though the Citpasans had pained cntrs unto the Brash adminis:
tration in propurtions far exceeding their actual populitian sn
Pune. Temple thought “thes will mever be satished until thes
repain there ascendancy ia tae country as thes had during the
last century” (quoted in Cashman. p30)

In cpu MEG) Ranade’s widely tead and inducotial book, Pe
Rese of Maratha Power, was published It presented a reading ot
Maharashiniae bistory (hat supported the dee tracitanglists) case
that foreign rule was a dangerous folly for Ind Ranade’s vision
ob the past was one ia whieh there waty a salads ob language
Poly. and celyien at least among Hindus punded the be:
nevolent hand at the Cipasan communars aad ats Peshws
leaders

Tilak ale looked to the past lor guidance et mag.aing the
luture He turned to mathematics and wetranoms to show hat,
an the hasty at astronomical Quculatioay ang iitercnees. the See
das must be dar alder than ay Western scolar had thought
Theos antedited ans fost. werittea inthe West bya wide mergin
He ahe wrote in exhaustise Gommentan on the Bhavacsd Gita
tamer he sigue that its central terehiog was hab ot Raz
Nag Stmaraus vind: selless eftortoun the profechon at tradian
Tather Chan ut ar escape cate personal deseatonalsar and senun-
caution ee Brown

Titth tiseraushy oppascd ans oempts at soci change through
law god pudte poles fn his estitorsals he led the nyeht against
asian the manemal marriage age for womee trom tea to lacie
He df got detend the specie practice of child marrage as such

--- Page 265 ---
Guneta in a Regional Seiung: Maharashtra 233
but attacked the legitimacy of the British to legislate the social
practice of various castes.

The year 1893 was one of frequent contlict between the Hindu
and Muslim communitics. la Bombay a movement made up pri-
marily of Brahmins called the Gaupalun Upadeshak Mandali (So-
ciety tor the Propagation of Cow Protection} conducted a series.
of pubhe demonstrations to bring the issue of cow protection to
the attention of the masses. For centuries the cow has been the
quintesscatal symbol of feminine and niaternal nurture Cavs
are honored frequently at rehgious festreals The Bretish were the
primary consumers of beef. and the butchers came from the Mus:
tim commumiy. For neo-traditionalists the cow became the sya
bol for “Mother” India. to protect the cow was to protect one’s
vision of what India meant

[In August of that yeas, a riot broke out amoung mill workers In
Bombay The proportions and ferocity of the episode surprised
eseryone The moderate Ieadenhip attcibuted i to the isolated
expresstons of lower clays passions The Bash blamed the caw:
protechor advocates for stirring up Latent hatred Setwcea Hindus
and Muslims Further communal sialeace crupted over the next
year in several towers in Maharashtra. leaving 4« totab of over
twenty dead Hindu relormers were deeply wounded by the Brit
who bosulits ta them over (at suc. and thes Became ineressinghy
appreheasse about the conduct of British administration and
poles This shift of epimoen amony the new cliy of Westernized
Indians was reflected in the polarization within mn the untant tae
dian National Congress between thoxg who wanted fo work
sathin the cramework of Batsh rule and those who argued tor
challenging it more vigorously Lord Hurry, Gavernu of Bor
bay at the time. had Hite ssmpaths for the Westerrized clit.
and Brahmin ahenatien from the Botint reached os taghe st level
to date under his administration

The levels of energy released so destructively durias: the tots
Ovet cow protection did nor go unnoticed by Tilak bar ser:
tine he had heen searching fora way to Brdpy tne sap benwees
ihe Brahmins and the non- Brahmins and find an appropri: coe
textain which to build anes grassroots unis bebwe sn ther Tk
believed that such a display ch arity trout be lrcmaitie st ine
place under the guidance ot the Brabruns os tre thadtei ore
natural leaders of socicns

--- Page 266 ---
334 GANESA LORD OF ORSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
At an open meeting on to September 189%, a few days after
the Bombay riots, Tilak urged Hindus to withdraw their partici-
pation from the Muslim festival of Meharram. which was to be
held that year in mid-September The Moharram festival honors
the martyrdom of Mohammed's grandson. Ali It includes a pro-
cession accampanied by music and dancing im which devolces
carsy placards [dbus] bearing images of the martyr’s tomb
through the streets: Traditionally many of the musicians and cele-
brants were Hindus Tilak appreciated the social and rehgious
power of the festwal. He seized on the tdea of holding a simular
public festival in honor ot Ganesa that would seme as a rehgious
rallying pomt tor a revitalized Hindu community
Since the fall of the Peshwa dynasty in 1818. the annual fesoval
to Ganesa had aot enyoved othoal recogmuion in’ Maharashtra
although it conboued to be observed with much celat in Benares
(Rousselet. pp. 43% 39). It had. however. continued as a family
traditian and neighborhood festival. particularly among Brahmins
in Pune. The Botish Gazereer, published in (8&5. deseribes the
festival as it wos traditionally observed in Pune before Trak’s
innovations:
Sometime betore Ganapat’s birthday [Gartese Cael] the cece:
ton hall is whilewashed and painted a wooden Iramework of
other seal ts made ready. and the roam as nlled with eich furaiture
and awtaayghtos Poattl he On the morning of the feast day the
bead of the hous, aad seme childfen und semis. with mus aad
@ Palangunr, ga to the muarkel to buy an inane of the god. scat
on the palanquin aod bang i home [eis set an the shrine and
sath the help et the Gunily priest verses ate rected that nll the
imoge Both the presence ob soul AL Ike end of the sence
Mecetmeats sre handed acound among the yeesty and Lamy
According to the wall and mesos ot the Lamy the image is kept in
the house from one and a holf ta twenty-one days an most cases
about akeck So too as itis amt the Bouse the gad is worshipped:
Myeht and motmng When the time comes tor the yod lo ga. in the
evening piavers and + p.linquin are hited anda priests called in
Altce paving Ganapatt te bless the family. co keep sercom [ram ats
doors, and te gee wisdom io its children verses bike those that
brought tbe presence of Che pod inte the image are sand amd its.
dram withdewsn Phen wang slump around us face, laying 9
hele cords a ene of ts bands and seating lan a Rowerdecked
Paninquin, ccullioy out the gead’s name as they go, they carry him to

--- Page 267 ---
Ganeta in a Regional Senting: Maharashtra 235
the side of the lake of net At the water's edge they take the
image aut of the palanquin and seat ion the grouod. and waving a
lightea lamp around is face carry i to the water sarrowing that for
another year they wall not sce the god apn (Gareteer of the
Bombay Presidency, vot 18 \. pp 246 47)

In 1894 Tilak and his associates Cranstormed the Ganesa fest al
by adding a public dimension that lasted several days between the
lime the images were installed in the homes and phen they were
taken for immersion Singing groups jetefas] composed songs ot
political protest and social converns to accampany the traditional
devotional songs to Ganesa that were sung in homes and temples
Melas were composed mainly by students who adopted similar
dress and formed themselves ito cadres: During the testisais they
sponsored song sessiaas, dramas. poliucal speeches, and lectures
Tilak and his followers spoke to many ot the aefas in Pune duriae
the first year. late festivals took Chem to surrounding tawny and
villages to promote the festival and its message On the day of the
Immersion of Ganesa images, the aig groups, along with other
more traditional gatherings of dev atees, formed a common proces:
sian to the iver At the bead of te festival. there was the umage
belonging to Kasta Peth Ganesa temple in Pune (Ganesa i the
gramadevata of Pune ats guardian certs} Tae festival procession
consisted of nearly a hundred aiela groups. seventy five hands of
musicians, and about twenty-five thousand spectators and cele
brants who flocked to the esent: Non- Brahmin sels outnum:
bered Brahmin ones by bwo ta one during that first vear (Cash:
man. p. $0) The festval clearly drew support from across section
of Hindu society in the urban ensitaps ot Pune

For Tdak thiy revitalized rebgrous festa al was a micany theouph
which the masses could be reached with bis message of both
renewed confidence yn the traditens of the people and: greater
suspicion of and resitance to Change imposed (tom the outside
The festival as a social. political, and rebyrous structure seemed
to offer the potential for create anew semse of unit mony
Hindus ft was an occasion when rustic villagers and urban so
phishicates could meet in a common contest and athem their sol
danty as Hindus Tilak also oreanvzed at testival in hone ot
Siwaji. Tt was an occasion tor Miatharashtrans to express the
pride in there martial traditans Like the Ganesa festival. the

--- Page 268 ---
226 GANESA. CORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNENGS
Sivaji festival was an instant success as a political and symbolic
event. Tilak’s enthusiasm for this potential of festivals came out
clearly in an editonal he wrote in his Marathi newspaper, Kesari
on 8 September 1896

These festivals have teo main poles The fint ty mass recreation
and the secand 1s masy education That nation which cannot spend
eight of ten days in order to satisfy its spisstual desires. which:
cannol sing desotional songs to its deities and cannot become en-
grossed in listening to them. which cannot forget ts Ile of slavery
for a moment, and which cannot sce or hear things which induce a
spirit of competion and enthusiasm, thal nslian is nuined Conse-
quently. in order to be able to show that our lives are different
from those of prisoners. that we are nut ay dase ay slates. our
inborn love for festivals should be encouraged to swell and over:
flow. (Quoted in Kelkar. p. $67}

{In another editonal Tilak argued that festivals had been major
events in the heroic Indian past. occasions when teachers and
students and the learned and the ilterate gathered together for
the purpose of common uplift and solidants bid . pp sor 64)
Tilak never delieved. unlike his reformist and British opponents,
that the religious and political realms of life could be separated
into some kind of sacred and secular domains. he argued that
political concerns among others were a legitimate pact of fest
vals. He wrote

Why shoulda t the furs orgamzed in camunctian vith testicals be

used tor poateal purposes? Just as men put up stalls as aver the

fae for games, the educated should put up a fea tents and hold
chscussions en tanous subjeets Ths would vet bes physi or
hagnually demanceng 2s holding Galoaal ssemones Woeklo't

Bus be an enice method tor calehienmg our beetheren un the

sillages about mart ond religious molten: Ola escasiens

why sbouktet the cducsted poeple give the moses teat patty

of The read state! Why should ¢ tnose wee cal themselves edt

cated remind the people af the attogities comailied by the paver

meat? Or why shoulen 2 thes jotekom Ut celigiaas sense in the
people and vt result streagiben then Gatwenal ade | OU ances
tor have given us a lace where peaple coud weber but the
educated ase as though ut did pet exis Thats because these
education dus fled them with Calse pride nd they are reluctant te
mu wath the people Uldid.. pp sh 65)

--- Page 269 ---
Ganega in a Regional Setting Maharashira ay

What was Ww about Ganesga as a deity and symbol that made
him so appealing to Tilak and others as a vehicle for this new
fusion uf religious and political spint” Ganesa was a deity of the
“great traditan™ of pan Indian Hinduism who had regional and
local status in Maharashtra and Pune. He was worshipped by
many castes as the protector of beginaimgs and the remover of
obstacles. Formerly he had been associated with the Peshwa
dynasty as the deity of ity lineage [Audadevatd}. as was also the
case with many prominent Citpavan Brahmin families in Pune
Hence Ganesa could mediate the non-Brahmin masses: who
loved Ganesa with the Brahmin elite who stood to gain the most
in the resitahzation of a revisionist traditionalism: that empha-
sized the unity of Hindus and the intellectual and) poliucal
leadership of the Brahmins. As the remover af obstacles,
Ganesa symbolized the Hindu resistance to the obstacle of Brit-
ish rule Hrs rcomography combined the asseciatens of varie
watnor and cayoyer of the good hte—a combination that teson
ated particularly well with Maharashtes’s cultural Gaduions
Ganesa’s emergence into Uns new sole gained hint almost in
Stant populacity and brought increasingly larger audiences to
hear the poltical views expounded by Flak and his associutes
during the annual Gagesa destiva, Wothin the Iramework of the
traditional tasttubons af the festa) and barr restitutians reves
tahzcd by a new awareness of there possibilities vind ogegsions
for pabtical conscmusness canine. the Beibmin obte had a new
opportunity to educate and polwage nen Brehmins ond iol)
them i the politics of dissent (see Cashman. po sab

In t8g7 the number ot publig craups pacteapaten: in the test
val nearly doubled spreading spontaneously trom Pune to Bom
bay. Abmadnagar, and a number ot oter cles in the regien,
helped in part bs the publicity Tilak gave the festival in bes news
Papers. Within a decadk aver seventy towns outid, Pung span
sercd public Ganesa celebrations abing dhe tines advocated by
‘Dhlak In the smalice towas the fosthyel maataingd amore tht
Gional religious characters But alton rgoo mans ot Tilek’s pobin.!
allies in the neo Hraditesahst max sment visited other cites ord
towns and gave lectures on topes of poltedh gal sour int. iy st
Tilak spoke to mans sach groups vdimonsting ther: be tee ates
the strength and virtue known under fee Pesawas eas acne
times He stressed) that estucatian atom: Brrtish tine snr sie hats

--- Page 270 ---
238 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
ignorant of their country’s history and incapable of appreciating
the strength of their own culture. Reform of saciety. he stressed,
should come from within, out of the traditions and inclinations of
the people, rather than borrowed from a foreign culture that held
India tn contempt (Karandikar. p 64) Vishyanath Kashinath
Raywade. a noted historian, lectured in tgos that the festival is a
mode of tradivonal Hindu education, combining celebration with
edification and that ut brings together the pandit and the peasant
in a common bond of “orship and community Hindu rulers in
the ancient past unde rstuod this and made good use ot the virtues
of such esents Only with the advent of foreign rule had this
tradition of festivals falten inte disuse Cloid po s77) Lectures
given during the carly vears of the festival meluded such topics
as. “Afttmsd and Victory "The Place of Hiaduism in Polstes,

“Who Runs Maharashtra?”, “Prohibinien.” aad “Brahmins and
Non-Brahmins” (1bid.. p 595)

Ganesa provided the acotradmenal elig wubb oa sembol
around which thes could rally to express the congerns about
the disrupting change brought about by Briush role. a change
thes saw as undermining the integrity and posinan of the
Hindu tradition and thereby ering advantage to the Muslim
commumty One ot the songs sung be a setuntan association
[arefa] for the festival gave voice to these fears and trustratioas
(quoted in Cashman, p. 7k)

Ob! Wy have von dbindaned today te Hindu tehgion*
How have you forgotten Ganapun, Sawa amd Marat?
What have saw gaened from worsupping taduty

Whar hoon as Allah conferred upon vex

That vou have become Muvsudnans ioday'

De not be frendh oa reign that vs aiten

Doonot give api vane eetegiedt aad be tion

De notat ail venerate the fabs

fhe vow oe our moter, de not forect her

The sonys et the mefa sinvers offer niseits nite the nierger ot
Fehrious devotion and political protest: during these turbutent
yours at the festa s inte restaizatian The aiaenty of sangs
inthe festival were tradionalls sebgious extoling the ercainess
ab Ceinesa Samy ot tbe celebrated: brs mvtholags tqueted: on
Agetaar png’

--- Page 271 ---
Ganesa in o Regional Setung Maharashira 239

Underneath the mountam forest spread dud Parvati come to
bathe.

Away she wiped the scurf [malul from her henbs and to!
Gana(puti) was born from it

To worship Siva he went forth, satting on his mouse
carner-horse

And with a whip he hit hus curner-horve, and down from it
came Ganatpat)

The moon laughed at hrs plight and this Ganatpati's anger
rose

And he gave the moon a curse: “Anyone who sees vou on
catusthi night shail be falsely accused of theft

Other songs brought the symbolism of Ganesa into the political
arena Set to the tunes of tradinonal devotional songs [bAgjanal.
many of these songs expheith linked mythological categones with
contemporary politcal circumstances. A few sonps from the pe-
dod of the festivals are most aggressively of a political character,
collected bv 1S Karandikar. an associate of Tilak. they convey
the tone and imagery of the songs

The noose ot politcal dependence is siranging, us Vehy, Ganesa,
ateG't vou meccitui! Line Karpurasuta [the demon who the
calor ot white minceal]. tne waite people harass the lind Bharata

[lodia, ferminine gender] as cursed by the demon snd sin pain O

giver af wcatth and happiagss deliver ust count reuse and bring

us peace (Korandikar, p. 4425

A second song draws more exphath upon the ritual of the
festival itself for its political metaphors:

O Gaur sen ot Siva and Gaunt, Gane. bang in end to obsta

AIS dake awa the dluston, tur we are oppresscd hy the heft sang

fic Brtsh meh We come yeu te cre soa [it pravesstany

because ous mothe cand cub ie you Bonab rhanded os tut «ard
ptt this per) Give us tng arudaka al seltrg Peerar! os your
prasada Make us foatiess OF) Gaeral Sates thre sine pica Lend

at your tect (Phd. ps6:

Other songs stress the acesssity alum anane the fndian
population in the tace of Jaren guk One sem Lakers tie con
Met between reformers ane ace toditanaasrs witli the Hinde
community (or perhaps the conthyt bensecn Hindus ind Maus
lims) to a quarcel within sa catcaded Remy ibis ps S20

--- Page 272 ---
240 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD GF BEGINNINGS
Until recenily they lived as loving brothers, twins tke
Rama and Lakymane
How dud this knife of divtston prerce their chests?
In the house they once lived as a happy family, but evil
fate hated their auspiciousness. Now the waters
in the stream have dned up
Like a mudman who has different views within himself, thes
have become confused.
The traduion of the Jars was great and conptuous. but
now all have been reduced to dust, and the minds of the
sons have become corrupted.
Fighting among themisel es. thes have burnt thei glorious
past to ashes
Those who were kings have become paupers. and the enmits
has reached to thet bones
O Ocean of Mery. Supreme God. mv praser & that vou pardon
them and put them on the right path
O Gananatha. give as rebirth to brotherly love
Gwer of Ausptciousness. # pray to vou in all these
different wavs
One of the Pune anelas that was drawn fram the scheduled
castes community sang a song in the festival that addressed the
issue of soci equality as the form of a new unity among Hindus
that would bring about the luture Culalment of the Hindu destins
{Ibid.. p 566)
Let us goto the court of Ganeia Let is weave our sidh
scarf fgophy*
of the different brothers among Hindus
Phere one ditiacion Dem cen Mme serail and the great.
no room for distinction here.
Gentlemen and ragues have became one here
Let us lose ourselves in this celebration Come out, you
who has hein, yeu who were untowi table vu. the ast
come all’
This Pandars own of Pantharpur] a hevond duahty,
thas city of Ganesa
This tite word of Sripad [the author}, naw let's peove
it to be true
Saba ptering te a Quit Line pertormed Jurinp the festival procesien an
MPih dances WEE a seftes OE artes together suman tog maspocs dame

--- Page 273 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Setung Maharashtra 241

This song makes expheit use of the spirit of unity that becomes
Possible during the hminal time of the festival procession when
all boundaries of soctal and ritual hierarchy become blurred, and
\t offers thts moment as the paradigm for a new kind of Hindu
sociely. As the scarves are woven together around a single pole.
so should society be weven in such a way that there ts no distinc:
tion or duality of importance between the great and the small
Such a society would indeed be the “city of Ganesa *

In addition to the me{a songs, a number of dramatic perform:
ances, staged by individual mefds (professianal acting compa-
nies), became a bighhght of the revitalized festival. One of the
most popular plays performed during the period at the turn of the
century when the festival was at its peak of political vitality was
one by Knshnap Prabhakar Khadilhar (1873- 1948). a first gen-
eration Citpavan Brahmin resident of Pune and the cditor of
Tilak’s Marathi newspaper, Kesari Khadilkur was among the
more radical of Tilak’s associates Atter his mentoe’s death in
1g20. he became a Gandhian and then retired trom politcal life
in 1930 and continued to have a distinguished career as a Marathy
playwright

Khadilkar’s play Kicaka Vadh i The Murder of Kicaka) is based
on the story in the MuhdbAdrata of Kicaka’s alempt to seduce
Draupadi (MBh 4 12-23) As the plas develops the story: ater
the Pandavas were exiled for Wwelve vears because Durvodhana
cheated Yudhisthira out of his kingdom, they came in disgutse to
the kingdom of Viraja Draupadi. thou wile, look the disyuise
of a chambermaid Virata’s brother in-law and commander of his
army, whose name was Ricuka. returned from a sist to Has
linapura. the former kingdem af the Pandavas Waen he saw the
disguised Draupadi, he became captivated by her beauty and
demanded that Virata aise her to him tes fis hater Feentuaily
Bhima slew Kicake whea he attempted to seduce Deaupadh and
thus freed her With their general defeated. Viratis acmy re
treated from the Pandasas’ superior courage and sictue

The play focuses on the ctents of Draupadi y abductian and
rescue Virata is reluctant to give Draupadi to Kicaka, rut he
fears the power of his Commander rn-chiet He seizes on a com
promise plan and sends her to a tempte where she will Re oul of
Kicaka's control but not entirely safe fram tis dust tes ker
Yudhisthira and Bhima arguc over what coune of acnen would

--- Page 274 ---
242 GANESA LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
be best to follow in setting Draupadi free. Yudhisthira counsels
caution, hoping that some twist of fate will dissuade Kicaka from
his designs on Draupadi Bhima insists that Kicaka must be slain
for the honor of Draupadi and the Pandavas. no matter what the
tisk. Bhima then takes the disguise of Bhairava, Siva in hes herce
form, and lies in wait for Kicaka to come to the temple in search
of Draupadi. When Kicaka arrives and attempts to seduce
Draupadi. Bhima jumps down from the divine throne and slays
Kicaka. strangling him to death
The allegorical meanings of the play were not lost on the audi-
ence or on some British observers. Kicaka. Che lustful and avar-
cous commander-in-chief resembled Lord Curzon, whereas
Virdta, the weak monarch, was the effective home gosvernmeal
that gave Lord Curzen a free hand Draupadi was India Yud-
histhica resembled the moderate faction of the Brahmin elite
such as Ranade and Gokhale. whereas Bhima stood for the nce:
traditionalists, such as Tilak and his followers The setting for the
seduction and rescue shifts from the dance hall. as it appears in
the Mahabharata story. to the shrine Bhima incarnates himself.
as it were, im the torm ot Siva the mad warrior, and he comes to
hfe at the moment ot Draupadi’s most intense distress The das
ing of Kicaka. a deed with sacrificial overtones, Drought cheers
from the audience Once Kicaka was slain and his army dis.
persed. the exiled family ty umted again, which leads to a happy
ending at the final curtain Phe play's theme drew upon the clay:
steal mythological tradition and set it, atlegerically ing circum
stanve that the audicace could: well understand resembled there
own, The play was frst pertormed ie reer and it wars Later
banned KRhaditkar was convicted ef the crime ef sediten lar st
One ot Fiak’s harshest British ents. Valentine Chiral, te:
Rected on what he took to he the omMmeus meaning oF the plas
for the future of Indian baetsb relations
Trimax me sand that ail tas foe the plas mere feo say But ae
barhshmon who has seen the play acted would ace AL his nite:
he wall be remember the tease. scowling Lives of rng aie as thes
Wot Righaka’s oultancous sets, the listonmg sve. et the Brak
min ladies as they listea to Draupadts etreabes Hu wont ol
Yeon thes lameness, thar adninstesr of Bhemnes aesanate
Protests. and the deep dust of satetagie rs whieh opproves tbe
shoushtce of the tycant (Chiral, potagh

--- Page 275 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Setung. Maharashtra 243
The ininal response of British authorities to the festival was
one of noninterfercnce. a response that was in keeping with their
general policy of reluctance in restraming their subjects’ practice
of religion, Some Englishmen were not convinced that the fest.
val was merely a religious event and therefore saw a more omi-
fous dimension to it. To them, iC represented one more example
of the Pune Brahmins’ attempts to regain their former positions
of prestige by manipulating masy superstition and discontent.
Chirol grudgingly admired Tilak’s rhetorical and organizational
skills of infusing the festival with us new signiticance and vitality:

Tilak could nat hase devised a more popular move than when he

set himscit 1. organize annul festivals in honor of Ganesh, known

as Ganpan celebrations, and ta found in all the chief cealers of the

Decean Ganpal societies, cach wilh ity atefa ar chou cecruited

among bis youthful bands of gymauis These testivals gave occa:

van for theatrical performaoces and tehgious songs in which the
legeads of Hindu mytholagy were skiltfully exploited to str up
hatred of the “foreigeer’ and mfenccha the term employed for

“foresgner.” apphed equally to Europeans and to Mahomedans--

as well as for tumultuous processions unly wo well culculuted to

provoke alfrays wah the Muhomedans and with the police. which

in turn led to judicial proceedings that served ay fresh excuses for

nos orotests and inflammatory pleadings Wath the Ganpati cele:

brattons the area of Dlak’s propaganda way widely imereased

(Ihid . p. 4a)

From the tirst yeat of its performance in ikgg. the revitalized
Ganesas festival would be plagued to 2 ereater or fesscr degree by
communal violence or the specter obi ta Pung, dunag the first
year of the new festival, while the processian moved through 3
street past a mosque. a oup of Muslin angered by the clamor
of the celebrants in the streets, custicd out of the mosque and a
scuffle ensued that left one Musi dead Phe Pune polige su
thonities placed restricuens on muse and Made modihysbans 20
the procession route is sucsecding sears Tak aitaly protested
the police response as animes ment on Hindus Hee everese
of rehgion) Mushmy toued many of Te refer sors attensnne 16
18ys they boycotted the Pane aruni ipo. cicetiens na protest over
what they took Co be rafhieisatony and provogetye attecks on
them al the (me of the festival Phe festsal’s Stes cipher
Hindu umity, the denumiaton of eiecefiy Corergnerss 6 tenn

--- Page 276 ---
244 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
that included Muslims—and the criticism expressed dunng the
festival that the British government had instituted policies that
gave preferential treatment to Muslims, could not help but
arouse anxicty on the part of the Muslim community. To them.
the umity called for in the songs and praise to Ganesa as the lord
of the people was an exclusive one.

‘The years from 1897 to 1900 were difficult ones for Pune and
Maharashtra. Slight harvests followed by outbreaks of bubonic
plague caused the testval to shrink in the number and enthus-
asm of its participants. From tgoo ty igos there returned a ten-
dency toward greater politicalization of the themes and songs in
the festival. By tgio et had taken on suck a militant tone that it
was virtually surpressed by the police Strict rules of censorship
were invoked on the content of the mefd songs and rosters of
members of mefas had to be submitted to the police in advance
Restraints on music and programs kept a tight hd on the festival
for several years. A few of the mefas evolved mto more perma:
nent institutions holding fo extreme aco-tradibanalist views, such
as the Abbinay Bharat (Young India Society) tn Nasik and the
Chhatrapati Mela. a group of non-Brahmin tadicals that pressed
for greater awareness of their particular political intcrest: (Cash-
man. pp. 91-92: Omvedt)

After the insatutian of the reforms ia tyie, which brought
about increased representation for Ladnins ia the British adminis
tration and expanded opportunities tor Indians within the Ray
the festival lost sume ot its polucal edge and audience By igia it
was possible for the government to remove its censorship of
songs and behavior during the festival alegether Dunng the
nest decade Gandbr would capture the Indian imagination and
create amass movement of hi own an a national wate that gave
opportunity for direct participation by great numbers of Hindus
of various castes: Like the testinal, Gandbr's nenceoperation pro-
tests offered direet partigipaton in cvents that closely resembled
rituals. set. ther rel gious assaquatians were more vague and nun
exclusive. focusing on Gandhi the Mabatina than ona patteulat
deity Lske Taak. Gandhi saw the rehgiaus aad politcal realms to
be ndistiazuishable in principle. and both valued above all other
concerns the necessity for setfrule as a oolincal and rehgious
necessity for India But Gandiu, tne Mahatma. took the manite
of tehgious assacnitions onto himself and turned political struggle

--- Page 277 ---
Ganesa in a Regional Setung: Maharashtra 245
into a context for religious realization rather than making reli-
gious events into political ones.

When Tilak died in 1920, the charismatic center he had pro-
vided the neo-traditionalists was gone. and the Ganesa festival as
an occasion for political awakening would never again have as
strong an edge as it did between 1894-96 and gos -10. Even ona
reduced scale, however, as we have seen in the previous chapter
in our consideration of 1ts contemporary forms, the festival con-
tinues to include polincal and social dimensions as important
parts of its public celebration,

Ata time when there were no other institutions of mass appeal
and participation available to Indians, particularly Hindus, the
Ganesa festival served as a bold and relauvely effective vehicle
for rchgious and political unity The festival succeeded in display-
ing the relevance of religious symbols for political lnfe. it raised
the status and perspectives of Tilak and the neo-traditionalists,
and it demanstrated the potential of rehigious events for mass-
movement politics These were lessons not lost on Gandhi and
the Congress during the decades that followed Beyond this tevel
of diffuse rehgious symbolism. the festival resisted attempts at
institutonalization The songs at the stefa singers did not move
the Brush to alter substantially the direction of ther rule, ner
did it persuade the non-Brabouns that their politcal and cultural
welfare was best served by the Brahmins’ nostalgia for the past
reconceived as a heroic utopia

There ts something appropriate about the outcome of the po-
litical phase of the Gagesa festival, given what we have seen to
be us patron deity’s character, Ganesa did remove some obsta-
cles to political awakening by showing Hindus the possibilty of
combining commitments to greater pohticat autonomy with toy:
ally to the past and its religious roots However. Ganesa ts muck
too clever to allow himself to be se casily captured by a single
group or ideology. The non-Brahimins did pot fock tothe ban
ners of ‘Suak’s elite. but thes dik take up a new seterest in
Ganesa as a rehgious hgure and swmbol appropriate te their ews
changing sttuation This process continues inte the presear day
particularly in smath towns and leewes silanes Other festivals
particularly the Durga Poya in Catcurta, Kataragama in So
Lanka, and the Awappan festwat of Kerala have demonstrated
similar tendencies (Sarma). The festival to Ganesa sortnbuted te

--- Page 278 ---
246 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS
restoring Hindus’ pride in their own religious traditions, a pride
that had been under attack from the combined forces of the
British government, Christian missionaries. und the new class of
Hindu reformers. It told them that their rehgion had the capacity
for self-renewal and could provide a basis tor progressive change
from within.

With the coming of political independence in tg48. the festival
again became a vehicle for hmited social and pohtcal expression
After the trauma of years of political struggle and communal
violence and separahon. many Hindus saw the festival as an op-
portunity to raise the awareness of the nation as a whole and
enhance solidarity among various communities. A pamphlet de>
tailing instructions for observing the fesuyal publisted a year
after dependence shows this sectment. After relating a tes
Gagesa myths, ening instructions fur payd. and collecting popular
desotional songs, the author exhorts hrs readers to comprehend
the relationship betwcen the worship of Ganesa and the realiza-
ton of India’s new national purpose

The public Ganapati means the national [raseiva) Ganapati To

undertake this festival everywhere in the country and carry i out

successtuliy 1s to peng progress to the nation Trorder ter our

COUNTY'S progress to muve forward. ull people must come tapether

in the worship of thy Lond of the Poopie [Sanghedipate, The

name Ganesa means Ged of Assemblies Thereture eververe

should parlaipare on his worstup But hetorg under basing il even
phe Must remove voy msunderstioding wbeut eae another thes
mas have formed carher aod must werk Coward achicaing unity

In this wax the Lord et the Peaple will be pleased sath us and

fulfill atl our desires (Marathe. p iob

Ina proyet at the beading of the pamphlet. the dor eckoes.
this statement “Friends. awokeat Cetus peas to thy auspictous
dey te take our eaten of Indio te the pionagle bkfaru] of
splendar [racbhara] ”

From the tases unt the present time the festival bas cantina:
ued to spread its prexence besond the urtan areas of Maharash-
Uta Hata ats voltages, fieguenth taking rock in the cilage sc voal
ancl spreading inte the village asa whole Tehas adapted itsell to
changing cultural wad: political circumstances (sco Barnauws As
we have seen un the previous chapter. the festial continues to
extibut cnormeus sitdits and crossing over ol Boundaries. sacred

--- Page 279 ---
Ganeia tn a Regional Setting: Maharashua 247
and secular [tis foo religious in character for Indians committed
to specitic social ur ideological programs. and itis too secular tor
Hindus onented toward traditional religious practices. The testi-
val. like the deity it hynors. stands ea the boundaries among
categories. cluding them all, and remaining lord of them oll

--- Page 280 ---
68

Fa a
Ganesa: The Protean God
Throughout this study we have been guided bv the questions
Who is Ganesa? Where docs he come from’? What does he do?
What religious longings. amucties, perple sites. and yoys does he
embody for fis devotees’ How does he shape and change
peuples’ lives?

Hoes ongins in the historical sense of the term are diticult. if
hot imposuble to locate, and much os left to conjecture Indeed.
he appears to came trom many places at once Ancient texts link
him wath Siva tor perhaps Indray as the Gapapan. the lord of
vreatuces: His Glephant shape assecnites firm wit the vehicles of
the gods. partieulary Indes. and the gusrdian figures of shrines
His behaves regarding pling and removing obstacles hiks him
fe cancrent demon figures. thy vinsvakas. who must be plagated
with tood and nites: Ganesa seems to be the result ota coalescing
ob these varicus patterns although precisely how this process oc
curred cludes us

His origins in the mythological sense are much more aceessiale
Stones trom the Poradas give us many vanadons an the themes
of bs birth and the acquastien of fis elephant head) Born fron
Srea’s thought or bough, bora fram Parvati’s leftover bodily sub-
stance, Gages emerges connected to one or both of them, but

248

--- Page 281 ---
Ganesa: The Protean God 249
also separate from them. Following almost immediately upon his
creation, Ganesa undergoes some form of beheading through
combat, cursing, or the machinations of fate. This removal of
head from body takes away the first and pnmordial head to make
room for the clephant head, the real head, the one he was des-
tined to have, the only head his iconography ever portrays This
head heals the breach between him and his parents and them to
one another. Through the process of creation. sacnfice and resto-
ration the myth recalls the fundamental rhythm of the universe
itself. Gagesa ts an embodiment of the macrocosm: he is both
tent asunder and made whole. From that vantage point Ganesa
cules over the territory of beginnings Beginnings of actions in
Gime as devotees call upon his graceful supervision of their under-
takings: beginnings of actions in space as his worshippers find
him at the doorways of homes and temples, straddling the two
orders of profane and sacred space

Although Ganesa’s myths cover a relatively small number of
themes, thes are immensely popular and reach deeply into the
Hindu psyche. His myths evoke the primal realities of life's earl.
est and most precarious experiences The intense inumacy Gan-
esa enwys as the child made from Parvats own substance—he
alone is permitted colry into her sacred enclosure— gives mythic
form to the forgotten traces of mother love that all can claim.
Suon theratier. however. this idyll as broken. in part by the
mother’s dong. when Ganesa must undergo the lows of his origi-
nal head to his father’s rape Garnesa must venture unto the out:
side world in order to be broken. the bead that knew the now
forbidden intimacy with the mether must he replaced by the head
of another species altogether According to some versions of thy
story, even that head must be broken again. the tusk, the remain
ing and perhaps competitive resembtance to the bathers must be
surrendered. This tale of intimacy sad violence gives shape at the
human level to the life process of separanion from the mother and
the painful but necessary and inesuiable expericace ot socrshza-
tion into the lurece world of family and society Among the riales
of teice-born castes. This process abo finds otual ath late im
the mte of upanavang, the investtuse ot Ube sacecd thread, an
which the young man Jeases the qurtute of hes soother and sub
mits to the requirements of the outside world reproscatcd by the
father and the cultural representalive ad the supetege. the gure

--- Page 282 ---
2§0 GANLS$A? LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS

This process of maternal intimacy followed by paternal rupture
is nol a tragic one in the Hindu scheme of things Instead itis a
necessary and ultimately redeeming one In the act of submission
to the father and his representatives. one finds power Ganesa is
rewarded for bis painful submission he receives damiaion over
every new undertaking: he moves to the entrance of the world of
the gods. From that vantage point. Ganesa becomes the trend at
court for all devotees secking blessing on thei efforts The anxi-
eties that humans inesilably feel in taking up new endeavars in
an uncertam world tind rehet when they are lad, along with
otferings of food, Howers. and sacred speech. at Ganesa’s feet
Through this process of creation. sacnitice. and surrender. Gan-
ea comes to knvs his seadharena, thats. the particular work he
has to perform in the cosmic scheme ot things His work is the
regulation of success and talure. his terion that ot abstactes
He thereby becomes a model for ull Hindus ay they pass through
the various thresholds of life's demands and challenges Ganesa
knows ther sorrows and desires, hes their best hope

A central recurring theme ca Ganesa’s chanieter is that af me-
diaton Spabally this theme iw smbolized Os the threshold
Ganesa’s dwelling place. and temporally by the begimmng. the
potent moment shea all outcomes are stl possible My thically
Ganesa mediates between his mother and lather, he stands he-
tween them as the soutey of both cootigt and recenmaliaion, ts
childiea trequently dein the haman workt He stands hemecer
the pods and ther adversaries beth hucat and demon be
stinds betwcen sugges and tulure. tte sacred and the protane
Asche ong who stunds an the boundary Ganesy notaaly plays
out his spect dharaia by creating and removing abstaces. he ts
Hamsell ancubstacte Rie an the ane sham Sit must overcome to
teach Parad feos the ang thy devotee must got qast inorder to
couch the precious torotors of the saner region ob the sane He
tothe Gand at the brst pling of meditate ter te veg the
auidadhara canta. Unraurh whieh consciousness must pays en tls
way to freedom

Camesas physid form stants these mediatarial reies and
power Eh physical appearance ws ons ot ningiures aad bounda-
nes Hollarimal halbdeity broken ined togethes, holt wild halt
fame soncat the lord and lady of the universe. sel acauaiated
with demons, her made up by jamie togethe: that which at

--- Page 283 ---
Ganeta: The Protean God 251
other times and places stands apart. He does not reconcile these
oppositians, he holds them together in dynamic tension. Hindu-
asm does not seek resolution of extremes into a golden mean, it
secks to push cach opposition to its outermost limits and then ty
gain a precious ghmpse, a darsana, of that unwerse so fully and
contradictory extended. ters appropriate that Ganesa’s form be
that of an elephant, the largest of animals. the one whose sheer
size makes room for se many oppositions at ance

During the turbulent times of India’s modern history, Ganesa
has stood an his mediatorial ground. A symbol of the traditional
Past. ver the banger of success in the future, the god of all
Hindus. yet the special deity of a displaced elite. Ganesa has
served as a symbol of a revitalized traditionalisn in the face of
rapid and uncertain change Lake the festival that annually hon-
ors him, Ganesa has beeo an occasion tor unity within Hiaduism,
and the source of fear und suspicton on the part of religious
minontes in india For the people of Maharashtra, themselves
dwellers on the cultural boundary between the Aryan north and
Dravidian south, Ganesa enjoys speci) attection as the patron
deity of the Marathespeaking people In paying homage to
Ganesa they not only honor the deity. they assert thete common
bond ay Maharashtrans. a bond that unttes them Pengath the
divisions of class and caste

From the vantage port of our examination of Ganesa’s char
acter and impact on Hindu culture, itos clear that Ganesa as cut
finished. His protean nature continues to give forth suubiay He
has not been displaced by the conditions of modernity in Ince
quite the contrary. Elis mythology and symbolnm adapt well to
the novel circumstances brought ubout bya culture undergoing
rapid change In hys capacity as the Lord ef Berinsines, he teids
religious meaning to new undertakings, and as the Lect at Ohsta-
cles he stands as a reminder ot thy precacorsncss of ali human
adventures For India’s Hindus. standing on the threshold be
tween tradition and modermty. Ganesa stands there with ther
He spreads out his massive body and dances at tte ear

--- Page 284 ---
APPENDIX
A - «
The Sri Ganapati
ry
so

Atharvasirsa
The Sri Ganapat: Atharvasirsa is a upanisad that celebrates
Ganesa as the embodiment of the ultimate pnnciple brahman. It
Is the most widely recited Sanskrit text among sectanan devotees
of Ganeéa in Maharashtra. The entire text is lettered over the
doorway to tbe temple hall) [vandapaj in the astavindvaka
Gagesa shrine at Ranyangaon, and it was the first Sanskat text to
be published in the prestyious Anandasrama Sanskrit Series. in
Pune. at the end of the last century

There ny seme dinpute as to the dates ef engin of thes tec Ut
was probably composed dunag the srdceuth or scsentecath cen:
tunes Te tecstved the attention of $n Upanigad Brahma Yorn io
his commentary on one hundred eight upaniyads in 1761. as well
as others (Bubnomann 1083, pray GS Ghurse locates its
emergence im the gar mingteenth century, corresponding lo the
ise in the Gaoapan colt in Maharashtra among Brahmns
centered oo Pune ipp fot 2b Phe text traces its own lineage to
the Athurta Veda Ms translaten ip taken from the edition by J
Ro Santis cBonay. igo) A beavily cdited and abbresiated
translated was Jone in the cars minetecath century by Vans
Keaneds (pp aut ga) A critical edition and transhaton hus been
Published reccath by Gudtun Bubnemanna (19845

m2

--- Page 285 ---
The Sri Ganapati Atharvatina 253

Homage to Lord Ganesa. Om. Revereme to Ganapati. You are
indeed the visible “That Thou Art™ [satvamas:} You indecd pro-
duce the universe. You indeed sustain it You indeed destroy it
You indeed are the all pervading reality You are the manifesta-
tron of the eternal self [dmmon} I speak what vs fitting. | speak the
truth Ff descnbe vour form [ listen to (the descrption af] your
qualities. | give you my wortup. I devote myself to your study
From the west. the cast. the north. the south. from abave, trom
below. trom wherever calamity may come during your warship.
Please give me protection

You are the essence of sound, You are pure consciousness fev}
You are pure bliss [dnandal. You are brahman You are the form
of truth, conscoousness, and bless [saccrdananda] You are the vist:
ble brahman You are knawledge [yauna| and insight [visidna}
This entise world is bora (ram you Through you thy entite world
is maintained. Through you this entire workd ws dissolved This
entre world returns to you again. You are earth, water. fire aur.
and space You set the places for the four classes [1 arta]

You ate bevond the three qualities (genta, 1¢ . sativa. rayas. and
tamas| You are bevond the three states of consciousness fie.
waking. dream. and dreamless sleep] You are beyond the three
hades (¢ . corporal. subtie. and blissful fsvituie, seihyena, dnanda-
masa’) You cootinuails dwelt in the sacral pleaus st the base ot
the proc [anihididea caksa] You embeds the create power
Yoginy constantly mediate on you. You are Brahma, Vigau. and
Rugra [Siva]. You are Agm. Vayu. and Suva You are Cane
drama You are curth, space. and heaven You are the manitesta-
tion of the mantra “Ont”

Having ullered the first letter of the word gut xa. thea Lutter
the nasal sound ag which follows and appear besutifully Ike the
crescent moet This veur form The ga lors the smuitial letter,
the w tormy the middle leer and the aa torms the final leader To:
Utter thes sound |: ¢ gdm] ns ty utter all sounds together

five recognihon te tke org having the siagle tase [meditate
on the ane basing the nested trunk, that teank whieh inspires
ae Te hum who bolds the single tusk. yur hands Ine upper
ght helds the noose the upper left heads the oad Ihe lower
left holds an clephunt’s tusk the lowes ctr gestures Baesseng be
hem whose cofur ns red. whose Dells as lane, wR. cers tevemble
4 21M WINAOMINE Darker. whose getments ase fed upon whom
sandal paste is appbed te him Pofter ms wortup [pega] wits ted
flawers.

Heo the deity whe readers compasaen te thon. who ate de

--- Page 286 ---
254 GAYVESA! LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS
vated to him He is the one who gave dirth to these worlds He 1s
imperishable, hc way produced before this universe was formed.
He is beyond the principles of spint and matter [purusa and
prakrtt| Whoever mediates on him wall become the most excel
lent yogin among yogins

Homage to the leader of the gana ot the gods Homage to the
lord of the duinc group) May my pranes go to hm sho is the
primier lord. who has the large belly, and the single tusk To the
one who destroys obstackes, the son of Siva. to the one whose sight
brings blessings. may my praises be offered repeatedly

Whoever studies this Atharvasirsa vill obtain the whole of
Brahma in this age [kalpa] Ho will realize alt happiness He sall
fot recetve affliction from any calamite He sill obtain freedum
from the five great sins [1 ¢. murdering a Brahmin. drunkenness.
adultery. stealing, and associating with evil persons, Whoever re-
cites this in the evening hecomes free from sins commuted dusing
that dus Whoever recites thes in the morning becomes free from
the ans committed during the presivus mebt Hence, whoever
recites this text morning and evening becomes free tram all siny
and obtains the goals al nght conduct daurmal. success [ariha].
sensual enjoyment [kuma]. and release [moksa]

One should refrain trom teaching this Atharvasiyag to anyone
who lacks faith init) Whoever teaches onl tor money commits
the highest sin One who eecues this Attarvasirsa one Ibousand
times will find all tus destres fulfilled

Whoever, along with this Athurvaurse. performs the me ot
bathing the image of Ganapat becomes a good erator Whoever
ultcers this on the foucth day ef cach halt er the month [catered
while Lasting becomes weil-endowed wilh knowledge [vidal This
text was told by the Atharsan sage. and theeugh iene recognizes.
the veil covering braftoin and becomes leafless Whoever otters
dhéevac prays [lo Gunesd| obtains the niches of Varstavana fRubera]
Whoever offers parched grain becomes hortored and endowed with
wedom Whoever ofters one thousand siodukas gains the frutt et
his undertakings: Whoesee offers burning wood with clertted but
Ter abtoins ll happiness and pains all worth ale things

Whoeser teaches thay tharasisga by cisht Brahmins attains v1
tal powee Tike that of the sun Whoever utters this during a sulue
echpse in a sacred place obiuns the power of the tulniiment of
mantra Vie becomes Eee from great obstacles He becomes free
from great fault He becomes Cree Tram great sins be gains all
knowledge ‘This is. indeed. the Veda This the U pamyad May it
be auspicious!

--- Page 287 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Primary Texts in Indic Languages

Agni Purdga. AAS. no 41. Poona. 19$7

Auareya Rrdhmana, With commentary of Sayana Bib Ind Calcutta,
1896.

Aivaléyana Srauta Stitra Bib Ind oo 49 Calcutta, 1874

Atha Ganesacuturthi— pijakatha prarambh See Javadekar in secondary
sources: 7

Atharva Veda Wuh commentary of Sayana Bombay. 1%y5

Baudhdvana Grhya Sara Ed RS Shastn Mysore. 1920

Baudhdyana Grhyuparisigia Sitra Selections ed and trans by Prete N
U Hartung Amersfourt, Neth., 1922

Bhagavad Gd Ed and trans Frankiin Edgerton HOS. pos 38 39
Cambridge. Mass . tag.

Bhagavata Purana Veith commentary of Srdhara Bambay, 1442

Bhavisya Purana. Bombay. 1989

Rrahménda Purdna Delhi, 1973

Brahmavavana Purana AAS. no 102 Poona. 1934

Brhaddharma Purdna Bib Ind Calculta. 184-97

Brhaddevata of Saunaka HOS. na ¢ Cambridge. Mass. 1gng

Brhassamhitd of Wardha Mikura Bib {nd Calcutta, 1865

Buddhacanta See Jobnsion 1937. 1972

Caturvargacintaman: of Hemadn Bib Ind Calcutta, 874

Devi Purdna bd PK Sharma Delhi. 1978

Devibhdgavata Purana Benates, ty6o

Ganefa Gita Sec Yorou in secondary sources

Ganesa Purdna Bombay, 1892

Garuda Purana. Benares, 1963

Gopatha Brahmana Leiden, 1969

Hurwansa. bd. VS Sukthankar ct al, Pune. 1969-71

Jaimniva Bréhmana {Tulavakdras Sarasvaty vara Senes, no tr Nap
pur, 1954

Jotakas. Ed. V. Fausbell 7 voly London, 1X27 yo

255

--- Page 288 ---
256 GANESA” LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS

dAénetvars Ed. S. Vo Dandekar. Poona. 1967. See also Pradhan in
secondary sources.

Kamasutra of Vatsyayana. Bombay. 1856

Kathasarusagara of Somadera Bombay. 1930 See also Penzer in secon-
dary sources

Kumérasambhava of Kalidasa. Bombay. 1955

Karma Purana. Ed. A. S. Gupte, Benares, 1972

Linge Purdga. Calcutta, (812

Mahdabhagavata Purdna Bombay. 1913.

Mahdébharata With commentary of Nilakantha Bombay, 102

Mahabharata. Ed. V. S Sukthankar ct at’ Poona, 1942-69

Maitrasani Santhitd Fd | von Schroeder Wiesbaden. 1&1 (reprint.
1970)

Manavadharmasasira, With commentary of Medhattht Bibo Ind Cal-
cutta, 1932

Monavugrhyusitra Trans Mark J. Dresden Groningen. iy)

Markandeya Puruna Bib Ind no. 2y Caicutta. (862

Métangalila Sec Edgerton in secondary sources

Motsya Purdna ASS. no $4. Poona, 1907

Mudgala Purdga Bombay. 1976

Némadeva Gatha. Bombay, 1970.

Padma Purana. ASS.no iit Poona, 1893

Péraskaragrhyasinea EF A Stenzler Abhandlungen fur dhe Kunde
des Morgentlandes. 02, 1870

Ramayana vf Valanke td GH Bhatt etal Barada, rato 6

Re Veda Wath comucatan of Savana Bd Fo Stas Muller and ed
London. 1bya yz

Sebdukalpadruma ot Raja Su Radhakant Deb Rohodur Calcutta, 1x86

$ona Cpunnads bo AM Shastry Madras ruse.

Samkaravuava of Anandagiue Fad Tatkapanyhanana Bib tnd) Cab
eutta, 186%

Satepurtu Brahenana bd Albrecht Weber Bih Tad Calcutta 190%

Sia Puraya Benares, i964

Sia Purana. Dharmasanthita, Bombay, 1884

Skande Purana. Bombay, 1867

Set Gaaeta Aradhani Seo N Josh

Srisumuriha Rumadasumce Sumagra Granthe EA AC Bhat Poona,
1yt6

Subhaytaratnakoga of Nvaksta bd DD Kosambr and VV Gok
nate HOS, no a2 Cambridge, Mass 2 ys? See also Ingalls in
secondary sources

Tartertva Aranyaka With commentary of Saving ASS. no 6 Poona,
1897-1 BYR

--- Page 289 ---
Bibliography 237

Tautiriya Brahmana, With commentary of Sayana Bib. Ind. Calcutta,
1859.

Tandya Mahabrohmana (Pancavimséa), With commentary of Sayana
Trans. W. Caland. Bib. tnd. Calcutta, 1931. .

Tukdrama Gdihd. Bombay, 1950.

Upangads. One Hundred and Eight Upanigads. 4th ed. Bombay, (913

Vamana Purdna. Ed. A. S Gupta. Benares, 1968

Vardha Purdna. Bib Ind. no ito Calculta. 1893

Vayu Purana ASS, n0. 49. Poona, 1860.

Vigne Purdna. With commentary of Sndhara Calcutta.t19g72

Vonudharmouara Purdga. Bombay, n.d

Yayriavalkyasmeti. ASS. no 46. Poona, 1903-4.

2. Secondary Sources

Abbott, Justin E. 1gjo Pukuram frandatons from Mahipan’s Bhakla-
Llameta, chapts. 24-40. Poet-Saints of Maharashtra. no 7 Peaona.

Agarkar, A J 1950 Folk-dance of Maharashtra Bombay

Agrawala, P Ko (y660 Skanda in the Puranas aod Classical Literature
Puraga Jievis -88

———_ 1978 Goddess Vindvaki The Femate Gunesa Beaares

Agiawala. VS 1963 Meaning of Ganapati Journal of the Onental
Research insutute, Baroda 131-4

Apte. VS ty7s The Practical Sanskrit Raghsh Dikonars Delt

Aravamuthan, TT gag Ganesa. Clue to a Cult ane a Culture fear
nal of Oriental Research 18 221-45

Ayyar, PON Jagadisa ig82 South Indian Customs: New Dew

Babb, Lawrence Ao sy7s fhe Divine Hierarchy Now York

Bedeker, © oM > oty6g Kubera in Sanskrit Literature sath Special Reter
ence to the Mahdbharata JGIRRE 26 425-50

Banerjcsa. ) N 1yso The Development of Hiada demography Calcuttr

Barnouw, Victor. 1984 The Changing Characer ots Hindu tysteral
AA 56°74, 86

Beck. Brenda b. F o1y6g Colour and Healt in Sauth Indian Ruud Murr
NS. 4893-72

—— _re7a The Kin Nucleus in Tamil Folktere ta dare Ro Tesur
mann, ed. Ainship und History vi Senth Asia M chican Papers
on South and Southeast Astro ne + Ann Arba Pp ot 22

Bellah. Robert N. ed 1g6s) Relignon und Progress a Matera Wat
New York

Berkelcy-Hill, Owen, ig2t. The Analbrcuy Factor on tne Rel gre:

--- Page 290 ---
258 GANESA: LORD OF OBSTACTES, LORD OF DEGINNINGS
Philosophy and Character of the Hindus /aternational Journal of
Psycho-Analysis 2: 306-38.

Berkson. Carmel. 1983. Elephanta. Che Cave of Siva. Essays by Wendy D
O'Flaherty, George Michell, and Carmel Berkson. Princeton, NJ

Bhandarkar. R. G. 1913 Vagnasism, Sarviten, and Minor Religious Sys-
tems Strausberg. Ger

Bharati. Agchananda. 1970. Pilgrimage Sites and Indian Civilization In
J. Elder, ed... Chapters in indian Cividtzaton, Dubuque. lowa Pp
88-126.

Bhat. A ©. 1916 Srisamartha Ramadasamce Samagra Grantha. Poona

Bombay Presidency. 1885 Gazetcer of the Bombay Prevdencs, sol
18/3, Bombay

Brown, D McKenzie. 1958. The Philosophy of Bal Gangadhar Tilak
Karma ss daana in the Gitd Ruhasva. JAS 17.197 208

Brubaker, Richard L977) Lusiful Woman, Chaste Wife. Ambivaient
Mistress. Anna 3 §9 62.

——. 8 November i979 The Uses of Decapitation Paper presented at
annual mecting ot the American Academy of Religion, New York

Buhnemann. Gudrun 1983. Budha-Kauithe 5 Rémaraksasviatea Publies-
uons of the De Nobil Research Library. sol io Ed Gerhard
Oherhammer, Vienna

- 1984. Some Remarks on the Structure and Application of Hindu
Sansket Stotras Wiener Zeitschrifs fur die Kunde Sufasiens 28
pp 7a-tag

Cartaus. G Moras 1968) The Twice Born London

Cashman. Richard 11975 The Myth of the Lokumanva Mass Potties ot
Maharashira. Berkeley. Calf

Cendisankut. Sadanand. tog. Sei Asa@indvade Bombay

-- tys Maharastratil Mahaganapats Bomban

Chattopadhyaya, Detuprasud aysy Gokavaie ol Suats on Amcens dae
dian Materialism Delhi

Chiro. Valentine tgta dadian Carest London

Clothey. Fred tg fhe Mam Faces of Murukun Tho Hague

Coomaraswamy, AR ty28. Ganesha Bullena of the Museron of Fine
Arty [Bostan] 14. 50-1

oa tytsa Future Simthsanian Miwellaneous Callections, vot
40 6. Washmeton, DC

Courtnght, Paul Bo ty74 Ganesa and the Gunes Festival im Maharash:
tra A Study in Hindu Religrous Celebration Ph D dissertation
Princeton Uoversas

cores tgko The Bebeading af Ganesa Purana 207 Sa

Crooke, Wilham. 1g2%) Popular Religion aad Folklore of Northern In-
dia. 2 vols. Oxford.

--- Page 291 ---
Bibliography 259

Danielov. Alain. 1964. Hindu Polytheism. Bollingen Series, no. 73. New
York

Day, Veena. 1977 On the Categonzation of Space in Hindu Ritual In
Ravindra Jain. ed . Tees and Context The Social Anthropology of
Tradinon. Philadelphia.

Deleury, G A. 1960. Phe Cult of Vithoba. Poona.

Della Valle, Pietro. 18y2 The Travels of Pietro Della Valle. 2 sot, Ed
Edward Grey. London.

Dessigane. RP. Z. Prttabiramin, and Jean Fillozat (gG0 La Legende
des jeux de Civa ad Madura, Publications de Ulnstitut Frangas
U'Indologig. no 19. Pondicherry

—— 1964. Les légendes Canues de Kancipuram, Pubhcations de
MInsutut Frangais d'Indologie, no. 27 Pondwhetry

—— 1967 La légende de Skanda selon le Kandapurdnam tamaul et
Ficonographie Pubhcauons de MInsuitute Franyan d'Indobogic.
no. 31. Pondicherry

Deva, Vighnahars and K Bhingarkar nd Moragdviei dew Conevadt ale
Cinevad

Diehl. Carl Gustave. 1956 dnsirument and Purpose Lund, Sweden

Douglas. Mary 1966 Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepss of
Pollution and Taboo: Landen

Dube, $. G 1967 dadian Village New York

Dubay. Abbe JA iysy fend Manners, Customs, and Ceremonies
td and trans Henry Beauchamp ard ed Oxtord

Dundes. Alan 1962 Earth-Diver: Creation and the Msthopociw Mule
AA 64 1032-1105

Eck, Diana 1. 1g7% Kast City and Sembol Puraga 202-169 9?

——--- 19R2 Bandras. Crty of Light. New York

Edgerton, Franklin igar Phe Elephant Lore of the Hindus The Ele.
phant-Sport (Matangalilay of Nitakantha New Haven, Cone

Exchinger Ferro-Lue2i, Gabdreila. tg77a Tae Loge ot South Ladin
Food Offerings Anthropac 72°3-4'529- 56

—_ 19770. Ritual av Language’ (he Case ot South Indtan Food
Olfernngs. Current Anthrapologs, 18°4:507 14

bhade. Micea tgsg Tae Sacred and the Profane Trans Willard R
Trask New York

Flwin, Verner. igag. The Myths of Middle india Oxford

Freud, Sigmund. 1905 (reprint) The interpretanen of Dreams Deans
James Strachey. New York

Gadgil Amarendra 1968. Sri Gunesa Kosa Updtaka ani abhyasaku ata
sarvarsathi Ganesa datvatasijusuka sadhanagrantha Puoe

Gennep, Amold van 1y6o. The Ries of Passage Trans Monts Vire-
dom and Gabriella Caffee Chicago

--- Page 292 ---
260 GAMESA LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEGINNINGS

Getty, Alice 1936. Ganeta. A Monograph on the Elephant faced God
Oxford.

Ghurye, G. S. 1962. Gods and Men, Bombay.

Goldman, Robert P. 1978. Fathers. Sons and Gurus: Oedipal Confhet in
the Sanskrit Epics Journal of Indian Philosophy 6 \§2-92
Gonda. Jan. 1984 Pratigtha. Studia indelognu Internanenalia 1-27

-~--- . 1963 On Mantra. Onens 16:247-97

Grierson, G. A. 1914. Ganapatyas. ERE 6:175-76

Gupte. BOA. tgot Hamest Festivals in Honuue of Gaur and Gunesh
indian Annquary 25:60-64.

-—— 1919 Hindu Holdavs and Ceremonuiy md res cd Calcutta

Hanchett. Suzanne L. 1972 Festivals and Soual Relations in a Mysore
Village: Mechames of ‘Iwo Processions Economuc und Politcol
Weekly 8.1§17-22.

Hara, Minoru. 195% Nakulisa-Pasupata Darsanam inde frantan Jour
nal 2:8-32

Hazra, RC 1948 Ganapats Worship and the Upspuranas Dealing with
It JGIARI §: 263-76

——. 1951. The Gagesa Purdoa. /GJART a 79-99

Heesterman, Jan 1967 The Case of the Severed Head WZASO 11 22
43

Heras. H 1984) The Problem cf Ganapan Taensl Culture ¥ 062-204

Herbert. Jean toga. Ganesha Precede dune etude sur dew ches tes
Hindous Lyon

Hillebetel, AU ty760 Phe Ritual of Baile Aristing in the Mahabharata
Nhaca, NY

———_ 1980. Siva. The Gaddess. end the Diseunes of the Pandavas and
Draupadi HR 207147 g&

- (982 Sexuality und Sacrike Convergent Subcucrents an the
Farewalking Cult of Draupadi In Fred Clathes cdo fenages: uf
Man Reheeon and Historical Provess nt Seidih Assa. Madras

Hosmitar Cbtecd 178 The Bnems Transformed Opponents of the
Lord in the Ahuguvuta Purana JAAR (Supplement) as 1ay-216

Howell, Catherine Ho ta76 “Discovering” the Goddess An Anglyos al
the Vrut Kutha. MA thes. Universit. of Virgima

Hynes. Willan J and Temas f Steele Sod aunr Saint Peter Aposile
Transfipured into Trickster Arche Sores and Papers on Archan
Studies, No G  Pransformanons of Archaic tnages Ed Wiltam
G Doty, pp 112 28

Inden. Ronald Bo. ond Rolph Wo Nicholas yet) Autstup in Bengal
Cutture. Chicago

Ingalls, Danicl HoH. trans (965. Aa Anthology of Sanskra Court Poetry
[Vidvakura's Subhdsnaraiiakosa] HOS. 00 44 Cambridge. Mass

--- Page 293 ---
Bibliography 261

Jacobi, H. 1914. Brahmansm. ERF 2:799-814.

Javadekar, A Y.. trans 1969. Now Begins the Worship and Story for the
Fourth Lunar Day of the Lord of Troops (Atha Ganesacaturthi—-
Ppuydkatha prarambh| Ed by McKim Mazriott with suggestions
from J. A. B. Van Buitenen and Jean Varenne. ind ed. Commit-
fee on Southern Asan Studies, Universuty of Chicago. Chicago

Johnston, fH 1937. The Buddha's Mission and Last Journey. Bud
dhacarita 1§ -28. Acta Onentaha 15:26-62; 85-111

——_ tans. 1972 (reprint). The Buddhacarita: or Acts of the Buddha.
New Delon

Joshi. MY. 1975. Sef Ganefa Darfana. Pune.

Joshi, Narayanashasta. 1969 Sri Gunesa Arddhand. Bombay.

Jouveau-Dubreul, G_ 1937 Iconography of Southern India Pans

Kaelber, Walter © 1978 ‘The “Dramatic” Etement in Brahmanie Initia.
tion: Symbols of Death, Danger and Difficult Passage HR 18. 44-
76.

Kakar, Sudhir tg7& The inner World. A Psychoanalvuc Study of Child
hood and Society in India. New Delbs

Kane, P. V tg6a-75. History of Dharmasusira 2nd cd 4 vols. Pune

Karandikar, JS 1953 Sriganesorsavaci Sdih Warge Pune

Kane. [ravaty ig42 On the Road A Maharashinan Pilgrimage JAS
22-17

—— tabia. Kraship Organizanon in Indi Bombay

on tyoab. Maharashtra. Land and his People. Bombay

Kelkar, N.C led ty2z2 Lokamanva Tilakace Kesaritil Lekh Pune

Kennedy. Vans (831 Researches into the Nature and Affinity of Ancient
end Hindu Mythology Landon

Kmpe. Dav M1977) Saptadikaruna The Hindu Rite of Entry inte
Heaven In Frank Reynolds and Earle Waugh. cds, Referous
Encounters with Death Insights from the Hotory and Anthecpol-
ogy of Religions: University Park, Pa Ppotti-a2d

Keasamti, D. D. 1962) Afsth and Realty, Bombay

Kramnsch, Stella (ozs The Tedian Great Goddess HR 26 215-45

——. 108). The Presence of Sua Princeton

Leach. Edmund R. go Pulleyar and the Lord Buddha Aspects of
Rehgious Syncretism in Cevlon, Psychoanuls us and the Puicne
analytic Review 49. 8o- 107

Mam, Vetam 1975 Purdaw Encvelopedia Dele

Mann, Thoras. 19g) The Trensposed Heads A Leeead af fadia Trans
H. T Lowe-Porter. New York

Marathe, Anant Vasudey 1y47 Snganctotsas Bombay

Mamott, McKim 1966 The Feast of Lave Te Multon Stnyer, ed
Krishna’ Myths, Rees and Auitudes Chicago Pp sone 212

--- Page 294 ---
262 GANE$A: LORD OF OBSTACLES, LORD OF BEGINNINGS

Mate. M.S. 1962. Temples and Legends of Maharashtra Bombay

MecKenne, John. 1938. The Mahar Folk A Study of Untouchables in
Maharashtra. Calcutta.

Miller, Barbara Statler, trans 1978. The Hermit and the Love Thtef
Sanskrit Poems of Bhartrthari and Buhana. New York

Mitra, Haridas. n.d. Gagopati. Shantimketan

Momer-Wilhams, Monter 1964 (repnat) An Engiish-Sanskru Dicuon-
ary. Oxford.

Moor, Edward i8or An Account of an hereditery wing Dems, to
whom devotion 1s pa by the Brahmins of Poona and a6 neigh
borhood Asiatic Researches 7 383-97

1968 (repnnt) Hindu Pantheon. Benares

Mubherj. Abhay Charan. 1916. Hindu Fasts and Feasts Aliahabad

Narain, A K 1978 On the Carbest Ganesa Int PK Indrapala and
JE. van Lohuven-De Lecuw. eds Senaeut Paranavitana Come
memoration Volume. Leiden. Pp. 142-44

Navaratnam, Rama Ma 1g?& Aue Ganesa The Peace of god lating

Obevesekere, Gananath 19a The Cult of dre Goddess Pausnt Chicago

O'Flaherty. Wendy 11973. Aseeticism and Broteam: in the Muthoiog:
of Siva’ Oxford

——. 1975. Hindu Mvths Balumore

1976. The Origins of Evil in Hinds Muthologs Betkeies Calif

- s980 Women, Androgynes, and Other Mvihuaf Beasts Chiao

——— 1081. The Rig Veda’ An Anthalogy New York

Oanedt, Gal a May 1a7t) The Noa Beans Ca uerge in Poona,
1922-26. Paper presented at the Moharashtea Studs Group:
Minneapolis

Ostor, Akos. 18a Phe Play of the Gods Ch.cago

Pandey. Ray Bali 1968 Handa Samskaras Delbt

Pather. Hoyo Ancient Cestan. An Accouni ot the Aborigenes ond Part
ot the Faely Critcanen London

Peneer NOM ocd iysa The Ocean of Story to saly Trans © WwW
Tawney. Longa

Plaffenberget, Bersas 1937) Pilgrimage and Traditenal Authority a
Tanul Sao bapka, PhD dissertation Caner ef Calton
Betkecies

Pradhan, VoG) trans 2 HEM Lambert: ed ons Phe daanesin ire:
sats London

Preston Laurence Weoryo. Subregional Religious Centers im the His-
Tors ot Mahorashing The Sites Sacred to Ganesh In NOOK
Mame cdo fuages of Maharashttg A Reyurta Protile ot fridta
Toronto: Pp 102-28

--- Page 295 ---
Bibliography 263

Radin. Paul. 1956. The Trickster: A Study in Amencan indian Mythol-
ogy. New York.

Ramasubramaniam. V. so7t The Ganapati-Vinavaka-Gajyanana Wor-
ship: Analysis of an Integrative Cult Insane of Traditional Cul
tures Bulletin 97~153

Ramanujan. A. K ty72 The indian Oedipus. In Arabinda Podder. cd..
indian Luerature, Proceedings of a Seminar. Simla. Pp 12737

Ranade. MG rg00 The Rue of Maratha Power Bombay

Rao, T. A. Gopinatha tora Elements of Hindu tconography 4 vols
Mauras

Rao. U Venkataknshna. 1949 The Ganapati Cult, Quurteriy Journal of
the Mithic Society 41-92-99.

Rassat. Hans-Joachim 1985 Ganesa. Fine Untersuchung uber Her-
kuoft, Wesen und Kult der E:lefantenkoptigen Gotthen Indiens
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Tubingen.

Renou. 1 ous. t937 Note sur les ongines Vediques de Ganesa. Journal
Astauque 229.271-74

Risley. Herbert Hooig6g (reprmt) The People of India. 2.0.6. Delhi

Rivtere. Juan Roger i962) The Problem of Ganesa in the Puranay.
Purana 4/1:96- 102

Rousselet, Louis. 1878 fadsa and Irs Natwe Princes: Lonion

Russell. ROVoand Hira Lal taba Creprmty Phe Pribes and Castes of the
Central Provinces of india. 4 vols Del,

Sarma. Jyotimayee 196g Pup Asweiations oy West Bengal JAS
38°3:579- 94

Sartha. J. Roo ed 1g6y $n Ganapats Athaniaursa Bombay

Sastn, Ho Kehna 1g74 (reprint) South indian images of Gods and
Goddesses Delhi

Shastn. A. Mahadews. 1gso The Sanu Cpannads Wub the Commen.
tary of Sri Upanisad Brahmayogin Madras

Shutman David D 9k fami Femple Myths Sucetttce and Murresve at
the South India Suva Pradtion Pooceton, NI

Swaramamurli. © tyz4 Natura in Ant, Phought and fitecuture Now
Del

———. 1077 The Art of india New York

Sonthemmer. Gunther-Dicls ty76 Arruda, Viaskeba and Kaundohs
Ursprung, Geschichte und Umwelt von pastoruien Gotthenen im
Maharayiva Wiesbaden, Wo Ger

Spratt, Philp 1y66 Hada Cudtare amd Perconalis A Pi tranal is
Study Bombay

Srivastava MCP 1g72) Ganeda and Jvesths Journal aj tite Besar
Research Society 6B 4166-70

--- Page 296 ---
264 GANES$A? LORD OF OBSTACLES. LORD OF BEUINNENGS

Stanley, John. 1977. Spectal Time. Special Power: The Fluidity of Power
ina Popular Hindu Festival JAS 37:1:27- 43.

Stevenson, R 1845. Analysis of the Ganesa Purana, with special refer-
ence to the history of Buddhism. JKAS 8:3:19-24

Sykes. W. HH 1823. Aa Account of the Ongio of the Living God at the
Village of Chinchore, Neat Poona Fransactions of the Luerary
Society of Bombay 3:64-72

Trauimann, Thomas Ro text Dravidian Kinship Cambridge. Fng

Tulpule. SG. 1y7g Classical Marathi Lueroture History of Indian Lu
etature. vol. yg Wiesbaden.

Turner, Victor W. 1469) The Ritual Process: Chicago

—-— 1974 Dramas. Fields, and Metaphors Whaca NY

Tyler, Stephen A 1973 india An Anthrupoligiwal Perspective Pacihc
Palasades, Calif.

Underhill, Mofo igat. The Hindu Regiows Year Caicutta

Varadpandc, M_ 1.. 1973 Ganesh in Indian Folk Theatre Sangeet Narak
27:64-75.

Vaudeille. Charlotte (973 Pandhatpur. the Cry of Sarnts In HM
Buck and Glenn Yocum, eds . Structural Studies on South india
Chambersburg. Pa Pp 0a7 161

Wintermts, Maurice 189% Ganesa inthe Muhubhdrata JRAS Uo BY

Wolpert, Stanley A. igh2 Tidak end Goknate Revolution ond Reform in
the Making of Modern India. Berkeley, Calif

Yoroau. Kiyoshi 196% Ganesa Gua A Saady. Pranstution witit Notes. and
a Condensed Rendertng of the Commentary of Nilekuntha Ube
Hague

Qacgenbalg. Bartholomacus 186y Genevloys of the Seuth fadan Gods
Trans Go Metyger, Madras

Zimmer, Heo tgg0 Main aad Svaibols ie tndiaa Art und Chica:
non Bollingen Scenes no 6 New York

——— as The Art of Indian Asa > vols Bollingen Series sols wg
4o Penecton, NJ

--- Page 297 ---
Index
Acala (poet), 2.30 Balay Baproo, 224
Ade (demon), 677, 6% Balarama (elder brother of Krsna)
Adin (mother of the godu, 95 $8 Joe 7
Adot, 20K Ballabinavaka (Ganesa), 213
Agastya (sage), 147 44 Bana (dramatist), 124
Aga (god of rej, $1, 92, 208 Bane. MoV 20
Ahalya(wife of the sage Gautama), Basmasura (demon), as -%
210 Beck, Brenda t F . 104-5. te 12K
Ahmadnagar. 161. 189 97 beheadings
Acavata (white elephant of Indra) of Daksa. 1. 92.
21. 26-28. 41 of Daou, 127
Gancéa’s beheading and, ¥4 OW of Gangsa. LU 62 74, 79 BERR AY
Bt 1 Indian mythology 92 9%
as Indra’s mount, 22 as sembola castralions, 117
Akrura, 169 Bellab. Robert N24
aksata (unbusked fice grains), 178 BL Benares (Kany 27 28. a2 dd
a, 196 Benson, Carmel, 6
alligators. 40 41 Bhagu.ad Gua 2
altars, in homes. 177 Bhagavata Purana, W-40
Amaravati. Buddhist shrine at, 1.0) Bhagendes (ladra). 210
Avandagin, 21s Bhandsthar RG itt
Andhaka |gaga demon).67. 16 Bhartbar. 29. 4
androgyny. 3 Bho ani (geddeyst JOS
@vuka tice. myth about, 6 O1 Bhima tnniace). 241 4?
asfuvinayakas (shrines), 207 LiL Bhongashar KOo204
216 Bhigu wages. Lo 153
Adie Fwins (equine gods), 7 71 87 Bhrngia Cadestesd sen of Sino snd
Atharva Veda, 201 Parvati of
abs

--- Page 298 ---
266 index
Bho (goddess). 178 Cakrapani (mythical king). 214
Bodhsatla (previous incarnation of Carstairs, G Mortis. 107, 120
the Buddha), 23 castes. 191. See also Brahmans
Bombay, 203-4 tn Maharashtra, 203, 203
conflicts between Hindus and Mus- in rural festivals. 197-99
limvs in, 233 worship by, 171
feaction to Bniain in, 229-30 castranon
Bombay Educational Sooty, 227-28 beheading as symbolic of, 117
Bombay State, 202 tn imagery of Ganesa, 111
Brahmacan, Vishnu Gusa (Vishnu symbolic, in upenavana ntual. ror
Bhukayi Gokhale), 228 Cendasankar. Sadanand, ait
Brahma (deity). 65 Chandogya t pangad, 181
birth of Ganeta and. 47 Chattopadhvaya. Debiprasad. 10
creations of, ay Chiptunar. Veshnu. 229. 241
elephants created by, 26 Chiplunkar, Veshnushaster, 228-29
filth head af. destroyed by Siva, 92 Chiral, Walentune. 242, 243
tn Madhu and Kanjabha myth. 2090 Cinesvad. 20). 221-25
at Maragaon. 216 Cintamane (Ganesay. 244
Parvati and, 67 Cimamag: Deva, 223-24
Parvati's cure on Sani and. 74 Cintamani HW Deva, 224
Rahu and. 82 Cintamage UI Deva, 224-25
mn otuals. U9 Citpavan Brahmin subcaste. 295. 232
in Tilotama myth, 208 cows, 233
Brahmaoie tradition Gages in ta-t2 0 Curzon, Lord George Nathan), 242
Brahouns
wa Abmadnagar, 180 Dadhyatc (sage). 70-71. 87. 92
fesusals crilcized by. 200 dagads couth (Virtdvakocuturth, day 10
in Maharashtra, 204. 204 lunar month}, 170 78
in Maharashtra. under Britain, 227, Daksa (deity) vay.
ne beheading Of. 49.92. 94. 96
Aeo-tradihonalsl movement and Dany idemnness). 14714
a0 darsaau, 167
BS PHicsis. (7ge78 TT TR. RA Dantatresy ides 205
tn Pune rcgion. 225 36 death. 26
in cural festahs 197 y& WA aniaton rte. we
an Samaksnta mth. 645 Dells salte, Peto. as
‘Tilak ands 235 demans. 2g 46
upunavana nie (or, 100 102 bath of Ganess and. 48g
worship of Ganesa By. 161, 162 Dano
Behaspat (perceptur vi the gods). 9 tn Madhu amd Katabha myth, 209
Ap. tte. ta Tilottama myth, 208
Batain Sec Great Brita Deda. 161, 149, 207
brother See aise sons Deshmukh. Sandae Gopal Han “Loka
felations belween. 522 29 hres adh” 228
Buddts Deswpane, Ro. 32
tatth of. 28 29 Deva. Vighnahan. 224
ekephant mvihs about, 240 26 Devadatis (caemy cousin of the Bud
Pudith: (goddess). 523. 624.204 Jhal, 25 26
Budlhisin Devala (Naratia. sage). 40
ckephant syanboasin in 2427 Desavayana (vinayaka, demon}. 132
Ganesan. 202 Devi tpoddess1. 24g
in Kade myths, 142-43 Dharamdar Deva. 224
Bybnemann, Gadtun. 192 Dbarmatasita. 29

--- Page 299 ---
Index 267
Dhavala (washerman), 93-94 father-son dynamic in myths of Ga-
Dhuods (Gageda). 143-44 eka, H4-a2
Dhuodirajs (Gageda 38 worshipped in in myths of Gapesa, 104-4
Kad). ras-ag mother-san dynamic in myths af
dik3d (initiation nite), 98-102 Ganesa, 107 14,
Dirghatpas (sage). 25 worship an. 174
Din (mother of demons). 84 83.040 Lather
Divali. festal of. tg smother lynamic in myths uf Gage:
Divodasa (mythical hing). 121-22. 4a. 105 6
142-44 oedipal themes in myths of Gane
domewic worship (puijd), 160, 172-88 and. 10)
doorkeepers (ratekeepers). 66. 15% lesuwals
of heaven, (41 Ganesi Caturthi. 174-93. 207. 238-
Douglas. Mary. 6 3A. 2as-47
Drsupadi (wife af the Pipvavas). atsova, 160, 184~201
agi a? Freud, Sigmund. 114.115
Deseshans. 4
Dubos, Abbe 3A. 14 Gartgil, Amarendra, &
Dundes, Alan. 64 Gayamubha (demon), 146-96
Durga (goddess). 41.49.92 G4. 129, Geyanane (Ganesal. 129
18> Gayas (tniber at
dieva grass, 00 Gajasura (demon). 6.2, 3435.93
Durvasas (sage). a7- aR. at Ganeda’s bathe with, Bo-Rt
Duy) anta Emythical king). 210,11 Gajendra (elephsat-hing). 24. 39° 4t.72
dvapare yuxd (cosimn age). 120 Ranw, VOS-94
Gatapat: (Ganera). 3 9. 615. 180 41,
Taig
costing. 1am 49 Ganapats (Muss youth). 150. $3
by Ganesa. 112 1g Genupan t paniyud (Sti Cranapan Athar.
ef prosda (dieing Pood) 1s. ty, taseega), 16%, 220. 262 $4
iss Ganapatyas, 215 26
Bek Diana lo . Ganapathumiara. 218
Eabinger Ferro Luz) Gabel 12 eee na gt
vkephan’s under Ganesa 146, 146
Ganess s broken tusk. Te go . vundharve (demigod), 40
Ganesas head tram Une gh 2 Gandhi, Mohandas. 244
tn Murtanda myth 56 3% Gatnesa eaty i. 4 8 248-51
military ue of arth of. gn he
myth ures tescrimhing yt Brahma and 4?
Seagal ssinbolisi: in head ef 1t Parvati and, «)-f2
ssmPobsm atop tr Siva and gh 4r
Chade Mines of brother brother dynamic an myths
Elptinstons Sfeuntstuanl 22; ot aa2 39
Eiprunviume Colkyye f28 dulibas of roy 12. 024
Phan Verner. <4 Fommemarabony of Mh. abeut
Enptish Language 228 pais
enue Cuma ae ut re Deity Sake on. cg
chemuns amd tu ¥6
fama ckphaal siebatism in go Us
frotherbrather dsm. amyitsnt | fathee mather dyaanic wy nythy of
Ganesa, 12t- 70 wen
fathee mother dynamin ety thy of father son dy ngemg aa my iy of,
Ganesa, toe th mare

--- Page 300 ---
268 index
festivals to. Hindu pide and. 245- Gaupalan Upadeshak Mandali
46 [Socety of Brahmins for the
festivals to, Tilak and, 234-38. 243. Propagation of Cow
245 Protection). 233
head af. 31-41 Gautama (sage). 210
bevels of myths of, 19 Getty, Abee. 10, 81
2s Lord of Obstactes, 136-59 Gennep. Amokt van, 98, 176
Maharashtra following for, 202 Ghurye, GS. 225. 252
moiher-san dynamic in myths of, Ginyésuta, 218
107-14 Gokhale. Gopal Knshna. 229
names for. & Gokhale, Vishnu Bhikap: (Vishnu Gu-
oedipal themes in myths of, 103 va Brahmacart). 228
ongins of. 8-13, Goldman, Robert. 116. 117
psychoanalytic approach to myths Gonda, Jan. 180, 183
Of, toa Creal Britain
puja (worship) of. 172-88 Gandhi's opposition to. 344-45
wi Purdonc teats, 18 India under, 227-29
restoration of. 97-98 react (0, 224° 42
testoration of head of, 94-95 guardran hgures. elephants as, 26-27
sampradaya (tradition of worship) Guha (Skanda, deity), 122
10, 217-26 gual (red powder). 19%
severed head of, 62-74 Guoeds (Ganeda]. 214
shrines in Maharashtra la, 206-17 Guna ania (Sataseati Gangadhara), 118
Set Ganapat Atharvasirya to, 252° purus. 120
34
10 symbolism uf upanayena nite. 99, hallucanateons. 14)
100, 102-4 Hanchert, Suzanne 1. . 161, 197
trunks, (2a Hanuman (dete). b90.
tusks, 74-90 Harkeda (veksa). 196
breaking of. as symbolic castra Harns, Lard George. 245
on, 117 Hava. R © 22a
as phalhe symbol. 101 head of Gapesa
sexual symbolum in, 021 broken tusk an, 74-90
wssava (pubhe festival) for. 184 20: donon of. y0 4
worship of, 160-67 severing of. 62 74
worshap af, Juring Ganeta Caruethe serual sebolisay in, 125
ten heads See alse beheadings
worship uf. during phases of moon, an Malini mvch. 129 Ww
167-91 Shanda’s, 02>
Canela Catartht (festival) 3b 74, heaven, averceowding in 140 44
Mt Heesterman, Jan. 96 97
since Indian independence. 246 47 Herambasute, 218, 219
Tilab’s changes in. 214-38 Hultebener AE 11
attee Tilak’s death, 24s Hondursntt
Ganvsa Gua, 2034 ducing Bash cule wr india, 228 29
Ganety Puranas ($1. 220 conflicis between Muslims and.
Ganesaupenna Upangad 220 maa
Ganga (portdess). 8245. 4g demons in. re
Ganyadhars Sarasval ys Ganesa festwab nat at
Gangapur. 226 pring bath to sau in, 10%
Gangeva (Ganesa). $2. $1 iMasOR sn gX- gy
gatekeepers (dourkeepets), 06, 168 pride in, Gane festivals and. 248
ef heaves gt “4

--- Page 301 ---
Index 269
Purdioue period of. 8.43 Kémalésura (demon), 313. 244
rituals and myths in. 54-15 Kama (god of desire). 215
sont separated from mothers in, 108 Kdmasiitra (Valsyayana). 29
Tilak’s movement and. 231 Kdacipuram. shrine at. 146
trnksters in, 155 Kagjaka (barber), 142
worship of Gancéa in. 160-67 Kaosa (sage), 20)

Had (gandherva), 40 Karandikat, JS. 239

Hussain, Zakir. 194 karma, chain of, 72

Karporisuta (demon), 239

ichor, 29 30 Kariukeys (Shanda: deity), 122

Indasamanagotia (monk), 23 Karve. Iravate. 203

Inden, Ronaki B . 61 Kaw (Renares), 27-28, (42-44

Inca Authasantsdgera (Somadcva}. 93-94.
under Britain, 227 29 16s
elephant symbolism in, 24 40 Kasen tnver). 147
Gandhu’s movement in. 244-45 Kennedy. John F . 194
Maharashtra region of, 102-6 Kennedy, Vans, 49. 152
surship of Ganesan 6-7. 165 Kesar (newspaper). 230.246. 241

Indran National Congress. 233 Khadihor, Kenhnay Prabhakar. 241,

Indians. North American. 1$4. 145 242

Indra (deny). 26 Khandoba (deity), 205
wn Agastya myth. 147-48 Kivaha
Auavata and. 41 Kicaka Vadh (Marathi desma). 241-42
bebcadengs by. 93 Kuromukha (Gapetay. 83 84. 92
cumpetion betwen Rudama and, Kolhapur. 205

tas-26 Konkan. 202
Dadhyanc and, 70. 21, 87 Kramrisch, Stella. <8
Diu’s son hilted hy Fy 85. a3t Kena tdeny) 31 72129. 148 49
Durasac and. 37+ 38 myth of srumaniaky and. 169: 70
clephanis and, 2% so myths ot Ganesa’s broken tusk.
Gancsa’s bith and. 44 ad wow
Gautama’s curse on, 210 Krthkas (Ploodes. wives of the seven
Kursa created by, so sages). 022

Koema foun of Gancdal. 624

Jacotn, Ho sy Kubera (dettyy tyo0 9

Jans 1%y Kurunsetea (sated nacllenctd). 125-

Jalardhorg (lemon), &2 2b

Pamadageresiped wa Kusminguracapulrs (inavake. de

Jamoh kat Bal Ganysdhar, 22% mong. 132

Praha ys Badlthse aq rae Rusamamdint Gere ant ot Bare any

Jasedckar AY eo te

Jeyarr tos Keuiter being) on

Sranctes. Jnangevata Sart) 166 6°

Jonata 8 Catns fen of Ganese) tra

Juavesy Dubreuil, Gar Jacdu [ywcrimeas). 1% 40

Ssosthe PNUD demaness; ran Fauws ta as

Famym Eloy 22. te

Kanatis tccmunn, cog Coach. Ederued 2 ree cna, 22 18a

Kakar Sudtit. tg. 608) toy fepe hil oe resuduc |. $8 0F

Kaun ‘Kactimbj, 200 Iepathavens Uancestos) $$
lempic at sik Lokamanya See dilux Ral Ginga

Kahdesa ipecth nit has

Kutiva (demons, pea anar moat, eT

--- Page 302 ---
270 index
Macaulay, Thomas Babingion, 227 Moharram (Mushim festival). 234
McKenzie. John. 190 Monier-Wilhams, Momer. 55
Madanasundan, 93-94 moon, 81-82
Madhavrao 1. 276 worship of Gapeta during phases of
Madhu (demon), 209 167-70
Mahdbalesvara. 138 Moor. Edward. 225
Mahabharata, 141, t$t- $3. 243 Moragaon, shrine at, 201, 202, 214-16
Mahsgaoapan (Gancta). 213. 218 Moraya (Moroba) Gosdvi, 211, 121
Mahatakymi (deity), 205 n
Maharashtra, 189. mather
under Britain, 126-29 lather dynamic. in myths of Gane-
as cultural region, 202-6 $2, 105-6
Gapesa festiwah in. 236-41 an myth of Buddha ac clephant. 24
violence of in, 243-44 oedipal themes in myths of Ganeds
Ganeia sampraddya in, 217-26 and. 10%
reaction to Bnush in, 229. 30 tn Ovdipus myth, 115
sacred centers tu Ganesa in, 206-17 Mudgala Purdna. 214, 220, 221
Tilak an. 230-35 Mukbery. Abhay Charan ise
worship in, 171-72 Mundas (tribe), 11
workup of Ganeda on. 164 Murugan (abo Murukan. Shands. de:
Mahar (caste). 150-54 aly, 022, 128
Mahavinayaka (Ganesa). 95. 134 Stustims
Matoda (king), 86 ww Ahmadtnager. 189. 191. tug. 196
Mahspats (poet). 229-24 conficrs berscen Hindus amd 2a1-
Matiys (demon), 92.129 Wo dat sa
Mahratia (newspaper) 231 festival to Gadesa and ty dae
maia (body ditt). $4° $6 tn Maharashtra 24
Malin (servant), $4. 99. 00, 120 mythalogy
Majsada Ganesa Mandir (temple) Dcheadings in. 92 ok
tou cullutal canted! of teaters of ind
Manavadhurmasustea. 134 listeners te a
Monavagrhyasutry 142 44 vf demons. 129 16
mandalt laswerativcs), 188, 190-97 elephant svinteber nt 27
fag. 200 of Gancsas behcading az 6 ty.
Mandana (pect). 27 4
Mann. Thomas. 93 nf Ganeda's birth gi Aa
mantras. 1h}. 074. 180. TBE oF Ganesa’s broke task 2a 90
Gane’s. 09, Hu OF Ganesa’s head. un at
Marstha-Kunt caste. sug levels of meanmes in ny
Muarathe. Anant Vasudkcs. 246, Ocdipus myth, tna 18
Marathe lingy sec. 204 iMualy and 1g 14
matnage of Gancks. (25 24 of shrines te Ganest 207 04
Martapga (won of Adits) <5 45 iinkeers in 16g ty
matuts, BY OM violence in an
Maya (queen, mother of the Huudhal at Virana. fA ty
aa
melas (singing groups). 248.219 41 Naga cult
dag Namidess ipoct aunt, 19%
Miller. Barbara Stuer, 29, Jo Samudeva Gutha laa
Meakyara, 044 nimakarund samnkdee (tte) +1
modakas (sweet wheat or tice balls} Namuci (ueman). y2
Tae 4. 126-27 Nandin Sica s hull, 20, 6. an ea
Moghuls. 224 Ganesa’s Seheading and, A> 0

--- Page 303 ---
Index a
Nandini (wish-granting cow), 144 Peter (saint). 156
Narada (sage). 86. 87. 138. ¢70. 209 -Plaflenberger. Bryan. 7
Narain. A K..g-10 Phadke, Vawdeo Balwant, 229. 242
Narasimha (Vigqu: deity). 197 Phule, lyotiba, 191, 228
Nardyana Deva. 224 pilgrimages, (25. 20113
Narayana I Deva. 224 Paltryar caste. 14
Nehru, Jawaharlal. 194 Pindas (nice bal). $8. $6. $8. 62
Reo-Iradmionalist movement. 229-30. Pleades (Krttikds). $2, 122
23232, 238 poct-saints, 205 5
New English School. 229. 231 poluical themes
Nicholas. Ralph W., 61 ia festivals, 192-94, 236
nightmares, 143 tn songs to Ganeda, 234
Nuriti Syestha; mauspicious goddess}. Poona Sarvayantk Sabha (Poona Pub-
10 lic Socvets), 232
Prapapats (dey). $1. $3. $8. 074. 180
Obeyesekere, Gananath. 109. tay dismemberment of, 95. 96
obstactes. 176. $0 prokrt panciple, 117
ocdtpal Themes in Ganesa myths. 103 praga, 181-87
Oedipus myth, 114-16. 123 Pprdnapransthd (retual), 19%, 180
O'Flaherty, Wendy 0. 18-19. 20. $4 prasuda (divine foud). 178. 177. (85.
an doorkcepens. 66 186
on Martanda. st Prasena. (69
Ostar, Akos. 44. $62 Preston. Laurence W207 18
POC, 174-94. 1 77- TE KG
patcdyatana, 164 Prehu (xing). $3. 6¢
Pandey Ray Bal. too public festivals (utsavas), 160, (RR Or
Pandharpur. 206 pape (warship), 60, 972 BS
Pandurang. Dadoba, 22% Pune. 161. tBR. 209 4. 225,
Parasurama (Veynu. deny). 4. 4 7% Gancta Catucthi festival in, 207
gh. 127, ee MOU
purgata Rowen, ye reachon to Bpstain in, 229-40
Parker, H. 88 shines in region of, 200002
Parvati (goddessy. 7 silence of Ganete festival in, 243
competibons between Ganeda and 4
Skanda and. (23-27 Purante perind of Hinduism. &
Ganesa’s beheading and, 62-73 dating texts of, 17-18
Ganes’s tieth and. 9-6. 02 11S. Ganesa cult during. 219
42 fz Ganesa’s ongins in 84
Gancta’s broken tusk and. 76 78 Purusa (cowie person). 165. 180
Ganess’s head and. 3) 45 Haas
ay Gageda’s mother, ins a Puruys-Prajapett (ders) 98 96
in Kasi. 142 pure primiple. 117
19 Malini mvt, 12g Puneasaaie, 179
as mother. 128
in myth of overcrowded heaven Radha (comort of Kryaal. 28
t4orat Radhskanl Deb Behsdur Rasa. Rs He
an Sa Lanka myth, 68. by Radin Paul, 154. 146
Vinayaka (Ganeda) and. 134018 Rabu (uemon), 2, 44. 92
on wedding mght. 14 Rarwade Vinhvanatt Kashinath. 245
Partin (Parvati. gititess). 024 atkyasas demons} 114
Pedh, 205 Ramodasa (saint. ifs
Peshwa dynasty. 204, 716 17. 228 27 Ramanujan, A Korie 6
Ganesa and. 200 Ransde, MG. 220. 282

--- Page 304 ---
272 index
Ranjangaon. shrine af, 109 Saturn, 39
Rao. T. A. Gopinatha, 31 “swcond birth.” 108-9
Ravana (demon). 138 sexuality
Raddhi (wife of Ganesa). 131 tn elephant myths, 29
reburth. in initiation nie. 99 Ganeta’s celrbacy, 109 12
tchgion, 14. 162 See efso Hindursm vn Oedipus myth, 115
Renow. Louis. 9 in Stva and Parvati’s relavonthip.
Reouka (wife of sage). 93 17
fice, $5-§8 symbolism of, in Ganeda’s head. 121
nuals of Ucchisja Ganapatyas. 219
of Ganeta Cathurthi, 172 shrines. 158
of Hindu inittation nite, 98-99 to Ganesa, in Mahutashita, 20617
during lunar month, 167-68 Shulman, David D , $8. 140. 140. 208
al Motagaon shrine. 216 Sudthatek, shrine at, 208 -9
myths commemorated by. 14-45 Sada (wile of Ganesa). 624. 124.219
purd 102, 132 BB Sindhu (00 of King Cakrapage), 204
upunoyena. 100 102. 118-20 Sandra (demon), 86. 87. 029
vindyakakaipa, (32 44 Swa (dents), 6 65
srolence in. 96 97 in Agastya myth. 147-48
of worship of Gapesa, 160-62 allempt ta steal tage ol cya
Rudra (deny). $7,179 axe given to Paraturama by. 2477
Rusama (deity), 125 26 battle between Gayasura and, 80-21
battle between Ganesa and, Ty-s0
Subdukatpadruma (Radhaksat Deb) beheadings by. 92
fs 86 Brabma’s Atth bead destroved by
sacnfice. 9 103 ar
by demons, 130 Daksa beheaded by.
taki, 65 ange under. 130
Sakuntala (queen). 260-1 on Ganess a$ Lord of Obstacles,
Salakatanaluta (inayana. demon), Wie a?
(32 Ganesa- Parvati cclatnashyp and,
Samiirec 208 tor
samkalpa (raal). 19% Ganesa testeted by. 9?
samkasacaturihy (das in lunar mouth? Ganesa’s beheading and 0. 62 +
for 6K x hy
sempraddsa (erkhon af wurstip) Ganesas oth and as $4
2 at as Caress athe ras 6. 1g 22
Sani (Saturn duis 49 Gameses head and year
cUPsE OF BN fy ve pods not honoring Guanes ray
in myths of Gunes s behcauite Phase extended ta devetces By ig
Th te a
Somer. 62 18 ay nha tas as
Sohiarsuta Lelemens, 254 19 Matbu und Karpabha myth, 29
Sumkacderava oT Atatstag 0 28 259 Movant sof Gama S qo r2 re
Saatosd Matyadues daughter el Ga fester. on of Game sas Bead by
near tag cs sia
saperndrhorratis HIME P66 Varaks detested 25 15%
Seaver agate sero 208 Veonaivaka 1Ganesar ind. ab 18
Sane 1 Rass an Nisanites ath rag 4s
het gene eaeduh ipubly groupe’ Sianoay aig das
ma fivine’ a honor af aie it
Satuatarsa Ue Mig Purden, gah 64
Nireektes. 4 Shanda anenm sag

--- Page 305 ---
index 273
Shanda (deity). 74-76 ustavas (festivals) popularized by.
bath Of. $2, $3, 88 188, a0
Ganeso's head and. 33 Tilottama (my thecal). 208
relationship between Ganesa and, dittha (bathwaler. ritual), 45. 134.
. 122-29 r3-04
Skonda Purdae. 1\-36, 79. 140. 169- ——Titvala, temple of Mahaganapau (Ga-
co eka) in. 210
Smana Brahmins. 162 trees. myth about, 60-61
soma, 11} teicksters. 154-55
Somaveva (poet), 164 Tripura (demon). 209
Somakants (king). 145 ‘Treditas (demon). 92
Somanatha (shrine), 140-45 Tryambak. 205
son Tuksrama (poet-saint), 122, 2234-24
brother-brather dynam. sn myths Tulyapur. 208
of Ganesa. 12229 Tulpule. Shankar Gopal. 203
father dynamic, in myths of Ga- turmenc. 102
De. 014 22 Tumer, Vector W. 5. By. 176
wn Hindu culture. 105 Tylet, Stephen A. 126
smother dynamic. in myths of Gane.
ta. 107 4 Vechista Gaoapatyas. 218-19
ocdipal themes in myths of Ganeda.— Ugrd (queen). 294
and, 169 kha pots. 8 97
Sn Ganapant Atharvasirsa, (63. 320 Uma [Parvau, goddess}. 47. 49
232 44 upecdras (rituals). 184 85
Sn Lanka. worship of Ganesa ia. 7 upanavane (rile). 9-104. 118-20, 249
Sriparthn emuhdgunapanpaia (rial). Upannyads. 48
176 aK Usinia Guravaka, comony
tthapane (elual). Ro utsavumure festival image) 140
Suddhodana (hing. father of tke Buds utsava (pula festival). 160. 186 207
dhal. 2k
Sudharma dquecn) 146 Vamanbhat. 22
Sun, &2 \urenya (Ganesay. 220
Surya (devi. 169, i14 Varkaris 205
Sutrayet. 169 Wasiytha (sagel (49 46
svavambaAu I sclf-cxitent” shrines) Vaeyayana, 29
103,20 Vethe poets
syemantaka (wish fulfilling? jewel beheadings in. 92
myth. 16y-70 demons in, 134
elephant swmbetisn on, 22
headin.
Taraka (demon). 223. 668 Wena thing: $3 61
‘Temple, Willram. 232 Vidarbha. ats 1%
temples (shrines). 198 Vighoaraya dLord of Obstacles
te Gancsa, in Maharashtea. 2060 17 Ganesa, Ganesa, dey). 116
Filak. Gal Gangadhar (Lokamansa}, Vighness (Lotd of Obstacles, deny!
tyr dya. ate (poner
Bhadrapada ‘esuvs, onder zih Vightesara fhord cf Obstastes Gus
death of, 246 ness. Jens) a7 ryt
Genet Cathurthi [esieal changed Vinayaka (Ganesa. Geman’ 10. AL
by. 032.207 AG. THY. 1S
Ganesa festivals ard. 243 shrines to. 207
New English School establshed oy. Witwvakacaturthy (dey 1 tenar
ny Monthy 166 7

--- Page 306 ---
274 Index
vindvekakalpa (ceremony). 32-31 vaynubalt (ric). $7
vindyakas (demons), 9. 132-34 Vidsarntra (king). 144-45
seen in nightmares. 143 Vithoba (Witthala, deity). 206. 274,
vindyakas (elephant-faced servants of Vira (demon). 26. 92
Swal. 47-49 Vyasa (poet. 151-54
sinlence in mythology and rituats, 96
07. See alto bebealings Wolpert, Stankey A. arr. 240
Virdbhadra (servant of Siva). 48 samen
Viraka (son af Siva and Parsalt), 66- importance of sany ta ins See abe
#8 107 mother
Murata (hang). 240 warship of Ganeta, 160-67
Vasalaksa (servant), during Gayete Cathurihs. (71-32
Vesaryana (ritual), 187 during phases af moon 17-77
Vegnu (uerty). 64, 22 pita. 172-bR
accutental beheading of, 92 sumpradava. 21328
altempl to Seal Sivas fenga anal, tarava (publ: Fetal), 8 201
IR
wn Divodasa myth. (42 43
festivals to, 197-98 yahgas. 9. log. Lae
Gajendra ond. go Yama Yond of death, 22. ae 138
at Gancta’s beheading. 49 Yatoua (mother of Kipnos. 1a ay.
Kanespuram shrine established by Yogm. $e Uponisad Braking, 252
146 Yudhisthira thing), 24¢
in Madhu and Kaitsbha myth. 209,
to eatin, 79 2xcgenbale. Bartholumucus. a O48
worship of. (64 Zimmer. Herongh. 22.84

--- Page 307 ---
Paul B. Courtright: is Professor ins the
Department of Rehgion at Emory Univer:
suy, Atlanta. GA, USA, He is also co-editor
of From the Marans of Hindu Mamage. He
is currently completing a book on the
subject of Sati, Other wholarly projects
include research on the religions traditians
ol Gachwal and a biographical study of the
mineteenth century scholar administrator
Horace Hayman Wilsan.

--- Page 308 ---
Extracts fram ceviews
“Excellentintco tes”
Wosw
Cannery of Canterbun iNew Lealand)
“Reads easily ..informative. Gives alternative views, balanced. clear.
Recommended as a goad source book.”
Forks) Wan
University of Sauthern Mecsessuppt
“Paul Courtright’s ingenuity and skill have produced a comprehensive.
interesting study about one of India’s most popular gods....Definitely a
must for the my thologist and indologist alike. lis a critical, thorough
studs that hay been long overdue.”
New Canadian Review
“Balances rich textural, anthropological, and interpretive
resourcees....An opulent exposition of Ganesa and his worship.
Choice
“Seasoned and insightful, obviously based on many ycars of thought,
cesearch, writing, and rewriling....Crammed (ull of information, well
organized, and still a delight 1o read... masterful.”
Journal of the Amencan Academy of Religion
“Courtright has collected much primary matcrial, especially From
the Puranas, presented some possible ways of understanding it, and
culled the best of the secondary literature. In these respects, the book
contributes significantly (o the study of Sanskritic Hinduism and its
regional reatlzation.”
Journal af Rehgion
“Intelligent and eminently ceadable.”
Religrous Studies Review
“Another of [the] year’s treasures.
Commonweal
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED
