--- Page 1 ---
The Tantric GaneSa: Texts Preserved in
the Tibetan Canon

Christopher Wilkinson
I. Introduction and the Texts
(S ane§Sa is a deity who began his career in India and subsequently

spread his influence throughout Asia, including Tibet. There are
thirty texts in the Tibetan Buddhist canon of direct interest for the study of
GaneSa. All of these texts were composed in “Indian” languages, presum-
ably Sanskrit or some Prakrit, and it is perhans only in their Tibetan trans-
lations that these texts survive today. There is also a significant postcanon-
ical development of GaneSa in the schools of Tibetan Buddhism, and the
practices associated with Gane§Sa as a Buddhist Tantric deity survive up to
this day.

. The intention of this article is to present a representative sampling of
the canonical literature related to GaneSa in English translation. Fifteen of
the thirty texts concerned with GaneSa are translated below. Time and
space prevent the translation of all the texts, and the same restrictions pre-
vent a study of the postcanonical development of GaneSa. Furthermore, I
have foregone any extensive critical discussion. The historical section (sec-
tion II) on the authors and translators has been added by Robert L. Brown,
primarily from information supplied by Tim Shaw. Otherwise, the trans-
lations stand on their own. Hopefully, they will provide a major new
source for scholars working on GaneSa.

All thirty of the canonical texts relating to Ganesa present him in a
Tantric character. There is, however, no attempt in any of the texts to make
claim to any particular class of Tantra. Gane§a is presented as a deity from
whom food, wealth, sex, and supernatural attainments may be received
by the practitioner. GaneSa’s relationship with Mahadeva, better known as

235

--- Page 2 ---
236 Christopher Wilkinson

Siva, is admitted in some of the texts, yet the predominant tendency is to
identify Ganesa as an emanation of the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara. This
may suggest that an attempt was made to strip Gane§a of his non-Buddhist
heritage and incorporate him fully into the Buddhist pantheon. It also per-
haps reflects the tendency to associate Avalokitesvara and Siva in later
Buddhism. It may, finally, and as evidenced by a number of essays in this
book, indicate that Ganega was originally not a Buddhist, Hindu, or Jaina
deity, but rather an Indian deity who was incorporated equally into all ma-
jor Indian religions.

The following bibliography presents the texts thematically, in the or-
der they are to be presented in translation, rather than chronologically.
Text numbers refer to the Peking Edition of the Tibetan canon. The marker
‘>’ indicates that the text is one of the fifteen translated in this article.

A. Text from the bKa ’gyur

1. > Arya ganapati hrdaya, ‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po'i sNying
| po. (Peking #338).
2. >Mahaganapati tantra, Tshogs kyi bDag po’ rGyud. (Peking
#337).
B. Iconographical text
3. > Mahavinayaka rupopadesa cintaratna, bGegs bdag Chen po’ sKu
bri ba’t Man rgag Yid bzhin nor bu. (Peking #4978). Author,
Nag po pa. Translators, Gayadhara and Zla ba’i ‘Od zer.
C. The Bali ceremony
4. > Arya ganapati bali vidhi, ‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po’i gTor
ma’ Cho ga. (Peking #4979). Au. Nag -po zhabs. Trans. Gay-
adhara, Zla ba’i’Od zer.
D. The fire ceremonies (S. homa)
3. [Vinayaka] homa vidhi [prabhasana], bGegs bdag gi sByin sreg gi
Cho ga Rab tu bShad pa. (Peking #4980).
6. Arya ganapati homa vidhi, ‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po'i sByin
sreg gi Cho ga. (Peking #4988).
FE. Vinayaka as an evil demon
7. >Vinayaka graha nirmocana, Log ‘dren gyi gDon las Nges par
Thar pa. (Peking #3812). Au. Ye shes rDo rje (Jnanavajra).

F Practice methods (Sadhana)

8. Mahaganesa sadhana, Tshogs kyi dBang Idan Chen po sGrub pa’i
thabs. (Peking #5176).
9. >[Ganapati sadhana daridra nidhiprada nama]. Tshogs bdag gi

--- Page 3 ---
The Tantric GaneSa 237 ©
bsGrub pa dbul ba’i gTer sByin Shes bya ba. (Peking #3855). Au.
dPal Mar me mdzad bzang po (Sri Dipamkarabhadra).

10. Ganapati guhya sadhana, Tshogs kyi bDag po gSang ba’i sGrub
thabs. (Peking #4560). Au. Amoghavajra. Trans. Diparnkara-
Srijnana, Nag tsho Tshul khrims rGyal ba.

11. Meghaloka ganapati sadhana, sPrin kyi sGron ma Tshogs kyi bDag
po sGrub thabs. (Peking #4562). Au. Rin chen rDo rje (Ratna-
vajra). Trans. DiparnkaraSrijnana, Nag tsho Tshul khrims
rgyal ba.

12. >Sri ajnd vinivarta ganapati sadhana, dPal Tshogs kyi bDag po
‘Jur gegs Sel ba Shes bya ba’ sGrub thabs. (Peking #4563). Au.
Indrabhuti. Trans. Diparnkarasrijnana, rGya brTson ’grus
Seng ge.

13. Ganapati sadhana mahacakra nama, Tshogs kyi bDag po’i sGrub
thabs ‘khor lo Chen po Shes bya ba. (Peking #4972). Au. Avad-
huti-pa (Avadhutapada). Trans. DipamkaraSrijnana, Tshul
khrims rGyal ba.

14. >Vinayakaraja sadhana, bGegs kyi rgyal po’t sGrub thabs. (Pe-

, king #4973). Au. Nag-po sPyod pa pa. Trans. Gayadhara,
Zla ba’i’Od zer. '
15. Vinayakaraja sadhana, bGegs kyi rGyal po bsGrub pa’i thabs. (Pe-
| king #4976). Au. Nag po pa. Trans. Gayadhara, Zla ba’1’Od
zer. [Readings differ from Peking #4973. ]

16. Sunitpuna mahadeva vignaraja sadhana, Shin to Myur ba’i Lha
Chen po bGegs kyi rGyal po't sGrub thabs. (Peking #4981). Au.
Dipamkara.

17. Subudha devamahavighna vighnaraja sadhana, Shin tu Myur ba‘
Lha bGegs Chen po bGegs kyi rGyal po bsGrub pa’ thabs. (Peking
#4982). Trans. Vairocana of KoSala.

18. Sri ganapati cakra stirya, dPal Tshogs kyi bDag po’i ’Khor lo’i gSal
byed. (Peking #4983). Au. Dombhiheruka.

19. >Sri ganapati Santi sadhana, dPal Tshogs kyi bDag po Shi ba’i
sGrub thabs. (Peking #4986). Au. Jo bo.

20. Arya ganapati cintératna [sadhana], ’Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po
Yid bzhin Nor bu’i sGrub thabs. (Peking #4987). Au. Nag po pa.

21. Ganapati guhya sadhana, Tshogs kyi bDag po’i gSang ba’t sGrub
thabs. (Peking #4990). Au. Diparnkarajnana.

22. Mahaganapati dhatutrika rakta vasikara sadhana, Tshogs kyi bDag
po Chen po Khams gsum dbAng sDud dMar po’ sGrub thabs. (Pe-
king #4992). Au. Cantapa. Trans. dPal Vairocana of India,
Chos kyi Grags pa.

--- Page 4 ---
238 Christopher Wilkinson
23. Krodha ganapati sadhana, Tshogs kyt bDag po Khro bo’i sGrub
thabs. (Peking #4994). Au. gSer gling pa (Suvarnadvipa).
24. >Ghanapati samaya guhya sadhana, Tshogs kyi bDag po Dam
Tshig gSang ba’i bsGrub thabs. (Peking #4995). Au. Canakirti.
Trans. Vairocana, Chos kyi Grags pa.
G. Praises (stotra, stutt)
25. >Arya ganapati ragavajra samaya stotra, ‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi
bDag po Chags pa rDo rje’i Dam tshig gi bsTod pa. (Peking
#4561). Au. Dipamkarasrijnana. Trans. Dipamkaras-
rijnana, Tshul khrims rGyal ba.
26. >Arya ganapati stuti, ‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po la bsTod pa.
(Peking #4977). Au. Nag po Zhabs.
27. > Arya ganapati stuti, ‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po la bsTod pa.
(Peking #4989). Au. Nag po Zhabs. [Identical to Peking
#4977. |
28. >Ganapati stotra, Tshogs kyi bDag po la bsTod pa. (Peking
#4991). Au. Amoghavajra.
29. >Kamesvara stotra, ‘Dod pa’i dbAng phyug gi bsTod pa. (Peking
#4993). Au. Candapa.
H. The precious elephant text
30. > Hasti ratna dhana deyopadesa, gLang po Rin po che la Nor bLang
ba"! Man Ngag. (Peking #4971). Au. kLu grub (Nagarjuna).
II. A Note on the Authors and Translators
of the GaneSa Texts
Most of the authors and translators of the thirty Tibetan texts that
deal with GaneSa and that are listed above can be identified. The earliest
among the authors appear to have lived in the eighth and ninth centuries
A.D. These include such writers as Sri Diparnkarabhadra (dPal Mar me
mdzad bazng po) (author of Ganapati sadhana daridra nidhiprada nama, our
no. 9), an Indian monk who wrote some thirty-nine tantrika treatises and
was active in the Bengal and Bihar area of India in the late eighth and early
ninth centuries.’ A second eighth-century monk, Amoghavajra, who
wrote the Ganapati stotra translated below (no. 28), is one of the most fa-
mous Indian Tantric teachers. He, along with his equally famous teacher,
Vajrabodhi, translated many important Tantric texts into Chinese; Amo-
ghavajra is particularly known for his Chinese translation of the Tattvasam-
graha.* Another monk on our list with a well-known name, Nagarjuna, au-

--- Page 5 ---
The Tantric GaneSa 239
thor of the precious elephant text translated below (no. 30), is probably
Arya Nagarjuna rather than the earlier and even more famous Nagarjuna
who founded the Madyamika school. Arya Nagarjuna lived in the seventh
or eighth centuries and was a student of Saraha, who taught at Nalanda. It
appears that Nagarjuna’s own student, Nagabodhi, was the teacher of
Vajrabodhi and thus of Amoghavajra, mentioned above.° It is also possible
that with this text, and perhaps others, we are dealing with a later text that
was legitimized with the name of an earlier famous author.

The latest dates for the authors of these texts corresponds to the
dates they were translated and introduced into Tibet, the tenth and elev-
enth centuries. Here again we have authors who are well known and who
often are related as teacher— pupil. Jnanavajra (Ye shes rDo rje), for exam-
ple, author of Vindyaka graha nirmocana (no. 7 translated below), was from
East Bengal and lived in the late tenth and eleventh century. He has nu-
merous names, as did many of the Tantric monks, a practice due to their
receiving new names with each mastering of a set of teachings or doc-
trines, usually under different teachers.* Jnanavajra’s other names include
Advaya-jnanavajra, Advayavajra, Maitripa, Maitrigupta, and Avaduti-pa.°
Avaduti-pa is listed as the author of no. 13 on our list, the Ganapati sadhana _
mahacakra nama, and thus both treatises on GaneSa (nos. 7 and 13) are prob-
ably by the same person. Avadhuti-pa is associated specifically with the
important VikramaSila Monastery in Bihar and was a teacher of Atisa.°®

It is AtiSa’s name that appears most frequently on our list, both as an
author and a translator. Atisa, under his name Dipamkarasrijnana, is

’ listed as the author of text number 21, as both the author and translator of
text number 25, Arya ganapati ragavajra samaya stotra (translated below),
and as the translator of four other texts (nos. 10, 11, 12 [translated below],
and 13).” Jo-bo (no. 19) is another name for him. He is also mentioned as
bringing with him to Tibet the longest of our translated texts, the Maha-
ganapati Tanira, which, being spoken by the Buddha, is not given an au-
thor’s name. AtiSa’s life is well documented, although the sources do not
agree in many details. He was born at the end of the tenth century to a
royal family, probably in Bengal,* and from boyhood proceeded to study
with a series of teachers, ultimately mastering teachings of various schools
and most areas of Buddhist knowledge. His constant movement and
search for new teachers and doctrines is typical of the monks who wrote
the GaneSa texts; perhaps of most interest was that Atisa’s search took him
to Southeast Asia to study with dcaérya Dharmakirti (Dharmapala) of Su-
varnadvipa. It is thought that Suvarnadvipa, literally ‘““Land or Island of
Gold,”’ a name used for a variety of Southeast Asian locations over a very
long period of time, was in the eleventh century a reference to the maritime

--- Page 6 ---
240 Christopher Wilkinson

kingdom of Srivijaya, located somewhere in Sumatra, Malaysia, and pen-
insular Thailand. Atiga studied with Dharmakirti for over a decade before
returning to India around 1025 when he became the head (mahasthavira) ot
the Vikramasiia Monastery. Atisa’s fame continued to grow, and he was
asked by King ’Od-Ide of Tibet (the kingdom of mNa’ris in western Tibet)
to come to his country and teach. Arriving in 1042, AtiSa worked on trans-
lating — in collaboration with his Tibetan disciple Nag tsho Tshul khrims
rGyal ba, who is listed as cotranslator of four of the Ganesa texts — San-
skrit texts into Tibetan.’

We know Atiéa translated works of his teacher, Dharmakirti,'!° who,
under his name Suvarnadvipa (gSer ling pa)—an obvious reference to his
Southeast Asian location — is given as writing text number 23 on our list,
Krodah ganapati sadhana.

Atisa was involved in translating five of the twelve GaneSa texts for
which we have translators named. A second Indian teacher, Gayadhara,
along with his Tibetan colleague, Zla ba’i ‘Od zer, are responsible for an-
other four of the twelve (nos. 3, 4, 14, and 15 —all translated here except
15). Gayadhara, a contemporary of Atisa, was active in the first half of the
eleventh century and visited Tibet several times. His collaborator, Zla ba’i
‘Od zer, is well known as the first translator of the Kalacakra Tantra. The
four works they have translated all have authors whose names are varia-
tions of Krsna: Nag po pa, Nag po zhabs, and Nag po sPyod pa pa. The
authors of texts numbers 20, 26, and 27 on our list have Krsna names as
well; thus, there are seven GaneSa texts by authors with names that are ©
variants of Krsna. Some of these writers are probably the same person.
Unfortunately, however, Krsna is a common Tibetan name for tantrikas
and siddhas. One likely candidate would be Krsna the Elder, an expert on
the Hevajra Tantra and author of the Yogaratnamala who lived in the ninth
century.'! Another would be Krsnapada, one of AtiSa’s teachers (and thus
living in the eleventh century) who, along with Atisa’s Tibetan pupil,
Tshul khrims rGyal ba, translated Candrakirti’s Madhyamakavatara.'?

The final two translators, Vairocana and Chos kyi Grags pa, are listed
as translating together two works (nos. 22 and 24, the later translated be-
low), while Vairocana is listed as sole translator of text number 17. Here,
based on the identification of thetranslator of text number 17 as Vairocana
of Kosala, and assuming the other two Vairocanas are the same person, we
can probably identify him as Vairocanaraksita, another contemporary of
Atisa, whose career parallels Atisa’s in many ways. He was constantly

_ moving, studying with new teachers, and conquering new doctrines. Only
a partial review shows him moving from his home in southern India to
western India, then to Magadha, to Varanasi, to Nalanda, and to Vikra-

--- Page 7 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 241
masila. His teachers include most of the famous pandits of his time; he
even is said to have gone to China."

I have not mentioned all of the authors and translators of the Ganega
texts, but we now can draw certain conclusions. One point is that there
was a small number of monks and adepts who introduced the GaneSa lit-
erature to Tibet. In addition, these translators and teachers were among
the most famous and important practitioners of Tantric Buddhism in Tibet.
The worship of Gane§ga was clearly an accepted aspect of Buddhist teach-
ing and doctrine of the time, and reflects practices at such important In-
dian monasteries as Nalanda and Vikramasila,'4 as well as Tantric teach-
ings outside of India, as in China and Southeast Asia.

A second point that relates to the small number of authors and trans-
lators is that they were often connected, either in a teacher— pupil lineage
or in a parallel process studying with the same teachers. Their desire to
study with famous teachers kept them in constant peregrination, epito-
mized by Atisa’s trip to Southeast Asia to study with Dharmakirti. We
should probably see here a desire to meet, to actually be in the presence of,
the honored teacher. We can assume that these authors knew one anoth-
er’s writings, and those on which they were based, regardless of the doc-
trine or school they professed. Again, GaneSa’s acceptance among this
most highly learned and sophisticated group of preeminent Buddhist
teachers helps us to understand that he was not a god of the periphery,
but, by the eighth century, was a Buddhist deity of importance.

II. The Translations
A. Texts from the bKa ‘gyur

There are two texts in the Translations of the Pronouncements (bKa
‘gyur). The first presented here, the Ganapatihrdaya, is in the format of a
traditional Mahayana sutra. The role Ganapati plays in this text is that of a
mediator between Buddhist and non-Buddhist traditions, for by using the
mantra contained in the text, non-Buddhist ceremonies can be trans-
formed into Buddhist ones. The second text presented, the Mahaganapati
Tantra, is clearly a collection of various rites and descriptions of Ganapati
and must be a compilation. The text does not present itself in the format of
a traditional Buddhist Tantra, and it leaves out such characteristic features
as the ‘Thus have I once heard”’ at the beginning. Being contained in the
bKa’ ‘gyur, the presumed author of both texts is the Buddha himself, and
no translators are mentioned.

--- Page 8 ---
242 Christopher Wilkinson
In the Indian language:
Aryaganapatihrdaya
In the Tibetan language:
‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po’i sNying po
[In the English language:
The Essence of Ganapati]

Homage to all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas!

Thus have I once heard:

The Blessed One was dwelling in Rajagriha together with a great
comn:unity of 1,250 monks and of Bodhisattva-Mahasattvas. At that time
the Blessed One spoke to the venerable Ananda: ‘’O Ananda, the tasks of
anyone who comprehends the Essence of Ganapati-Ganesvara will all be ac-_.
complished. One’s wishes are fulfilled by comprehending it; and every
mantra will bring attainment: ‘“Tadyatha/ Namo stutemahaganapataye svaha/

_ Om kata kata/ Mata mata/ Dara dara! Vidara vidaral Hana hana/ Grihna grihna/
Dhava dhaval Bhamyja bhamjal Stambha stambha/l Jambha jambha/ Moha moha!
Dehi dehi/ Dapaya dapaya/ Dhana dhanya siddhi me prayaccha samayamanusmara
maharudra vacaniye svaha/l Om kuru kuru svahal Om turu turu/ Om muru muru
svahal Om bava samti vasu pustim kuru svahal Adguta bindu ksyabhita mahavi-

_ dara! Samagacchati mahabayal Mahabalal Mahavarakral Mahahasti/ Mahadak-
siniya pracidayami svahal Om kuru kuru/ Curu curu/ Muru muru/ Om ga ga ga
ga ga ga ga gal Om namo nama svaha!

“O Ananda, when any son of noble family, daughter of noble family,
monk, nun, lay man or lay woman goes to a place of worship other than
where the Three Jewels [are worshiped] or enters the palace retinue of a
king and practices the mantras [recited in that place] and begins with this
Essence of Ganapati-Ganesa, he pays homage to the Blessed Buddhas [as if]
with flowers and incense. Upon hearing this Essence of Ganapati all one’s
tasks will be accomplished. Have no doubts about it. If one is mindful [of
this mantra] in fights, arguments, confusions, and wars, they will all be pa-
cified. If you get up early each morning and recite it, you will attain
learnedness. Yaksas, raksasas and dakinis will not rob your health but will
promise to stay far away.”

After the Blessed One proclaimed these things, the gathering and
everyone in it, along with the world and its gods, men, demigods, and gan-
dharvas, rejoiced and praised the Blessed One’s teaching.

This completes the Essence of the Noble Ganapati.

In the Indian language:
Mahaganapatitantra

--- Page 9 ---
The Tantric Gane§a 243
In the Tibetan language:
Tshogs kyi bDag po Chen po’i rGyud
[In the English language:
, The Tantra of the Great Ganapati]
Homage to the Lord of the World!
Chapter One: Attaining Accomplishments (siddhi)

Homage to the great, glorious Ganapati! Place an image of the de-
lightful, glory-endowed Ganapati in a four-cornered mandala. You must
worship it for six months. Your fortune in this life will equal the universal
monarch (cakravartin) of the gods, and you will acquire great merit. Your
pleasures will equal the gods’, and your life will be most long. You will be
a lord of men and other beings. The sons of gods will be like your slaves.
Your orders will be heeded, and even nagas will follow them, doing the var-
ious works like slaves. You will have the pleasures of the gods, and any
pleasing things you desire will come to you [p. 200b]. An apparition (nir-
mana) by the great god Mahaganapati is brought about by the force of a dis-

- ciple with the fortune to attain accomplishments. Upon attaining the su-
preme accomplishment, you will obtain magical powers, and your
pleasures will increase according to your desires. He is the world-benefit-
ting god of gods whose worship brings accomplishment.

Chapter Two: The Mantra of Divine Accomplishment

Now make a four-cornered clean mandala in a secluded place. Smear
it weli with cow dung. When it is smooth and soft place an image of Gan-
apati on the raised-up middle. Sprinkle it with white flowers. Denude
yourself and worship it [while visualizing] yourself in the form of Vinay-
aka. Recite eighteen hundred mantras three times daily for a six-month
varataka [retreat]. All your mind’s hopes will be realized.

Om is a glorious will-being; it must be put at the beginning of a man-
tra. The accomplishment-granting letter that is like a wish-fulfilling jewel
must be put after it in the row. The sun-like letter must be read after that.
The first sign of the Tathagata, the supreme letter, must be taken up next.
Then the first consonant must be uttered. One who desires accomplish-
ment recites the mantra with the jewel syllable Sua and the action syllable
ha.

Chapter Three: Ganapatt’s Description

Ganapati is white. He has the head of an elephant. The tusk on one

side is broken. His right hand holds a radish. He rides a rat vehicle (va-

--- Page 10 ---
244 Christopher Wilkinson |
hana). His body is bedecked with precious jewels. His head is ornamented
with the full moon. He glows with rays of clear light. His complexion and
color are good. He is fat-bellied and bedecked with jewels [p. 201a].

Chapter Four: Propitiation of Ganapati with One Face and Four Arms

Now an expert, holding white flowers, should draw an image of Gan-
apati on the day of Pusya, white with the head of an elephant. His right
hand holds a radish. His left holds a precious jewel. He is fat-bellied, or-
namented with every sort of jewelry, seated atop a moon and a rat. Sit with
your face toward the center of the mandala and worship, [visualizing] your-
self in the image of Vinayaka.

Chapter Five: The Mudra of Ganapati

Now in the proximity of Indra, there is the white Ganapati with an
elephant’s head. He rides a rat. His third eye holds a crescent moon. His
right [hands] hold a radish and a knife. His left hold a trident and a skull.
To make the mudra of Ganapati you must clench the left hand with the
thumb and middle finger extended then seize the joint of the middle finger
with the bent thumb.

Chapter Six: The Mantra of Mahaganapati

Now to explain the mantra. The glorious Om is placed at the begin-
ning. Then inscribe the wish-fulfilling jewel, the letter of gems. The first
section of consonants should be written after that. Then the first sign of
the Tathagata must be unified with the eight vowels. Imagine the letter of
the first consonant, and inscribe it with your mind. The third of the third
section should be conjoined with the fourth of the first. The third of the
seventh section should be subjoined to the first of the third. Put the fifth of
the fourth as a companion to the wish-fulfilling jewel letter. This must be
ornamented with the third vowel. Then recite it with the third of the
fourth. The syllable of realized accomplishment must be recited at the end.
The Lord of the World himself gives the accomplishment of this mantra. All
your wishes will be fulfilled [p. 201b].

Chapter Seven: The Mantra of the Name

Now, furthermore, the speech that is the essence of attaining accom-
plishments, called “the mantra of the name that attains every accomplish-
ment,” is made by putting Om, the letter of glory, and Yam, at the begin-
ning. Subjoin the syllable of the sun to the wish-fulfilling jewel letter.

--- Page 11 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 245
Subjoin this to the sixth vowel. This must be ornamented with the bindu
nada. The letter of the first sign should be spoken next. Then the fifth of the
fourth should be attached. The first of the fifth should be written. Then
write the first sign of the Tathagata. The syllable of the wind element must
then be ornamented with the eighth vowel. The second letter of peace
should be announced at the end of it all. ‘The mantra of the name’ is the
fulfiller of every desire.

Chapter Eight: Worshiping Ganapati

Now this must be explained as well: Extract the perfume of white
flowers. Make an image of Ganapati about the size of a thumb out of white
sandalwood, fat-bellied with four arms. Do it carefully and do it well.
When the Great White One [the sun] is brilliant, lustrate the image with
morning dew. Wash it with a vase that is clean, bright, attractive, and fra-
grant, and with perfume with the scent of white flowers. Then immedi-
ately offer white flowers to invite [Ganapati] to the center of the mandala.
Then offer a large bali made of radishes and pastries. Make offerings of in-

_ cense, scent, lamps, and eatables. Offer the bali of radishes, pastries, wa-
ter, and the three whites with the [above mentioned] mantra. Offer incense
and flowers as well. If done in this way, Obstacles will be evermore inca-
pacitated [p. 202a].

| Chapter Nine: The Food for Attaining Accomplishments

Now a “radish” is a turnip that has eight flavors. It is the most excel-
lent of all foods as well. It is endowed with the eight [sic] supreme flavors:
bitterness, sourness, astringency, sweetness, hotness, and saltiness. It is
mild and has the greatest relish. It is the remedy for the eight sorts of ill-
ness. It benefits the bile, phlegm, and fever; the blood, pus, and indiges-
tion; the nerves and contagious diseases. There is no food grown like it!
The lips of the gods quiver for it! It is the food for attaining accomplish-
ments! It should be offered to the Lord of Hosts. The food called ‘‘pastry”’
(modaka) is:made from the three sweets and the three grains. It, too, en-
slaves one with its delicious smell.

Make little balls of wheat paste. Churn milk into butter, and make a
large bali for the hosts. Make offerings to Ganapati with butter, pastry |
flour, the three sweets, and various suitable foods [Verse ends].

[Make offerings] to Ganapati like this: Put Ganapati’s image in the
palm of your right hand; recite out loud one hundred thousand recitations
[of the mantra], not thinking of anything else. If you offer a radish after
blessing it with the mantra, your merit in this very life will equal that of a

--- Page 12 ---
246 Christopher Wilkinson
universal monarch. If you offer white flowers, you will not be defeated by
kings or others. Royalty, etc., will be attained [by you]. Kings, ministers,
and others will come under your control [Prose ends].

Chapter Ten: Achieving Kingship, etc.

Now I will explain the ceremony. Make a large image of Ganapati out
of the precious substance “‘silver.” It must hold a valuable gem in its hand.
The large mandala measures a full cubit. Scatter it with jewels and white
flowers. Recite one hundred thousand mantras. Sickness and suffering will
thereby be pacified.

As a wise man procures an image of Ganapati made from crystal and
silver, all his worldly suffering will be cleared away [ p. 202b]. An image of
Ganapati made from crystal should be about the size of a thumb. Recite the

" vidyamantra called ‘‘senapra’’ one hundred thousand times; lustrate the
crystal image; and on the day of Pusya point yourself to the east, put on |
white clothes, wash yourself, put your palms together, and solicit [Gana-
pati] with your hopes. |

‘‘What is the Obstacle that harms me? I lustrate the crystal image
which remains unmoving, unwavering atop the mirror and look to the
east. Let any Jarapa or thieves there may be appear in the mirror, then be-
come their identities.” Worship and consecrate this crystal image of Gan-
apati as is fitting and recite one hundred thousand of the vidyds called “‘na-
gakuru.” If you merely show this image to a person afflicted with sickness
or suffering, any disease will be healed. The person will also be liberated
from suffering. This is the ritual of great peace.

Make an image of Mahaganapati out of the precious substance
“gold.” Reveal it on the day of Pusya. Make offerings and consecrate it. Re-
cite one hundred thousand mantras called “vara.” Every sort of wealth will
increase in the house where the image rests. All Obstacles will offer jewels
upon seeing a golden Ganapati. Unable to work the woes of Obstacles,
they will worship you like a king. A rain of jewels falls upon the land where
a golden Ganapati resides. A golden Ganapati receives every sort of wealth
from all the kings of Obstacles. You will be transformed into a gracious,
glorious, and wealthy individual. The yaksas open their treasury to the
good qualities of the one who makes the finest image of Ganapati. In this
life and the next his possessions will continually increase. The Lord of
Wealth, Vaisravana, will serve and honor him like a king [p. 213a].

Now put the image of Ganapati on a four-cornered mandala. Recite
the mantra called “‘bhaga” one hundred thousand times. Whatever accom-
plishment is desired will be granted thereby in this very life. The propitia-
tor will be given the might of the king of the gods.

--- Page 13 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 247

The great compassionate Ganapati, being a most compassionate in-
dividual (atman), protects the poor with great compassion.

Draw this great God of Wealth on silk or cotton. Reveal it on the day
of Pusya. His estate whose house it resides in will be fortunate.

Carefully craft an image of Mahaganapati in copper. Put it atop a
mandala upon earth anointed with red sandalwood. Honor it with banduka
flowers (pantapates phoenicea), rubies, and red flowers. Recite the vidyamai:-
tra called “‘brum.” A king’s daughter will come under your power. Divine
maidens, naga girls, humans — any kind of girl you want — daughters of
Brahmins, women as they should be, those with the best of bodies, will
[all] adore you. They will follow your orders like slave girls. This and lim-
itless other wonderful things.

Realize these things by depending on images. Merely worshiping
them will fulfill [your wishes].

Or make an image of Ganapati out of precious jewels. Let it rest upon
a mandala. You must recite the vidya called ‘‘ratnasiddhi’’ one hundred.
thousand times. Treasure mines beneath the earth will be revealed. Any-
thing you wish for, you will enjoy.

Chapter Eleven: The Mandala of Mahaganapati

Now the great glorious Ganapati is the great wrathful one, the fierce
one, him having the heart of a Buddha and the head of an animal. He is
ornamented with a young elephant’s head, has three eyes, four tusks, four
arms, and four legs. He sits enthroned on a large naga. His first left [hand]
holds a white tusk. [In the hand] beneath it there is a noose. [On the night]
he holds an axe and a trident. His stomach and tusks are dark blue. Make
this kind of Ganapati image of bell metal (kamsa) and molten bronze (sar-
akam). Consecrate it on the day of Pusya.

Now seek out a spot for erecting the mandala to do contemplation and
propitiation. Draw out the mandala described in the ninth chapter. It
should have doors and portals. In the center, on an eight-petaled lotus,

Ganapati stands upon the object desired. [The image] must be placed atop
a moon seat, not being separate from the consort. Her name is Arcikari,
the adamantine pig-faced woman (rdo rje phag gdong ma). She carries in her
hands an axe and a banda full of blood, which she feeds to the principal
deity (Ganapati) [Verse ends].

In the yellow eastern section [of the mandala] sits the Lord of the
Three Realms holding a radish and a knife. In the blue southern section
sits the great black yaksa Adamantine Lips (rdo rje mchu) with the face of
Mahadeva, holding a staff and hammer. In the red western section sits the
red yaksa king named Lord of Ciouds (sprin gyi bdag) holding a water-filled

--- Page 14 ---
248 Christopher Wilkinson

cloud bank and a noose. In the green northern section sits the green yaksa
lord called Abode of Wealth (nor gnas) carrying a club and a jeweled staff.
In the white northeastern section sits the black Vinayaka with an ele-
phant’s head, carrying a trident and a radish. In the red southeastern sec-
tion is the black Lord of Hungry Ghosts (yi dags kyi bdag po) called Wrath
(drag po) carrying an axe and an entire skull. In the black southwestern sec-
tion Illuminatress of Clouds (sprin gyi sgron ma) holds in both hands a
cloud bank with lightning bolts in it. In the black northwestern section is
the king of Obstacles called Remover of Obstacles - Twisted Trunk (Log-
‘dren sna yon, Vakratundavindyaka) with an elephant’s trunk, carrying a tri-
dent and a dry skull filled with radishes and meat. The deities are served
by the eight naga kings: The naga kings Avala, Varuna, Samkhapala
(dung-skyong), Taksaka (‘jog po), Kulika (rigs Idan), Sesa (mtha’ yas), Padma,
and Mahapadma. At the eastern door is the great king Dhrtarasta (yul ‘khor
srung); at the southern door Virudaka (‘phags skyes po); at the western door
Virupaksa (sprin me bzang); at the northern door Vaisravana (rnam thos
sras). You must know their respective colors: white, blue, red, and green.
Each carries in his hands a precious jewel and a sword. Their consorts are
not portrayed [p. 204a].

Make a three-cornered secret mandala in the northeast of the draw-
ing. Draw inside it an image of your enemy out of monkey fat. Make it
lengthy, black, and with disheveled hair. Smear it with sesame butter.
Write his name and family at the heart. Tie a rope made from a corpse’s
hair to its neck. Then set out a bali of pastries and radishes for each of the
eight great yaksas and a red bali made from the discordant mixture of fish
meat and garlic for each of the eight great yaksas, a large bali for the eight
great nagas, and one each for the four great kings. If [this many] are not
possible, make one big one. Delicious food must [nonetheless] be offered
up to each [member of the mandala].

The ritual implements for a wrathful [deity] must be set out: the skull
of a wolf, a black spike, black mustard seed of two kinds (ske tshe and yungs
nag), and white mustard seed [Prose ends].

Chapter Twelve: The Stages of Practice

This must be explained as well: The stages of contemplation must be
carried out in [the following] way, or they will not be carried out at all. You
must practice with great secrecy.

Out of emptiness, whose nature is Ya, there arises the seed syllable
Hum with a nature of light and a group of eight Yas. The emanations of the
wrathful one are born from the mantra of the name and fill the triple uni-

--- Page 15 ---
The Tantric Ganega 249
verse. They melt into light and are absorbed into the original Hum. Maha-
ganapati arises [from the Hum] for the sake of living beings. He is a great
terror whose form is fear. His consort and retinue emerge as well. From the
letter Bhe and their [respective] names the eight kings and eight ndgas arise
like bodhisattvas. The kings arise looking like the wrathful one. Conjure
them forth with light: [The light] emanates out and gathers [the deities]
with a Dza and a Dza; they are drawn down with vast hooks, and the man-
tra Hum and Hum, thus endowing them with efficaciousness. Then wor-
ship and offer a bali, which must be augmented with the heart mantra bali-
grihanaka.

Chapter Thirteen: The Mantras of the Great Yaksas

Now the king of mantras is counted [by first reciting] the vowels and
consonants. The first of the fourth is written after that. The fifth of the
fourth is put in the row. Then contemplate the wish-fulfilling gem letter.
Recite the first mark of the Tathagata. Ornament it with the eight vowels
[p. 204b]. Put together the syllables of conjuration and the syllables of the
wind element with the second vowel, and it is known as “The King of Vic-
torious Ones.”

The second vowel should be conjoined to the wish-fulfilling gem syl-
lable. Then write the syllable of the sun and the fifth of the fourth. Orna-
ment the letter that is the fourth of the second with the fourth vowel. Con-
join the letter that is the fifth of the third to the fourth of the fifth.
Ornament the letter that is the first of the fourth with the fourth vowel.
Subjoin the syllable of the wind element. Recite the precious gem letter
and the action letter at the end. This basic mantra of Mahaganapati is the
realizer of every wish.

The mantras of the eight Yaksas, ‘Ya,’ etc.; ‘Ya Ya,’ etc.; Bam,’ etc.;
“Vinayaka,’ etc.; ‘“Baira,’ etc.; “Hum” and ‘Tri,’ the eighth being “Hu,” are
grounded at the end with ‘Phat,’ which is the essence of life. The mantras
for the nagas come from their names. They should have Om [at the begin-
ning] and Hum Phat [at the end]. The mantras of the great kings are the
mantra called ‘Bhai,’ the one called ‘‘Bhi/’ and the one called ““Bha’”’

Chapter Fourteen: The Wrathful Mantra

The mantra that conjures up the object of propitiation is Ya and ksa
and ka and ma and ha and bairabhai; tri and ra and ca with Setrum nrijaniya.
It must be recited many times.

Take hold of the enemy’s effigy with the mantras of the eight yaksas.
Then burn the effigy. Then leave the effigy.

--- Page 16 ---
250 Christopher Wilkinson

The king of hidden mantras is Ya and ksa and ka and Ia; ma, and ha and
bherabhe, deva yaksa yama and naga naga, all [recited] together. The entire
mass of enemies, whoever they are, must be admonished by saying ‘Ya Ya
Ya."

Now the secret of secret mantras is Ma and ha and bherabhe, yaksa,
etc., as above. Then recite the following: Saya curna curna tralaya, nagayaka-
tramaraya, hanacakra twice; then say ‘You, O so and so, maraya phat phat.”

Chapter Fifteen: Praising Ganapati

Now for another wrathful mantra: Om vighna phibabhya sarva vidya vi-
saya hridametaya, hum cidu patu, damarutaya, hanahana, grigana grihana, vaca
vaca, bhrahma bhrahma, bhrahmaya bhrahmaya, hum hum phat phat.

Make an image of Mahavinayaka out of bell metal or copper. Con-
secrate it and worship it. Put an image of your enemy beneath it; make him
the foot mat of Ganapati. There is no doubt this enemy will die. These
yogic techniques are mentioned on account of great necessity.

Make an image of Ganapati out of sandalwood or precious jewels.
Perform a consecration and offer up worship [Verse ends]. If you desire to
stop hail, make images of the lords of hail, the wind god, and the water
god; make an image of a cloud and an image of a dragon. Then place them
beneath Ganapati as a seat. Imagine they are beneath yourself as well.
When you recite mantras like the one called “hikacandra;’ the hail will be
stopped. Scatter white mustard seed all around.

If you want to send down hail, draw out a mandala of water and
clouds. Meditate on Mahaganapati riding a dragon. Imagine him to be
your servant. For the secret ritual implements use iron filings, gold filings,
and copper filings. Knead them with rain water and rice flour. Make it into
shapes just the size of the hail you want. Smear them with blood. Make
seven [of these] and many [bunches of] seven. Pour them into the skull of
a crow. It must be covered with clouds. The mantra must be written on the
crow’s skull three times. The ritual implements for the image must also be
set out. When you recite one hundred thousand mantras like the one called
“brum brum bharisaya’’ and there actually appear inside the crow’s skull
three or seven or eight hail stones, then carry it to your enemy’s land and
recite the mantra; [the hail] will fall.

If it doesn’t fall, turn the image of Ganapati upside down. Hide it in
the center of your enemy’s locale with its feet up. It is absolutely certain the
hail will fall. It will approximate the size of a kalantaka bird’s egg. the red-
colored testicles of a deer, or a fruit; ard it will fall for a long time. The crop-
destroying mantra is called “Brum.” If you want to stop [the hail], you must

--- Page 17 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 251
remove the image and crow[’s skull], for hail will fall every day as long as
they remain. You must offer worship to the image of Ganapati and recite
108 rosaries of the mantra perfectly from its beginning to its end ona rosary
made from precious gems. Lustrate the image and beseech it to remain in
the center of its mandala [prose ends].

These and limitless other excellent things are the works of Ganapati.

Homage, O delightful, glorious Ganapati! Homage, great, glorious,
peaceful, and wrathful one!

The Ganapatitantra called ‘The Arising of Attainments” is finished.

The Indian sage Dipamkarasrijnana came [to Tibet] carrying [this
text] from India for the sake of worldly attainments. It was entrusted to
rGyal ba’i byung gnas.

This Tantra fulfills one’s wishes.
B. Iconographical Text

The Mahavinayaka ripopadesa cintaratna includes not only an icono-
graphical account of Ganesa, but a mantric practice to go with it.

In the Indian language:
Mahavinayaka Rupa Upadesa Ratna
In the Tibetan language:
bGegs bdag Chen poi sKu bri ba’i Man ngag Yid bzhin Nor bu
[In the English language:
The Jewel of Instructions on the Form of The Great Lord of Obstacles]

Homage to the glorious Vajradakini!

Bowing to Cakrasamvara, draw an icon

Of the great Lord of Obstacles!

The mandala of the elemental spirits must be attained

By putting the eight of fourteen black things

On such special surfaces as

Cotton from the earth of Playful Cover (T. rol gyogs)

Cotton that has been pierced by weapons,

Cotton whose meat has been destroyed by insects,

Or the skin of an ox.

The one who makes the picture

Possesses the commitments.

It must be drawn by practitioners.

It has four corners and four doors.

It is well endowed with door protectors.

--- Page 18 ---
252 Christopher Wilkinson
The good qualities of all attainments abide in it.
It is full of the five good qualities of desire.
Thinkers must draw the mandala ornamenting it with the five offer-
ings.
The center of all mandalas is encircled with a line
And is most beautiful.
Draw an eight-petaled lotus.
Worship it with red flowers.
Fill it with bali that are suitable for worshiping,
Such as special kinds of perfume and incense, [vessels] filled with
the five ambrosias, fish, meat, and beer.
The great Wrathful One in the center of this
Has one face and four arms.
The tusks on his face are a bit sharp.
His wrathful mouth is smiling.
His supreme body is blue and is a great fright.
He is well ornamented with a rosary of skulls.
He rides a hungry ghost (5S. preta, T. y1 dags)
And sits upon a sun.
He brings fear to [the heaven of] the Thirty Three, Tusita.
He holds a garment made from the skin of a tiger.
He has three eyes and has a fine form.
He holds three banners, a flaming vajra,
A skull, and a mudra.
Likewise he holds in his right and left hands
A bow and an arrow.
Om vajra krota daki hum phat.
This is recited. .
In front of this is the great Lord of Obstacles.
His light blazes in great splendor. |
Draw him with twelve hands and being most fearful.
On eight petals there are eight yaksas.
Draw the great Lord of Obstacles just as he is.
First make the proper sort of cotton.
Then make an artist of divinities who has the proper happy character
So that he will draw it attractively.
Then an expert at consecration endowed with blessings
Must perform the ceremony of consecration in the proper way,
Using any required offering substances that are possible.
Facing a vast space
Fiercely generate benevolence, compassion, and bodhicitta.

--- Page 19 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 253

Worship and dedication must be performed extensively.

This is a wish-fulfilling jewel.

If you continually worship,

Your needs and desires will come forth.

This is the instruction of the icon.

The mandala of the elemental spirits is to be attained,

And when you do one hundred thousand recitations,

[Ganapati] will come before you in actuality.

Set up an image and worship it.

It is proclaimed that then your needs and desires will all come forth.

The Jewel of Instructions on the Form of the Great Lord of Obstacles com-
posed by the great master Nag-po-pa is finished.

It was translated by the great Pandita Gayadhara and the translator
Gyi jo Zla ba’i ’Od zer.

C. The Bali Ceremony

The Arya ganapati bali vidhi describes the making and use of a bali (T.
gtor ma). This form of offering is essential to every Tantric practice of Ga-
neSa. Its importance is demonstrated not only by the frequent referenceto
bali offerings in the texts dealing with GaneSa but also in the occurrence of
an entire text devoted to this offering. ,

In the Indian language:
Aryaganapatibalividhi
In the Tibetan language:
‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po’t gTor ma’t Cho ga
[In the English language:
The Bali Ceremony of the Noble Ganapati]

Homage to the glorious Vajradakini!

It is desirable to offer bali, for one must perfectly please the noble
Ganapati. First, fill a perfect vessel made of precious jewels with such eat-
ables and drinkables of perfect color, taste, and scent as husked rice, dan-
delion, the three whites, the three sweets, white pastries, radishes, beef,
and grapes, then place it before you.

Sit on a comfortable mat, and then contemplate the four abodes of
Brahma, go for refuge to the three [jewels], and generate the supreme Bod-
hicitta. Then meditate on the selflessness of all dharmas.

Think that from a Bhum [appears] a spacious and vast vessel made of
precious jewels, inside of which [there appears] a Kham from which [ap-
pears] food of a hundred flavors which fills [the vessel] to overflowing.

--- Page 20 ---
254 Christopher Wilkinson
Bless it with the three thusnesses (T. de nyid gsum) and “Om A karomukham
sarvadharmandm adyanutpananatuat Om A Hum Phat Svaha.’

Then concentrate on the seed syllable in your own heart. The light of
this summons the noble Ganapati of Wisdom. Then visualize him in front
[of you]. Then show the mudra.

Make offerings with “Om nama tute/ Namah gahnasataye/ Idam bali kha
kha khahi khahi svaha;’ and think that by this he enjoys [the offering] unto
satisfaction and then is pleased.

Then say these words:

I offer without any grasping

Such attractions of the ten directions’ gods and men

As fruits, medicine, jewels,

Pastries, radishes, beef,

Grapes, wine, husked rice, and dandelions.

You, O Protector, eat these things

Through your total love of me!

For I beg you to be pleased!

And make it so that all my works come to fruition!

Make it so that obstructions are well pacified!

Then praise him perfectly with words of praise. Then recite as many
rosaries of root mantras and spells as you are able. Then you must pray for
the object of your desire.

Then request the Wisdom One (T. ye shes pa) to depart. Thoroughly
dedicate the roots of merit that have been accumulated and recite the one
hundred syllable [mantra].

| The Bali Ceremony of the Noble Ganapati [by which] the great master
_ found supreme attainment, composed by Nag-po zhabs (Krsnapada), is
finished.

Translated by the Pandita Gayadhara and the translator Gyi Jo Zla
ba’1’Od zer.

D. The Fire Ceremonies

The Vindyaka homa vidhi prabhdsana and the Arya ganapati homa vidhi
are highly cryptic texts related to the use of GaneSa for fire offerings (S.
homa, T. spyan sreg). There are no available commentaries on the texts to
assist in their interpretation and translation. A study of GaneSa in this role
using these texts is certainly necessary, but must await future attention.
E. Ganesa as an Evil Demon

The Vindayaka graha nirmocana describes how the practitioner can es-
cape the sorrows caused by the evil demon Vinayaka. No iconographical

--- Page 21 ---
The Tantric GaneSa 255
description of the demon is present in the text, and it is not possible to be
completely certain that the demon in question is truly Ganeéa; yet the
name he shares with Gane§a is of sufficient value to warrant inclusion of
the text in this article. If it is Ganesa that is being referred to here, the de-
tailed description of the harm he causes is highly interesting for an insight
into GaneSa’s role as a demonic lord.

In the Indian language:
Vinayaka graha nirmocana
In the Tibetan language:
Log ‘dren gyi gDon las Nges par Thar pa
[In the English language:
Freedom from Vinayaka]

Homage to the glorious Vajrapani!

One who desires freedom from the Vinayaka demon (T. gdon) of the
world must, to begin with, know the signs. If smells come out of a body of
common family, when one is wearing bad clothing, when one has for food
the leftovers of others, when one is a woman or a child, when one is ex-
creting or urinating, when one is abiding nakedly, or on the fifth and four-
teenth days of the waning moon or on the new moon it starts. The signs of
it starting are groaning, smoke, one’s wealth being squandered, one is not
attractive to others, if one is a man one does not find a woman, if one is a
woman one does not find a man, if one does business one fails, one is not
born in a good land, or even if one finds a woman her mind changes, so

'. one is devoured by the Vinayaka demon.

The practice of the means to reach freedom from these things is to
offer to the west a bali made of four demon-vessels (T. gdon ma’t bum pa),
parched grains, cooked meat, raw meat, dandelion, perfume, a garland of
white flowers, porridge, and various kinds of incense.

Then illuminate and throw in the fire medicinal incense (T. gu gul),
white mustard, melted ’gi wang, horn, and horse hooves. Put in sandal-
wood, black aloewood, and saffron in equal parts with cow urine and goat
urine. Then do as [was mentioned] before by covering [the fire] with but-
ter, etc. Do such things as anointing and rubbing [the bali].

You will certainly be freed from the Vinayaka demon.

This composition of the Master Jnanavajra (T. Ye shes rDo rje) is fin-
ished.

E Practice Methods (Sadhana)

There are seventeen texts devoted to ceremonies of practice for Ga-
nesa in the Tibetan Buddhist canon. While it is not possible to present
translations of all of the texts, representative samples have been selected
to provide a general insight into how Ganesa manifests in these texts. Five

--- Page 22 ---
256 Christopher Wilkinson
Sadhanas are here translated: (1) the Ganapati sadhana daridra nidhiprada, (2)
the Sri ajra vinivarta ganapati sadhana, (3) the Vinayaka-raja sadhana, (4) the
Sri ganapati Santi sadhana, and (5) the Ganapati samaya guhya sadhana.
In the Indian language:
Ganapati sadhana daridira nidhiprada nama
In the Tibetan language:
Tshogs bdag gi bsGrub pa dbul ba’i gTer sByin Shes bya ba
[In the English language:
The Propitiation of Ganapati that Gives the Treasure of the Poor]
The practitioner possessing the commitments (S. Samaya, T. dam
_ tshig) who desires to attain the enjoyment of the full gift of all desired pur-
poses through the works of Ganapati makes a round mandala that is very
even, like the face of a mirror, ina mentally satisfying building. Make it of
blue color, just two cubits in size, and in the blue diagram inside it [put]
the main syllables in a circle, and inside them write the Essence of Ganapati
with gold. Then draw the image of Ganapati on blue cotton and consecrate
~” it. Then roll up a variety of silks and put them inside.

Inside the heart of a monkey [put] gold — which comes from the
earth, as many precious jewels as you find, and as many kinds of meat as
you find; and place it on top of the mandala. Fasten a rope made of
wrapped-up elephant hair and monkey hair. Clearly meditate that the
body color and mudra of Ganapati are upon [this mandala].

Establish yourself in the pride of being Vidarana, then recite ‘‘Namo
ratnatrayayal Om Ga Svaha/" a thousand thousands [times] without being
distracted by others, and think that Ganapati gives you enjoyments ac-
cording to you: desire.

On the eighth of the waxing [moon] or the eighth of the waning
[moon] offer an extremely fine Ganapati bali that has various kinds of
meat, butter, dandelion, and various wonderful tastes; and pray for the ob-
ject of your desire. It is not proper that others see this.

The Propitiation of Ganapati that Gives the Treasure of the Poor, composed
by Dipamkarabhadra (T. Mar me mDzad bZang po) and advice for those
who desire wealth and food, is finished.

In the Indian language:
Sri Ajna Vinivarta Ganapati Sadhanain
In the Tibetan language:
dPal Tshogs kyi bDag po ‘Jur bgegs Sel ba Shes bya ba’i sGrub thabs
[In the English language:
Clearing the Obstacles of Entanglement: The Method of Practice for the
Glorious Ganapati]

--- Page 23 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 257
Homage to the Great Compassionate One!
Paying reverent homage to the manifestation
Of he who continually holds
All sentient beings with equanimous compassion,
Ganapati,
I will explain the secret method of practice.
First set up an image of Ganapati.
[Draw] the Noble One on a horsehide or fine cotton
With a body color that is white like snow.
He has three faces, six arms, and four legs.
The faces are an elephant’s, a rat’s, and a monkey’s.
In his right hands are a radish, a jewel, and a sword.
His left [holds] a pastry, a skull full of beer, and an axe.
His right leg is stretched out, his left drawn in.
The other two [legs] are crossed in a good bent-knee position.
Beneath him the goddess Pleasure Woman (dGar mo),
Who has the face of a monkey,
Must sink in about half of the Noble One’s secret.
As foot supports she has two goddesses.
Jewels fall from this consort’s mouth.
They fall into vessels
To remove the practitioner’s poverty and fulfill his hopes.
This must be drawn under the great stars.
[Draw] with ‘gi wang on the four sides of it
— Tadyatha/ Namah stute ganapati/ Katta kattal Madda madda/
Radda radda/ Daha daha! Grihna grihna/ Bhanyja bhanjal Namah stute/
Ganapati rurucanaya svaha/ Om A bhum travinabukhanance dhara
bhrama gacchati! Hahaya/ Mahuhatiksitananapraye mayemi/ Kuru
kuru/ Curu curu/ Muru muru/ Namo nama svaha!.
Write it many times and increase it.
Behind it you must write the long spell.
For the consecration, put before [the drawing]
A white mandala with eight petals.
Then on sandalwood that has been anointed with water
Arrange white flowers in separate bunches.
Worship the Noble One with beer, radish, pastry, husked grain, dan-
delion, etc.
Then make yourself [into] a tutelary deity
And recite this mantra:
_ Om Gam Ganapati mama ratna siddhi!
Ga ga 3a ga ga ga ga ga Ganapati svaha/.

--- Page 24 ---
295 Cnristopher Wilkinson

Apply this to the sign of the number.

You will gain attainment in one month.

Then, to worship the image,

Wrap a human leg in the middle of a piece of silk,

And inserting it [into the vessel] with your hand in the early morn-

ing,

Offer a bali:

Om Gam Ganapati ratna siddhi/ Ga ga ga ga ga ga ga gal

Ganapati svanal Om Gam Ganapati balim takhahi khahi/.

You must offer this with the mantra of seven [syllables].

Then make praises using this mantra:

Om Ganapati ratna ratna ratna siddhi mama rodha rodha/

Ganapati/ Ga ga ga ga ga ga ga ga kata kata svaha/ Ganapati

ratna pustikara mata mata svahal Ganapati siddhi vasim kuru

rata rata svahai Ganapati ratana bausata grihna grihna

svaha’.

Your mental aspirations will be completed ,

By reciting this 108 times.

After reaching the state of a universal monarch

You will find wealth without effort.

You will attain this without the necessity of making a profit.

For this reason you must strive to [offer] ball.

By the merit of composing this method of practice

Of the Noble One who clears away all the obstacles of entanglement

May I have power over the wealth of the world

And obtain the unexcelled result.

The method of practicing the Noble Ganapati called Clearing the Ob-
stacles of Entanglement composed by the great master Indrabodhi is fin-
ished.

It was translated by the great pandita Dipamkarasrijnana and the
translator rGya brTson ‘grus Seng ge at Yam bu Gar ta ri.

In the Indian language:
Vinayakana Raja Sadhanam
In the Tibetan language:
bGegs ky1 rGyal po’i sGrub thabs
[In the English language:
The Method of Practice of the King of Obstacles}

Homage to the glorious Vajradakini!

The meditator strives to make good in a witch’s (S. matrka, T. ma mo)
house or a delightful place by concentrating on an icon. The intelligent one

--- Page 25 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 259
begins by making offerings so that the dancer (T. gar mkhan) will always
remain bound.

The glorious Ganapati abides with his right leg stretched forth. His
red body color flames with red light and trembles in redness.-He has one
face. He has three eyes. His elephant head holds the crown ornament of
braided hair (T. ral pa). His tusks are sharp. He is short in stature, but fat
and bulky. His stomach is twisting and large. He is extremely fearsome. He
is ornamented with every ornament. He has twelve hands. The first on the
right holds an axe, the second a staff, the third a bow, the fourth a khat-
vamka, the fifth an iron hook, and the sixth a skull full of blood. The first
on the left holds a vajra, the second a sword, the third a skull full of great
things, the fourth a small radish, the fifth a trident, and the sixth a roped
spear. He sits on the throne of a sun and red lotus.

Om gah gah siddhi siddhi sarva artha me prasadha hum hum jah jah svaha.
This is the invoking mantra.

Om Ah Gah Hum Svaha. This is the reciting mantra.

You will gain attainment by one hundred thousand [recitations], and
thereafter works will be perfectly initiated.

Make a circle, reciting the whole [mantra] at one time. If fortunate
mantra practitioners see it, they will delight. You will receive great homage
at the door of the king, and all your enemies will be frightened. All Obsta-
cles will be exorcised. The fruition of all your desires will be granted. This
will come to pass without any doubt at all.

This ceremony is true practice. Witches are the supreme gainers of
attainment!

The Method of Practice of the Glorious King of Obstacles composed by the
master Nag po sPyod pa, who found the austerities of attainment, is fin-
ished.

This was translated by the Pandita Gayadhara and the translatorGyi
jo Zla ba’i ‘Od zer.

Mangalam.

In the Indian language:
Sri Ganapati Santana Sadhanam
In the Tibetan language:
dPal Tshogs kyi bDag po Shi ba’i sGrub thabs
[In the English language:
The Practice Method of the Peaceful, Glorious Ganapati

Homage to the Lord of the World Avalokitesvara!

First anoint a four-cornered mandala with the five things from a cow
in a secluded and attractive place. Sprinkle it with medicine and good-

--- Page 26 ---
260 Christopher Wilkinson

smelling water. Make a circle with perfume from white sandalwood. Set
out a bunch of white flowers. Arrange butter lamps, perfume, incense,
and food offerings. The bali is a food made of mash and barley flour
kneaded together and having the three whites and three sweets. Each
[bali] has a radish and a piece of pastry. If you have a traditional image ora
painted image, request it to abide there.

When everything is set up in this way, begin by making offerings to
the three jewels, generate yourself as your tutelary deity (5. istadevata, T.
yi dam), then think that from an A that is before you comes a moon, on top
of which is a white letter Hum. Clearly meditate that from this [Hum there
appears] the glorious Ganapati. His body color is white. He has an ele-
phant’s head. In his two right hands he holds a radish and an axe. In his
left two he holds a skull filled with jewels and a Khatvamkha. He is orna-
mented with precious jewels and divine flowers. He sits on the throne of a
blue rat.

Then light emanates forth from your own heart and invites the glo-
rious Ganapati from the Abode of True Nature (T. rang bzhin kyi gnas). Then
he melts into that [image] before you.

Show the mudra of the commitment. Lustrate the image. Make offer-
ings by means of mantras. Then you must recite this: Om varataka svaha -
[Peaceful]/ Om bagavate ekadamstavanidha siddhi hum [Productive]/ Om brum
ganapatiye svaha [Powerful]/.

If you recite one hundred thousand of the peaceful seven-syllable
[mantra], you will be given any attainment you desire. Your thoughts will
be accomplished. Your enjoyments will be great, and your possessions will
increase. All the wealth of the three realms will come to you, and you will
become a rich man. If you do offerings and recitations for a six-month
quintessential Bhagavati [retreat], then even if you are an ordinary person
your merit will be equal to a universal monarch. If you do offerings and
recitations for a six-month Essence of the Name of Ganapati [retreat],
everyone will come under your power, including kings, ministers, men,
and women.

After making the recitations, recite mantras over the bali and offer it.

The commitment is that you must abide in the dharma.

The bali is a food that has a hundred tastes in even a small bit and is
meditated to fill the sky. Think that you are praying to it [as follows]:

Homage, O delightful glory-endowed Ganapati!

Homage, O great glory-endowed Peaceful One!

Homage, O great glory-endowed Wrathful One!

Grant me whatever attainments I desire

In this very life!

--- Page 27 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 261

Give the practitioner the rulership of the King of Gods!

From that individual of extreme compassion

Comes the greatly compassionate great Ganapati!

Protect the poor with great compassion!

I myself, through faith, praise in homage

You, great God of Wealth!

The glory-endowed great Ganapati

Has white body-color and the head of an elephant.

In his right hand he holds a radish.

- In his left he holds a wish-fulfilling gem.

In his lower [hands] he holds an axe and a Khatvamka.

His fat belly is ornamented with every kind of ornament.

He sits on the throne of a moon and rat.

Homage to the glory-endowed Ganapati!

Eat this bali of radish!

Increase my life and enjoyments!

Pacify sickness and elemental spirits!

May humans, gods, nagas, and yaksas become my servants!

May the good qualities of the many enjoyments of the gods that I de-

sire come forth!

May the Mighty One who is able to grant attainments

_ Manifest his form by the power of the disciple!

May the great great Lord Ganapati also

Protect the world and grant attainments!

Be a friend for my future attainment of enlightenment!

Immediately upon finishing the recitation, you must recite mantras
over the bali and offer it.

Then the Wisdom Being (5S. jndnasattva, T. ye shes sems dpa’) departs.

You must practice in conjunction with the commitments.

Show this to individuals who delight in brevity.

This was composed by the Lord based on the Tantra of the Arising of
Attainments (dngos grub ‘byung ba’i rgyud). He gave it in the presence of
‘Brom.

Mangaiam.

In the Indian language:
Ghanapati Samayanusmara Guhya Sadhanam
In the Tibetan language:
Tshogs kyi bDag po Dam tshig gSang ba’i bsGrub thabs
[In the English language:
The Practice Method of the Secret Commitment of Ganapati]

--- Page 28 ---
262 Christopher Wilkinson

Homage to the glorious Ganapati!

As you, O noble Avalokitesvara,

God who looks with compassion on others throughout the three

times,

Have manifested him in your heart,

I will write the great and supreme method of practice

Of Ganapati, just as I have found it.

One who desires to propitiate Ganapati, the supreme king of all ele-
mental spirits, who is truly loving to practitioners, should first, for his pro-
pitiation of the yaksa, be devoted to the glorious guru, for this increases his
great compassion and sedulous faith. Before [anything else] the guru must
be pleased.

One who has the transmission and teachings sets up a besprinkled
mandala and offerings in a delightful place. To begin with, generate bodhi-
citta. Then worship the guru, the Buddha, etc. Then pray for refuge and
present a bali. Dedicate the merit. Then you must pacify all the passions
with the Four Immeasurables, which begin with benevolence toward sen-
tient beings in all the three worlds. After that contemplate all the inner and
outer dharmas as emptiness. Om svabhava visuddho sarva dharma svabhava v1-
Suddho ham. Then think that immeasurable wisdom abides in the state of
compassion. Om sujnanata jnana vajra svabhava atmako ham. Thus must one
contemplate purity.

From the sphere of emptiness the yogi visualizes [himself] clearly as
some tutelary deity. In front of him [appears] Ganapati atop a moon and a
rat. He is white, with one face and four arms. He stands with one leg
drawn in and one stretched forth. Divine garments are his upper clothing.
He is ornamented beautifully with precious jewelry. In his right hands he
holds a radish and an axe. In the left he holds a trident and a skull. He has
three eyes. The third is very wide. Upon his head ona full moon there sits
Amitabha. Think of the three syllables that conjure the Wisdom [deity]
into your own place. Worship him and present a bali. Then the mantra
arises either from the awareness of the image or the heart, goes out of the
mouth, enters Ganapati’s mouth, and melts into his heart. Praise him, and
from the [visualized] image’s navel [the mantra] comes forth and enters
your own navel. Contemplate worshiping him and serving him.

Thus I present the mantra to be recited: It comes from the path of the
guru and is presented according to the instructions of the Tantras. Om is
first, with the syllable of fire placed on the throne upon the wish-fulfilling

--- Page 29 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 263
gem that increases one’s thoughts. The six vowels are subjoined. This
must be ornamented with the bindu nada. The first sign must be taken up.
Then the fifth of the fourth should be attached. Then write the first of the
fifth. The first sign of the Tathagata should be shown after that. Then give
the seed [syllable] of wind. This must be ornamented with the eighth
vowel. The two concluding tastes (T. dro ba) should be shown with the two
vowels. This is the secret mantra of the name. It grants the results one de-
sires.

Om is glory-endowed prosperity. The syllable of jewels that grants
one’s mental [desire] and accomplishes one’s intent must be thought of af-
ter that. Then write the seed [syllable] of the sun. Then the first sign of the
Tathagata must be taken up by the mind. Then recite the first consonant.
Then give it the seed [syllable] of jewels. Then recite the syllable of action.
Presenting this for a long [time] accomplishes one’s desires.

Om is the first purity. Then place the jewel of desiring wealth. Then
show the first consonant. Then the first sign of the Tathagata. Ornament
it on top with the eighth vowel. Then there is the first consonant. Then the
fifth of the first must be joined to the fourth of the third class. The first of
the fifth class is shown by the first of the third. The syllable that fulfills de-
sires is subdued by the fifth of the fourth. Put the third of the fourth after
that. By applying wrathful action like the great seed [syllable] of anger, one
will meet with the god one desires.

In this way one who desires supreme attainments must fully exert
himself at the mantra until the face of the great god is shown. This is the
holy mantra. |

If you want to undertake a work, you must make offerings to the No-
ble Ones with beer, radishes, pastries, and milk. Praise [Ganapati], and
any tasks you contemplate will be realized. This is the delight of Maha-
deva. Or make an image out of copper or bell metal, place it atop a mandala,
and make it happy by worshiping it. It will give you attainments. Or skill-
fully draw [an image] on a clean piece of cotton, worship and praise the
Victorious One, and whatever you contemplate is realized. Or recite man-
tras over red flowers and throw them atop [the image]. All your wishes will

be fulfilled. Or make [an image of] the Noble One out of silver or crystal,
worship and praise it, then put it on top of your head and recite the mantra
of men. When you enter the center of a city the people will gather. Or make
a drawing [of Ganapati] on cotton with mixed-together secretions from an
elephant’s temples (S. Gajamada), blood, and maddening semen. Pros-
trate, worship, praise, and make prayers to it. Recite the proper mantra and
admonish him. You will become equal to a Noble One. You must not show

--- Page 30 ---
264 Christopher Wilkinson
_ this image to everyone. Offer your prayers with radishes and mantras. Lus-
' trate the image with sandalwood water. If this [water] is drunk or rubbed
in, there will be freedom from all diseases.

Make a copper Ganapati the size of a thumb. Put it in your left hand.
Take some milk from the king’s woman and pierce it with the elephant’s
trunk. Think ‘She truly loves me” and recite the vidya of the name. Then
she will certainly come. This is believed to be the result of the mantra. Tie
twenty-one knots in a thread of a young [woman’s] lower skirt. Imagine
one god for each mantra. Tie it to your left shoulder, and that thing will
quickly come to pass.

Draw Ganapati in [a combination of] ghi, hangkara, brown sugar,
honey, and your own semen. Concentrate on it and recite the hundred-syl-
lable [mantra]. Then concentrate on the object of your desire. It will be re-
alized by reciting [the mantra] 108 times. Then roll up the image with silk
and hide it in your left armpit. By this all desires are realized. Make balls
of milk, beef, and parched grain. Pile sandalwood atop the mandala of Gan-
apati and burn them. As [the fire] swallows them and rises, all your pur-
poses will be realized. By doing it for seven days, a poor man will become
perfectly endowed.

Draw an image on the meatless shoulder blade of an elephant. Encir-
cle it with the mantra. Show it to the sky, and hail will stop. Draw an image
of Ganapati on smooth cotton. Encircle it with the mantra. Tie it to the end
of a long piece of wood. Thus the opposing armies are turned back. All
these various sorts of works without exception delight the gurus and de-
light the gods. This [worship of Ganapati] is supreme among the methods
of attainment.

May my composition of this practice method of Ganapati bring to
pass the fruition of my desired ends and absorb my thoughts in the su-
preme bodhicitta.

The practice method that is called ‘“The Supreme Secret Commit-
ment of Ganapati’’ was composed by the guru who had gained attain-
ments, Canakirti. The Requirement of Pleasing the Glorious Ganapati is fin-
ished.

The great Indian yogi Vairocana and the translator Dhare Bandhe
Dharmakirti (T. Chos kyi Grags pa) translated this at Nyar smad rma lung.

From the Southern king Ghunasosprava to pandita Nag po dPal
‘dzin. From him to yogi Kanacanara. From him to guru Canakirti. From
him to guru Tathagataraksita. From him to guru JanakaSila. From him to
guru Dhorocana. It was composed based on the Arising of Attainments Tan-
tra, the Replies to Vajrasattva Iantra, and the teachings of guru Kanacinira.

This is the great practice method. There are many others that are
smaller than this. It is called “profound.” There are no mistaken readings

--- Page 31 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 265
in this text. The guru has said that if you have the transmission, the very
best thing is to practice.

Prosperity!

G. Praises
There are five texts in the Tibetan canon devoted to the praise of Ga-
_ nesa, two of which are identical. All four dissimilar texts are here pre-
sented.
In the Indian language:
Arya Ganapati Ragavajra Samaya Stotra
In the Tibetan language:
‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po Chags pa rDo rje’i Dam tshig gi bsTod pa
[In the English language:

The Praise of Commitment of the Noble Ganapati Vajra of Desire]
Homage to the venerable Avalokitesvara!

Homage, O glorious Ganapati, the delightful!

Homage, O glorious generator of peace!

Homage, O glorious great wrathful one!

You grant any attainment desired in this very life!

You grant the power of the king of gods to the practitioner!

The Great Compassionate Ganapati, .

Being a most compassionate individual,

Protects the poor with great compassion!

I bow down to you and praise you,

Great God of Wealth, with reverence.

The glorious great Ganapati is

Three headed, six eyed, and four armed.

His faces are an elephant'’s, a rat’s, and a monkey’s.

He holds a radish, a sword, a jewel,

A vessel of beer, a pastry, and an axe.

He stands with bent legs, one in, one out,

Above the consort.

A rain of jewels falls from her mouth,

Removing the practitioner’s poverty.

His fat belly is ornamented with jewelry of every kind.

Homage to glorious Ganapati!

Eat this bali of butter, pastry,

Radish, and boiled porridge!

--- Page 32 ---
266 Christopher Wilkinson
Increase my life and my pleasures!
Pacify sickness and demons!
May all men, demons, yaksas, and maras become my slaves!
May the good things I desire
From amongst the gods’ many pleasant things
Come to me.
O Great God Ganapati, with the power to grant attainments,
Whose body emanates from the strength of discipline,
Protect this world and be a helpful friend
For my attainment of enlightenment!
You should make your requests while reciting this praise, and offer a bali
when the moon rises.
The Praise of Commitment of the Noble Ganapati Vajra of Desire, composed
by the pandita Dipamkarasrijnana, is finished.
It was translated by that great pandita himself and the translator
Tshul khrims rGyal ba.
In the Indian language:
Ganapati Stotra
In the Tibetan language:
Tshogs kyi bDag po la bsTod pa
[In the English language:
Praise of Ganapati)
Homage to the Noble Avalokitesvara!
The chief of the gods, Ganapati,
Lives in the divine land of the Thirty-Three Gods, Tusita.
Born the son of Mahadeva by amassing the accumulations
[Of merit and wisdom],
And by the strength of his aspiration,
He became master of the four continents by the blessing of Great
Compassion (S. mahakaruna).
I praise you, O Emanation of the Most Noble Avalokitesvara!
Your four arms, the four modes of action, enact the purposes of living
beings.
Youthful, you sit with half-crossed legs.
Bedecked with jewelry made from wish-granting gems,
You send down every desire as rain.
With great wrath, might, and discipline you drive back the battalions
of demons.

--- Page 33 ---
The Tantric GaneSa 267

I praise you who are arrogantly wrathful and greatest of the proud!

You hold the sun, the moon, a radish, a rosary, an axe, and a bowl.

You adorn your body with the divine clothing pajicalika.

There is no other supreme god like you in the world.

I salute and praise your glowing image,

Most Noble One of perfect qualities!

Your body is without the darkness of the three poisons, [bright] like
a conch.

Bedecked with beautiful ornaments,

Goddesses gather upon merely a glance.

Standing amidst the divine troops your whistle strikes down the tri-
locosm.

The light rays emanated from your hideous screams

Defeat the Obstacles.

Your furious roar singes the nagas of the sea.

Homage and praise to you, Mighty One Without Rival!

You manifest in a monkey’s body to generate coarse awareness _
(S. sthulavijnana).

Your monkey-face, with its upturned eyes, |

Is somewhat terrifying.

.» Your red body is lustily powerful like a rat.
Two of your hands’ palms are joined.

The smell of your infatuating incense gathers the gods.

With the Grandfather at your right,

You take control of the race of women.

With Ranu’s symbol at your left, you take in men as workers.

Sending forth rays of light from your heart, you enslave the three
realms.

You wander freely throughout the sky

Like the cold north wind.

Your body’s hooked-shaped light rays gather into one

All the wealth in the world,

And a rain of wealth falls upon me as well!

Desires, needs, and all the objects of delight melt into ambrosia.

Descending from the paths of the channels (T. rtsa),

It is gathered from the secret vajra.

The stream is churned, and — from the penetration of the karavati—
is thrown down.

I take refuge in the liberating stream of ambrosia!

Before the Great of Hosts, the Glorious of Hosts,

--- Page 34 ---
268 Christopher Wilkinson

The Mighty of Hosts, the Lord of Hosts,

The queen Hari bows and offers homage,

As doI to your image, O Great God!

Will you please bring about all the things that I desire?

The pandita Amoghavajra who was attained in the glorious Yaman-
taka’s attainments praised Ganapati [with these words] after having a vi-
sion of him in the cemetery Kamkaru sPungs (S. skandha).

In the Indian language:
Aryaganapati Stuti
In the Tibetan language:
‘Phags pa Tshogs kyi bDag po la bsTod pa
[In the English language:
The Praise of the Noble Ganapati] .

Homage to all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas!

Homage and praise to Ganapati,

The Protector of the World, Creator of Appearance,

Maker of Glory, and Enactor of Benefits,

The Unequaled and Unparalleled!

Homage and praise to Ganapati,

Master of Secret Mantra, King of Vidya Mantra,

Matrix of Enjoyments, Supreme Treasure,

Shower of the Result of True Realization!

Homage to the chief of elephant-trunked ones,

Great Hero, Victorious over Demons (S. mara, T. bdud),

Great Power, Defeater of Obstacles

Who defeats the battalions of emotional defilements (S. klesa, T. nyon

mongs),

Pacifier of Suffering!

Homage to You, O Possessor of an Elephant’s Trunk,

King of Jewels,

You whose jewel body brings forth the jewel of great jewels,

Protector of the Jewel Doctrine!

Homage to the chief of elephant-trunked ones,

Ganapati, Great Miracle,

The One who takes the breath of the white armies of gods,

The One who turns back the battalions of black demigods (S. asura)!

--- Page 35 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 269
Homage to the chief of elephant-trunked ones,
Whose body is the jewel of good qualities,
Whose speech is the true essence of good qualities,
Whose mind has the identity of good qualities!
The Praise of Ganapati composed by the master Nag po Zhabs is fin-
ished.
Mangalam. Prosperity. Subham.
In the Indian language:
Kamesvara Stotra
In the Tibetan language:
‘Dod pa’t dbAng phyug gi bsTod pa
[In the English language:
The Praise of the Lord of Desire]
Hiri!
, Protector Ganapati, born from Speech,
Has the countenance of the newly risen sun. }
He has an elephant’s head
And is bejeweled with the wealth of the gods.
His three eyes are beautiful like the anthers of a blue lotus.
Looking far and wide he protects the poor among living beings.
His white tusks have the luster of precious jewels.
His right hands, in the wealth-bestowing mudra,
Hold a rosary and a bowl of many foods and pastry.
His left hold a red axe, remover of every difficulty,
And the food of evil spirits, a radish.
He has jewelry and costume finer than the gods’.
His spiraling crown of plaited hair emanates forth like an angry
cloud.
The roar of his voice screaming out “Hri’
Brings the three realms under control.
It fulfills one’s heart’s desire.
Blue-black robes beautifully cover his body’s lower part.
On his throne, a white lotus and the light of the moon.
He sits upon a vessel of pleasing things
That is blue, the color of lapis,
And grants the fruition of one’s desires.
I praise you, O Great God Lord of Desire (S. Kamesvara, T. ‘Dod pa’t
dbAng phyug)!

--- Page 36 ---
270 Christopher Wilkinson
I praise you, O Protector of the Victorious One’s Doctrine!
I praise you, O Controller of the Heterodox!
I praise you, O Inexhaustible Sky-Treasury of Pleasing Things!
Keep your promise and grant me every attainment!
The great guru Cantapa’s praise is completed.
H. The Precious Elephant Text
The Hasti ratna dhana deyopadesa is devoted not to GaneSa, but rather
to the elephant itself as a granter of wishes. Its close association with Ga-
nea is evident not only by the content of the text but also by its location in
the canon, grouped together with the largest body of texts on Ganega. The
text claims to be written by the great Buddhist author Nagarjuna. This
claim can easily be contested on account of its references to yaks and
crosses between yaks and cows — neither of which existed in India — as
well as on account of its specific mentioning of Indian ink, Indian paper,
and so forth, which would not be necessary if the text were written in In-
dia. This text will nonetheless be useful for gaining insights into the close
connection between GaneSa as an elephant-headed deity and the elephant
_ itself, despite its questionable authorship.
In the Indian language:
Hasti Ratna Dhanamyeti Upadesa
. In the Tibetan language:
gLang po Rin po che la Nor bLang ba’t Man Ngag
[In the English language: |
The Instructions for Acquiring Wealth through the Precious Elephant]
Homage to you, O Precious One
Who satisfies all needs and desires,
Most noble among the seven jewels (T. Rin chen, S. ratna),
Treasury of treasures!
One who desires to remove the suffering of poverty
And desires to acquire the stuff of wealth
Must exert himself in this treasury of treasures.
An expert who desires to attain the wealth
Known as the ‘‘Elephant-Treasure-Treasury”
Must grind the five kinds of jewels
Into [a mixture of] fine substances that are able to burn,
And make it into the form of an Indian elephant
With many strengths and virtues, and beautiful to look upon.
[It should have] short legs, a fat belly,

--- Page 37 ---
The Tantric Ganesa_ 271

And a head ornamented with a wish-fulfilling jewel.

This is to be ripened by fire.

One must know that placed inside of it are mantras and substances.

First the character of the mantra must be written,

In gold if possible.

If not possible, it must be written with Indian ink

On a white piece of Indian paper.

One must apply sandalwood with the five good smells.

This is the mantra:

Om mahahatiratna sarva siddhi phala hum/ ratna pune siddhi siddhi hum.

May I gain the great attainment of a treasure of precious things!

Dhanam medhihisiddhi hum.

May I gain the great attainment of wealth, food, and enjoyment!

Nanakheddhi siddhi siddhi hum.

May I gain the attainment of all supreme and great foods!

Dhala sasvo siddhi siddhi hum ja ja.

May I gain the great attainment of a retinue and enjoyments!

. May there be prosperity!

Satya thédan vijaye vijaye ugge ugge svasti trapati akhumel

Prasaradha/ Svadhi/ Prahakhe/ Mune mune gurane gurane/

Akhemu akhemu rage murage/ Svaste guranaya!/ Sarva vasti brum

brum brum/ Svisti svisti/ Mule mule/ Kese keSe/ Curna!/

Curna/ Bhimale svaha! Om kam kara! Kam kara/ Niragatcatani/

'  Nirgatcatasvasti!/

May this house, which is known as Chegemo, become a precious pal-
ace filled with treasures!

May a rain of grains and enjoyments fall!

May a retinue and enjoyments be gathered like clouds!

May my sons and all my lineage expand and prosper!

May my fame and renown be equal to the sky!

May conditions (T. rkyen, S. pratyaya) and obstructions be well paci-
fied!

May I have a long life free from sickness, with perfect bliss and hap-
piness!

May my life force (T. tshe srog) be hard as a rock!

May the manifestation of my enjoyments become equal to that of the
delighted gods!

May all my food and wealth grow and increase!

May my deposit of men, wealth, and food become full!

May all my storehouses of grain become full and increase like a box
of sesame!

--- Page 38 ---
272 Christopher Wilkinson

May all that is scattered be gathered!

May all that has failed be restored!

May all that has declined be augmented!

May all that is low become high!

May all the haughty be deceived!

May the day of dMu yad come down!

May perfect bliss and well-being come forth!

Then draw the seven precious things on a white piece of Indian pa-

er,

And write this mantra on your own back:

Om cakra ratna phala/ Siddhi him/ The precious wheel/

Om maharatna phala svati him/ The precious jewel/

Om bhihi ratna phala sviti him/ The precious queen/

Om maharatna phala siti him/ The precious minister/

Om hati ratna/ Phala siti him/ The precious elephant/

Om dhana ragamasa ratna siti phala him/ The precious horse/

Om ghati ratna phala siti phala him/ The precious general/

Furthermore, draw all eight of the substances of prosperity on a
white piece of Indian paper

And put it in the inside of the elephant.

Secondly, the stages of substances are:

Exactly nine srang measures of earth from the fields and earth from
the houses of nine rich people,

Earth from the fields and earth from the houses of nine poor people,

Gold, silver, copper, iron, smoke, crystal, coral, pearl,

The five kinds of grain, fine silk, many kinds of food, the three
whites, the three sweets,

The hair of nine domestic animals belonging to a rich woman

With the exception of crossbreeds between a yak and a cow (T. mdzo)
and mules,

The hair of good-quality horses, goats, and sheep,

The hair of both male and female yaks,

The six kinds of good medicine, flowers,

The barley of seven rich people,

And expensive substances that bring prosperity.

Put all of these inside the elephant.

Recite the Essence of Dependent Origination (T. rTen ‘brel snying po) one
hundred eight times

Over the above-mentioned substances.

--- Page 39 ---
The Tantric Ganesa 273

Then you must tie the legs up well.

Invite the precious elephant who brings forth all needs and desires

From the divine realm of the Thirty-Three (S. tusita).

He melts in nonduality into the [effigy].

The clay elephant he dissolves into

Becomes an elephant of jewels.

Think that by this transformation all your desires come forth from
the elephant.

All needs and desires come forth,

And that which comes forth enters your treasury or safe.

The method for placing them in the silo or treasury is as follows:

Attach five kinds of silk to the trunk.

Praise the precious elephant

And place it on a three-bladed knife (S. kila, T. Phur-ba)

Made of Acacia Catechu

That is four finger-widths [in size].

You must consecrate it according to the above [account].

Make round-shaped offerings (T. ‘brang-rgyas)

And request prosperity.

If a treasure of wealth substances comes to you on that very day and
time,

It is an extremely good omen,

And thus is a sign that attainments will come forth. ,

Then one must not allow people to see this clay elephant.

You must have great prosperity,

And must not hasten to pass it around.

You must not distribute it into people’s hands.

The good qualities of acting in this way are

That you will become most mighty

And will be equal to the gods who delight in miracles (T. ‘phru ga’ lha).

Whatever you think of will come about spontaneously.

You will become the aspiration of all sentient beings.

Wealth and food will be gathered like clouds.

Your lineage will grow like a forest.

You will be liberated from disease and demons.

Your bliss and well-being will be perfect.

In brief, the precious elephant amounts to each and every good qual-
ity.

Therefore you must strive at this.

All needs and desires come forth from this.

--- Page 40 ---
274 Christopher Wilkinson

That which is called ‘The Falling Rain of Jewels of the Precious Ele-
phant” is an instruction that brings together all food, wealth, enjoyments,
long life, and merit like clouds. It is an elaborated teaching that grants pos-
sessions and sMu yad. The supreme mantra that is most profound is Om
mahahastiratna sarva siddhi phala pasang kuru him him. Write this on paper
many times. Put it inside the elephant.

May I, the author, increase all my wealth and possessions!

Arya Nagarjuna wrote this.

Mangalam.

It is clearly evident from the materials here presented that a major
study of Ganeéa’s role in Indian Buddhism, as well as his impact on Tibet
and Tibetan Buddhism, remains to be made. It is hoped that the small con- |
tribution here offered provides a beginning to this research and will en-
courage scholars to devote attention to this subject.

NOTES

1. See Alaka Chattopadhyaya, Atisa and Tibet (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1981), 37-55; George N. Roerich, trans., The Blue Annals, 2d ed. (Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1976), 371—73.

2. See Yukei Matsunaga, ‘’A History of Tantric Buddhism in India with Ref-
erence to Chinese Translations,’”’ in Buddhist Thought and Asian Civilization, Essays
in Honor of Herbert V. Guenther on His Sixtieth Birthday, eds. Leslie S. Kawamura and
Keith Schott (Emeryville: Dharma, 1977), 177-78, and J. W. DeJong, ‘““A New His-
tory of Tantric Literature of India,” review of Yukei Matsunaga, in Studies of Mys-
ticism in Honor of the 1150th Anniversary of Kobo-Daishi’s Nirvanam, Acta Indologica, 6
(1984):101-2.

3. D. S. Ruegg, The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India
(Wiesbaden: Otto Harrossowitz, 1981), 104-5.

4. Giuseppe Tucci, ‘““Animadversiones Indicae,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic So-
ciety of Bengal 26 (1930):139—-40.

3. Tucci, “Animadvesiones Indicae,”” 139-40. Also see Ruegg, The Literature of
the Madhyamaka School, 107, and Keith Dowman, Masters of Mahamudra (Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1985), 282.

6. Rahula Sankrityayana, “Acarya Dipamkara Srijnana,” in P. V. Bapat, gen.
ed., Twenty-Five Hundred Years of Buddhism (New Delhi: Govt. of India Publications
Division, 1976), 201, 203.

7. It is not possible to know if the Dipamkara listed as the author of no. 16 is
Atisa or Dipamkarabhadra, or in fact another pandit.

; 8. As with most facts having to do with Atisa’s life, the date of his birth, as well
as where he was born and the names of his parents, vary with the sources. They
