--- Page 1 ---
The Wives of Ganesa
a sLawrentce Cohen
Introduction

When I was a child [in Karnataka], we believed Gane§a to be a bache-
lor. But when I came to Calcutta, Ganesa was with a woman. I asked a man,

“Who is that?”” He said: ‘‘That is Gane§a’s wife.’ I said: ‘As far as I know,

GaneSa is a bachelor.”

—M. B. Talgeri, Bombay

M r. Talgeri is not alone. As far as many besides him know, GaneSa is

indeed a bachelor, the archetypical divine brahmacarin. For others,
like Mr. Talgeri’s passerby, the elephant-headed son of Parvati and Siva is
a married householder. Even within the married camp concord is lacking.
At times GaneSa is said to have two wives, here Rddhi and Siddhi, there
Buddhi and Siddhi. Alternatively he is imaged and worshiped with a sin-
gle consort, whether she be Sarasvati, Sarda, Laksmi, a banana tree, ora
nameless dasi, a servant. This diversity of connubial possibilities is height-
ened by GaneSa’s ambiguously structured and mythically dense relation-
ship with his mother, the Goddess as Parvati, Gauri, or Durga; by his an-
drogynous appearance and comic persona; by his drawing on complex
mythic and iconographic traditions of elephants, yaksas, and his divine
parents; and by the geographic and ritual breadth of Ganesa’s importance
in the worship of Hindus.

This essay examines this diversity, suggesting that it be used asa
context in which a contemporary reading of Ganesa as iconographic, rit-
ual, and mythological text be situated. My conclusions come from a year
(1983 — 84) spent asking many different people in many different places

115

--- Page 2 ---
116 Lawrence Cohen
nage India about the life, worship, and significance of GaneSa. They
suggest that the variety of ways in which Gane$a’s relationship to women
Lis articulated may itself be structured along regional, class, and sectarian
lines. The question of Ganesa’s marriage is not central to his mythic cycle
as told by laypersons, yet when it is examined in an “‘all-India”’ context,
coherent traditions emerge that distinguish north-central India from Ma-
harastra, Marwar, south India, and Bengal, and devotees of GaneSa as Is-
tadevata from devotees of Murukan, tantrics, the business community, and
others. Through a focus on the marriage of Ganesa, differences in how in-
dividuals and communities structure his divinity become apparent.

I begin with a review of textual and iconographic traditions of the
consorts of GaneSa, follow with asummary of observations from my field-
work, and conclude by examining a variety of approaches to Gane§ga’s am-
biguous relations with women from both within Hindu tradition and with-
out. The paper is based on notes of conversations that occurred as |
traveled through India visiting temples of Ganesa; specifically, the work
was carried out in Maharastra (the Asta Vinayak shrines, Aurangabad,
Bombay, Chinchwad, Ellora, Ganipatipule, Mahabeleshwar, Nasik, Pune,
Shirdi, and Tryambak), Uttar Pradesh (Allahabad, Mathura, Varanasi and .
surrounding villages, and Vrindavan), Madhya Pradesh (Gwalior and
Khajuraho), Punjab (Amritsar, Anandpur Sahib, and Patiala), and Rajas-
than (Bikaner, Jaipur, Jaiselmer, and Udaipur) using Hindi or English in
conversation, and in West Bengal (Calcutta), Karnataka (Bangalore and
Mysore), Kerala (Trivandrum), and Tamil Nadu (Kanniyakumari, Madras,
Madurai, Mahabalipuram and Tiruchchirapalli) using English or a third-
party translator. My conversations were with pujaris, pandits, pilgrims,
and passersby; I am grateful for their kindness and concern in talking with
me and sharing their knowledge of GaneSa.

Text and Icon

The story of Ganesa’s marriage most often told to me by informants
in Uttar Pradesh was that of the Siva Purina:

Siva and Parvati said to their two sons, “You are both good sons, equal

In our eyes. An auspicious marriage will be performed for the son who re-

turns here after having gone around the entire world.” When he heard this,

Skanda started off immediately to go around the world, but Ganega pon-

dered in his mind. Then he bathed and placed two seats for the worship of

his father and mother. After praising them he circumambulated seven times
around their seats, and then said, ‘Let my auspicious marriage be celebrated

--- Page 3 ---
The Wives of Ganesa_ 117
now.” But his parents were surprised at his remark, and so GaneéSa replied.

“Is it not said in the Vedas and Sastras that anyone who worships his parents

and circumambulates them will derive the merit of circumambulating the

earth? Such things are said in the Vedas and Sastras; are you going to say they
are false? If you do, then your forms become false, as do the Vedas them-
selves. So, let my marriage be arranged quickly.”

When Siva and Parvati heard his words they were greatly astonished,
but they praised their son for his clever mind. And so Ganega was married
to the daughters of Prajapati: Siddhi (Success) and Buddhi (Intellect). After
some time GaneSsa begat two sons: Ksema (Prosperity) born to Siddhi, and
Labha (Acquisition) born to Buddhi. When Skanda returned and found that
he had been tricked by his brother, he went angrily to the Kraunca mountain
where he remains, celibate.'

This text was utilized as a definitive resolver of arguments over who was
the wife of GaneSa; in a small village south of Varanasi, the elder head of a
Bhumihar family fetched his copy of the Siva Purana to provide an author-
itative answer.

Textual references to the marriage of GaneSa are few. The Matsya Pur-
ana, in detailing the iconography of GaneSa, envisions him as “‘the owner
of Rddhi (success, prosperity) and Buddhi (intelligence).’”? Here Rddhi
and Buddhi (as do Buddhi and Siddhi in the Siva Purana and the popular
modern pairing of Rddhi and Siddhi in Uttar Pradesh) function not as
wives or Saktis, but as depersonalized emblems on the level of Gane§sa’s lo-
tus or bowl of sweet modakas. In the Brahmavaivarta Purdna, Narada inter-
rupts his narrative of the birth and early life of Ganesa to describe the ori-
gin of Kartika. Kama gives ‘the knowledge of the sexual scien -e’’ to
Kartika; after this ‘Brahma chanted the Vedas and married the fair, lovely,
good-natured Devasena (whom the savants called Sasthi) to Kartika.’’
Only then, ‘after the lapse of a time, Siva again invited the above gods,
munis &c. and married the magnanimous GaneéSa with great eclat to
Pusti.’’? The narrative centers on GaneSa, but on the subject of marriage
Kartika’s story is interpolated. The incongruous references to Kama’s
teaching and to the ‘fair, lovely, good-natured” bride of Kartika suggest
that Kartika’s marriage is a sexual union, and one in pronounced contrast
to Gane§Sa’s.

Alice Getty concluded in her monograph on GanesSa that “there is no
trace of a Gane§Sa cult in India before the fifth century A.D."* Balaji Mund-
kur has more recently supported this conclusion.* Possible antecedents to
the worship of an elephant-headed lord of obstacles do appear in Vedic lit-
erature and pre-Gupta art; some of these deserve mention in the context

--- Page 4 ---
118 Lawrence Cohen

of the consort of Ganesa. The Rgveda refers to a “Ganapati” and the Sa-
maveda to ‘‘Ganeéga.”’* Ganapati may be an epithet of Brahmanaspati or In-
dra,” and GaneSa here probably refers to Rudra/Siva as lord of the ganas."
What is of interest is the possible link between these Vedic lords of the
ganas and women — Prithvi Agrawala cites the Rgveda commentary Sar-
vanukramani to suggest a link between Brahmanaspati/Ganapati and
Alaksmi.® Brahmanaspati/Ganapati is invoked for alaksmi-ndasanam, the re-
moval of the inauspicious antithesis of Laksmi. As the more familiar ele-
phantine god comes to take on this role of gana lord, his association with
dangerous females continues. From at least the fifth or sixth century on-
ward, Gane§a is found with the saptamdatrkas (seven mothers) in temple
sculpture, fitting complements to his own ambivalent nature as placer and
remover of obstacles.

Mundkur explores the association of ““Ganesa’’ and Rudra/Siva in
the Sdmaveda in the context of the origin of the rather mysterious ‘female
GaneSa.” He suggests a process through which Siva’s titles such as Ganega
and Ganapati were extended to pre-Vedic, often theriomorphic deities,
who became the ganas.'° This theory might both explain the Vedic refer-
ences and origin of Ganesa as well as the parallel incorporation of female
elephant-headed yaksis into the emerging Saivite cultus.

The earliest evidence of sucha “female Ganesa” is a weathered terra- .
cotta plaque from Rairh in Rajasthan, dated by Agrawala from the first
century B.C.E. to the first century C.E., of what appears to be a standing
female figure with an elephant’s head. However, the significance and even
the identity of this plaque are not clear. Agrawala labels the figure Vinaya-
ki, but he offers little justification for associating it with either later ele-
phant-headed goddess figures or the later Puranic references to Vainayaki
and its variants."

Vainayaki in the Puranas is neither described as elephant-headed nor
associated explicitly with Ganesa. The sixth-century Matsya Purdna men-
tions Vainayaki amidst a list of two hundred ‘‘Divine Mothers’’ whom Siva
created to drink the generative blood of the demon Andhaka, who wanted
to kidnap Parvati.'* The Linga Purana includes the name in a list of Saktis
invoked during the mammoth Jayabiseka rite that yields the four purusar-
thas.'? Elephant-headed females who figure prominently in Puranic and
folk literature are not Vainayakis but demonesses or transformed god-
desses. Malini is an elephant-headed demoness who, in a variant of Ga-
ne§a’s origin story, drinks Parvati’s bath water and has a son with five e]-
ephant heads, four of which Siva removes." In an episode from the Skanda
Purana, Laksmi is cursed by a Brahman to have an elephant’s head.
Brahma is so pleased by her penance in this form that he declares that she

--- Page 5 ---
The Wives of Ganesa_ 119
will henceforth be worshiped as Mahdalaksmi.'* The elephant-headed god-
dess as Malini is mother to Ganega; Laksmi, as will be seen below, is usu-
ally associated with GaneéSa as consort. GaneSa’s connection to elephant-
headed females, however tenuous, encompasses these two roles — if we
take the ‘female Ganesa”’ tradition as a whole, we find within it the same
tension that characterizes GaneSa’s overall relationship to the Goddess,
both his wife and mother.

Aside from the Rairh plaque, all extant images of an elephant-headed
goddess date from the tenth century onward. The most famous of these,
indeed the only one mentioned by Getty in her classic monograph on Ga-
nesa, is the forty-first yogini in a Causath Yogini temple at Bheraghat, Ja-
balpur district, Madhya Pradesh. This yogini is inscribed ‘‘Sri-Aingini.”
She is unique in that an elephant-headed male, presumably GaneSa, sup-
ports her bent left leg.!° Mundkur argues that it is unlikely that the Ucch-
ista Ganapatyas, the Tantric worshippers of Ganesa, envisioned the god
with an elephant-headed counterpart as Sakti; in Ganapatya texts when
GaneSa is described with a Sakti she is inevitably anthropomorphic. !” How-
ever, the Bheraghat image does seem to draw upon Sakta tradition in its
structuring of the relation between the feminine and the masculine em-
bodied in a totalized — yet split— GaneSa.

Another central Indian image, from Satna (now in the Indian Mu-
seum, Calcutta), suggests an alternative structuring of this relationship. It
is an image of the boar-headed Vrsabha holding a baby GaneéSa in one of
her left hands and surrounded by four votive therianthrupic goddesses,
one of which has an elephant head. Agrawala speculates that

the Ganapati figure in the hand of Vrsabha as her child tends to suggest that

this cow-headed Yogini personification was considered to be the principal di-

vinity of Saivite nature including in her parivara both Ganesa and his female

equal Vinayaki as her children."
Here “’Vinayaki’” is arguably a sibling to Ganesa, although her presence as
one of a therianthropic group suggests her substitutibility for Vrsabha and
thus a maternal relationship to GaneSa the child.

Agrawala includes in his curvey of female Ganesas two descriptions
of hermaphroditic figures. He translates Srikumara’s sixteenth-century
Silparatna, which details the iconography of “‘Sakti-Ganapati’’:

Now Sakti-Ganapati, Salutation to the god GaneSsa, who is from the
neck upwards an elephant and whose lower body is of a youthful female, has
vermilion-red colour of the evening, a corpulent belly, the breasts which

--- Page 6 ---
120 Lawrence Cohen
make the bodily frame bow down owing to their weight, and beautiful hips,
is shining with two proboscises which are (like) two great chains of molten
gold, is of the form of Five Seed-syllables (pancabijasvartipam) and has ten
splendid arms adorned with a citron (bijapura), etc.”
The description — a female body, a Siamese head — is certainly unusual,
and may reflect Agrawala’s misreading of Ganesa imaged with his sakti as
the two combined. If we follow Agrawala, the two trunks suggest that
Sakti-Ganapati fuses male and female elephant-headed deities. As with
the Bheraghat image, a Sakta orientation appears to define the relation be-
tween the elephant-headed goddess and Ganesa. An inscription on the |
Amare§svara temple at Mandhata, Nimar district, Madhya Pradesh, simi-
larly notes that Ganapati, competing with his father’s Ardhanarisvara
form, assumed the same form.*”
Finally, Agrawala offers the Buddhist text Aryamanjusrimilakalpa,
portions of which he summarizes:
It is stated that the region of the Vindhya is appropriate for the siddhi of Vi-
nayaka. She is the deity causing obstacles to those who mutter religious
charms. She possesses the elephant-proboscis (hastakara-samayuktam) and is
one toothed (ekadantam). She is of the form of a horse (asvarupa) and can as-
sume many different forms. She is the divine daughter of ISana, is of varying
nature and causes obstacles (vighnakarakam).*'
Here the goddess Vinayaka is identified explicitly with GaneSa, unlike Vai-
nayaki in the Puranic lists; she assumes several of his ritual (causer of ob-
stacles), iconographic (elephants trunk and single tusk), and mythological
(daughter of ISana, who Agrawala identifies with Siva) aspects.
The vast majority of images of Ganesa, however, show him with only |
a human Sakti. According to Ananda Coomaraswamy, a statue from Bhu- |
mara represents the oldest known depiction or GaneSa with a Sakti; he
places it in the sixth century.” The goddess sits on Gane§a’s left hip, hold-_
ing a bowl of batasas (flat cakes) or modakas (round sweets) in her lap from
which GaneSa with his left-turning trunk takes a sweet. This motif is re-
peated in other areas and periods; throughout, the consort lacks a distinc- |
tive personality or iconographic repertoire. |
Far from functioning as iconic deflated phallus, symbol of Ganega’s
defeat and emasculation by his father — the classic psychoanalytic inter-
pretation of GaneSa’s origin and iconography” — his bent trunk vividly
contributes in these images to the erotic bond between the god and his.
consort. With it Ganesa reaches into the consort’s lap for the bowl of mo-

--- Page 7 ---
The Wives of Ganesa_ 121
dakas (Getty equates these with ‘the germ of life’’).74 In the more risqué
Ucchista-Ganapati images, the bowl of modakas is dispensed with; Gane-
Sa’s trunk descends directly into the goddess’s yoni.

The connubial, occasionally erotic, imaging of Ganesa and his Sakti
parallels the emergence of the Tantric Ganapatya sampradaya — the wor-

_ ship of GaneSa above other deities in the pantheon. Courtright places the

rise of an identifiable Gane§Sa cult in the sixth to eighth centuries. and of a
developed Ganapatya tradition certainly by the tenth.?° Central to Gana-
patya practice was the imaging of the deity with his consort. According to
Getty, Ganapatyas worshiped five and later six distinct forms of ‘“Sakti-
Ganapati.” Symbols of fertility predominate; in addition to the consort’s
modakas, Ganesa himself often holds a pomegranate.”®

The Sankaravijaya of Anandagiri, which Courtright dates to about the
tenth century, has Sankara debate and defeat proponents of various phil-
osophical and religious schools; it provides a description of the six groups
of Ganapatyas. One of the six, led in the Sankaravijaya by Herambasuta, is
the left-handed Tantric Ucchista Ganapatyas. In the text Herambasuta de-
scribes the erotic image of Ucchista worship, trunk in yoni, and glosses
‘Ganapati and Devi are part of one another; just as, though the self [jiva]
is smaller than the lord [isa], even so they are one.”’ This move toward
equivalence of god and goddess is paralleled by the antinomianism of the
Ucchistas:

First, all men born of different castes are of one caste; second, the women of

all castes are the same as the men. There is no sin if there is intercourse be-

tween men and women [of difference castes], or separation either, because

there is no rule that one woman belongs to one man. If they are united in

intercourse while she is menstruous, there is greater bliss [ananda] to be ex-

perienced, because there is much blood flowing. There is no such arrange-

ment as marriage and all classes [varna] are the same.”
This union of social and cosmological opposites seems to remain, how-
ever, a path for men alone: ‘‘The act of enjoyment should be taken by any
man who, having Heramba Ganapati in his mind, takes a women as his
Sakti.’’?8

The antinomian license of the vamacara Ucchista Ganapatyas never
came to characterize the mainstream of Ganesa worship, but the Tantric
Ganapatya tradition did influence later and more orthodox understand-
ings of Ganesa’s relationship with women. Getty notes briefly that the
Tantric Sakti of Ganesa was sometimes called ‘‘Laksmi’’;”’ she differen-
tiates this Laksmi from the Vaisnavite Sri-Laksmi but offers no evidence

--- Page 8 ---
122 Lawrence Cohen
for the distinction. Both Ganeéa and Sri-Laksmi have long traditions of re-
lationships with elephants and the auspicious. The possible relation of —
Brahmanaspati/Ganapati to Alaksmi and the Skanda Purana story of Laks-
mi’s transformation into an elephant-headed goddess have already been
mentioned. Although no evidence exists to suggest a popular tradition of
the joint worship of Laksmi and Ganesa as distinct personalities until the
recent past, their figuring together in artistic and popular imagination
does precede the current era of calendar art and at least keeps open the
possibility of partial Tantric origins. Getty in her book includes an undated
Rajput miniature of the abhiseka of Gaja Laksmi with various gods in votive
attendance.* Gane§Sa is distinguished from the other deities in his position
apart from them and directly below the goddess, forming a vertical axis
with her. He appears to be the’ most direct beneficiary of the prasada of the
abhiseka effluence and, given his resemblance to the elephants who bathe
Laksmi, seems more closely tied to her essence than does Visnu standing
to his left.

Gane§a’s marriage in the Siva Purana to Siddhi and Buddhi is another
central archetype; it can also be viewed within a Tantric context, that of the
Asta Siddhi. Siddhis, special and often magical powers or successes, are
important in the yoga literature as largely iconic signs of the goal achieved —
along the path to moksa. In Tantra their function is more indexical; Mircea
Eliade points out that for many Tantric texts siddhis are ‘‘direct proof of
man’s gaining divinity.’’>! There are many siddhis, but texts such as the
fourth-century Vaikhanasasmartasutra come increasingly to speak of
eight.*? In the eleventh-century play Prabodha Chandrodaya, the antinomian
sexual practices of the Kapalikas are said to lead to the attaininent of ‘the
eight great siddhis.”’*? As siddhis are powerful indices of godhead attained,
a state usually imaged sexually within Tantra, their embodiment as god-
desses is not surprising. Eliade’s attribution of this personification to the
magical worldview of peasants™ seems unimaginatively naive.

In the cosmopolitan Sakta worship of Ganesa the Asta Siddhi were
also addressed as eight goddesses. In the Ganesa Purana, according to the
retelling of this work on the walls of the Siddhi Vinayak temple in Pune,
these personified Asta Siddhi are used by GaneSa to attack the demon De-
vantaka. These eight consorts are fused ina single devi, Ganega’s Sakti, ac-
cording to Getty.** She speculates as to whether the Asta Siddhis are a
transformation of the saptamatrkas with whom GaneSa is often sculptur-
ally represented,” their relation to other divine octets like the Asta Durga
also deserves attention.

GaneSa’s entry into the canon of orthodox Brahmanical Smarta wor-
ship in south India and then throughout the subcontinent is as a single de-
ity, imaged without a Sakti or consorts. He is worshiped with Siva, Parvati,

--- Page 9 ---
The Wives of Ganesa 123
Visnu, and Aditya, the sun. Whether GaneSsa occupies a corner of the man-
dala or is worshiped as principal household god in the center of the group,
he remains alone. Yet images of GaneSa with a Sakti on his lap or flanked
by two consorts are to be found throughout India. Like the mythological
traditions of Ganesa’s ambiguously structured relationships with his par-
ents, this complex legacy in text and icon of the relationship of the god to
women who are not his mother forms a part of the cultural materials with
which contemporary worshipers make sense of GaneéSa.
Arrangements
When confronted with an image of GaneSa with a Sakti or two con-
sorts, a worshiper or passerby may not invest the female images with much
significance. Unlike, for example, a goddess in a picture with Siva— where
she will immediately be identified as Parvati or another — the goddesses
associated with GaneSa often lack a density of meaning. When questioned
_ about such an image, an individual may politely but halfheartedly suggest
a name, or State, “I don’t know.’ However, on numerous occasions at
shrines or images of Ganesa when I was observing or participating in wor-
ship or conversing with pandits or pujaris, people had definite ideas about
the identity of these images and the marital status of Ganesa. Not only do
such ideas exist, but over the course of hundreds of such conversations |
became aware of patterns in responses to the question of Ganega’s con-
sorts. The most prevalent distinction was regional: individuals in Varanasi
and other cities in Uttar Pradesh often spoke of Rddhi and Siddhi as the
two wives of GaneSa, and there was a less pronounced tendency to asso-
ciate him with Laksmi; in Maharashtra, Ganapati was also considered to
be married but not always to Rddhi and Siddhi— more frequently, Saras-
vati and also Sarda were declared to be the wives of Ganeéa; in the four
southernmost states of India, Ganapati or Pillaiyar was almost always
brahmacarin; and in Calcutta, Ganesa was also unmarried, conceptualized
not only as the son of the Goddess as Durga or Kali but also as the brother
of Laksmi and Sarasvati. In this section I will examine this plurality of ap-
proaches to the marriage of Ganesa.
Parvati
A Gujarati story revolves around the custom of gambling through the
night during the festival of Diwali:
Siva and Parvati were themselves playing at a game of dice. Siva lost all that
he owned to Parvati. Kartik saw his father dejected and asked Siva to teach
him how to play at dice. Kartik then challenged Parvati toa game of dice and

--- Page 10 ---
124 Lawrence Cohen
won back everything from her. Ganega saw his mother dejected and asked |
her to teach him the game; he then won everything back from Kartik. He re-
turned to Parvati with his good fortune, but she still looked dejected. Ganesa
asked, ‘I have won all—why are you not smiling?” Parvati replied, “But my
son, you have not brought back your father.”
Through tales such as this individuals are reminded of the inevitable ten-
sion in Ganesa’s devotion to his mother. Paul Courtright’s detailed exam-
ination of Ganeéa’s relationship with Siva and Parvati in Purdanic literature
and his reading of Sudnir Kakar enable him to tie Ganesa’s fractious or1-
gins and sexual ambiguity to the psychological and ritual contexts of the
transition from female-dominated childhood to male-dominated youth.*
His interpretation rests in part on an interesting association of the upana-
yana rite of passage with GaneSa’s filial conflict. Though speculative at
best, Courtright’s attempt to offer an Indian frame of analysis for Ganesa’s
ambiguous sexuality moves away from the category fallacy®’ of more sim-
plistic Oedipal analyses. It is a significant effort to ground the study of
myth and divine meanings in a more indigenous psychodynamic.
Yet if reflecting as Courtright suggests the inevitable reality of child-
hood’s end, the stories of Ganesa’s birth, beheading, and reintegration did
not provoke in any of the many worshipers with whom I discussed them
either reactions of irony or discourse expressive of any problematic in the
conflict between father and son for Parvati. Nor did this conflict seem to
emerge in rituals of and for Ganega, despite the Turnerian capacity of rit-
ual to structure ambiguity. Where irony occasionally did appear in popu-
lar myth and ritual was in the recognition that the Goddess may function
as both the mother and the consort of GaneSa. Two ritual pairings of Ga-
nesa with a goddess who is and yet is not his mother are especially sugges-
tive of this trope: the worship of Ganesa and Gauri in harvest festivals, and
the pairing of the Kala Bo with Ganesa during Durga Puja.
In Bengal, Ganesa on Durga Puja is associated with a banana tree—
the ‘“Kala Bo’ —ritually transformed into the Goddess during the festival.
According to Haridas Mitra, the Kala Bo is a condensation of the nava pa-
trika, nine types of leaves that together form a sacred complex on Durga
Puja.* Each of the plants is associated with a particular manifestation of
Devi, and together they symbolize her unity and represent peace. On the
first day of Durga Puja, the Kala Bo is set up alongside the othet gods next
to Ganesa and wrapped ina sari. For most who view her, the new sari in-
dicates her role as a new bride; for many with whom I spoke, the Kala Bo
is unquestionably married to Gane§a each year.*! For some Bengalis, this
is a marriage of desperation: GaneSa, they say, is, given his appearance
. |

--- Page 11 ---
The Wives of Ganesa 125
and nature, almost unmarriageable. The mute and uncomplaining banana
bride is his last — and only — hope. But however unlikely the couple, in
Calcutta and surrounding villages the response to a query regarding Ga-
nesa’s marital state remained, ‘He is married to the Kala Bo.”

Yet the Kala Bo signifies none less than Durga herself during the Puja
festival. Durga in Bengal is the mother of Ganesa. Where the Kala Bo’s
identity with the Goddess is not widely appreciated, the relationship is not

_ very ambiguous. For individuals knowledgeable in matters of ritual signi-
fication, however, a conflict may emerge. One woman in Calcutta, a librar-
ian with whom I spent a delightful morning discussing the Kala Bo, serves
as a case in point. She first utilized an apologetic rhetoric of symbolism,

_ explaining that as the tree symbolizes the importance of agriculture, its
marriage with GaneSa is merely a “symbol” of the desire for a productive
and obstacle-free harvest. Up to this point our discussion had less to do
with the ambiguity of GaneSa’s relations with women than with the more
generally troublesome hermeneutics of post-Orientalist discourse. But

' when she examined a reference text (Nogindranath Basu’s Vishnu Kosh) -

_ and read of the identity of the tree with Durga, the librarian suddenly
switched from a focus on the symbolism of this marriage to denying its ex-
istence, noting that ‘only illiterate persons see this as the wife of Ganesa.”
By this denial of the marriage of Gane§Sa as the ignorance of those without _
textual references, his ties to the Goddess were rendered unambiguous.
But the rejection of irony is incomplete, for it is premised on the denial of
a known reality (GaneSa is married to the Kala Bo) given a potent but ques-
tionably real fear (the Kala Bo is Ganesa’s mother).

In central India, Ganesa and Gauri are traditionally worshiped in the
shared context of a harvest festival in which ritual motifs of menstruation
and rebirth are integral. This worship has become increasingly tied to Ga-
nesa’s festival of Bhadrapad Chaturthi. The immersion of GaneSsa’s murti
after the Chaturthi is associated with the celebration of Gauri as sakti. B.
A. Gupte, writing in 1906 in the best Frazerian tradition, ties Ganesa‘s
“death” through immersion to the death of the old harvest season; his as-
sociation with Gauri both structures this death and leads through the fer-
tility of the Goddess to rebirth. Although Gauri is technically Ganesa’s
mother, as with the Kala Bo, the Goddess comes to be identified more as
consort than as parent.”

The potential for ambiguity between wife and mother extends be-
yond central India. One man in Varanasi originally from Himachal Pra-
desh noted the potential conflict in the relationship of Ganesa with Gauri,
and at first explained it through recourse to a common rhetoric of plurality
— different devotees may structure the relationships between gods differ-

--- Page 12 ---
126 Lawrence Cohen

ently, and therefore Gauri can be either GaneSa’s mother or his wife but not
both. He paused, and went on to give a more personal answer from his
own Sakta perspective: ‘’The father is in the womb of the mother,’’ he
noted. Men marry their mothers and recreate themselves. The icono-
graphic relations between gods structure this sexual ambiguity. “‘If
Laksmi is on GaneéSa’s left she is his wife, but if on his right his mother.”
For this man, the ambiguity is essential; though perceived by few, it is fun-
damental to the esoteric experience through contemplation of Gane§Sa of
the equivalence of generations and relativity of time.

The conflicting loyalties of a son between mother and wife is a deeply
resonant theme in Indian popular culture. Lannoy writes on the primacy
of the mother—son relationship in India on into adulthood, suggesting that
‘‘the Hindu male tends to seek in his wife not a mate but a mother.’’*
Whether the Goddess functions as in the case of the Kala Bo and Gauri as
both wife and mother or, as is far more frequently the case, GaneSsa’s com-
plex relationship to his mother prevents much attention in his mythic cycle
from being focused on his own marriage, the structuring of divine rela-
tions reflects human realities. Its ambiguity denied, the total relationship
of mother to son is celebrated and continually reasserted. The popular Sid-
dhi Vinayak temple in Pune’s Saras Bagh is said to sit on a mound of earth
scooped from the land at the foot of Parvati hill near where it rests, a strik-
ing affirmation of Ganesa’s bond to the Goddess as mother, a bond that can
dwarf all others.

Celibacy

ge Mr. Talgeri was surprised when he left his native south to find that
GaneSa was married. Throughout southern India, GaneSa is envisioned as
brahmacarin. Even in Varanasi in the north, worshipers at the Chintamani
GaneSsa temple near Kedar Ghat, frequented chiefly by south Indians, de-
scribe Ganesa as celibate and single, but at neighboring shrines with dif-
ferent clientele he remains married. In both north and south, Gane§a’s
condition is in opposition to that of his brother Kartika/Murukan. In the
south, Murukan can be both ascetic and married; but even where, as at Pa-
lani, he is enshrined as an ascetic, for his devotees he still remains un-
questionably married. Murukan’s courtship and marriage to each of his
wives serves as a devotional paradigm for bhaktas.“* Ganesa, however, in
the south is solely brahmacarin.

In the north, Kartika is today a minor deity; he was mentioned by in-
formants in Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan only in the context of his contest
with Gane§Sa, in their telling of a marriage story similar to that in the Siva
Purana. The fact that in the south GaneSa is considered celibate and un- -

--- Page 13 ---
The Wives of Ganesa 12°
married was only acknowledged in these northern states by transplantec
south Indians. Other northerners lacked a sense of the plurality of re
gional possibilities for Ganesa’s marital state; this lack underscores the rel
ative unimportance of a north/south opposition in the construction o
north Indian identity.

In Maharashtra and the south, however, the fact that Ganesa woul
be either married or celibate was on many occasions recognized by my in
formants. The opposition of Ganesa as married and Gane§Sa as single her
helped focus a discourse of regional identity largely phrased in terms o
north versus south. A Brahman working in Madurai’s Minaksi temple af
firmed Gane§Sa’s celibacy and then noted in some consternation the para
dox that “‘in Bombay Gane§Sa is a family man and Kartik a brahmacarin
Why? I don’t know.” Alternatively, schoolgirls outside a temple in Nasik ir
Maharashtra informed me that ‘’in the south, the opinion is that [Ganesga
is not married. But here he is.”” Through the contrast of GaneSa as single
and as married, the girls identify that “here’”’ is different from the south, «
statement more significant in Maharastra than the north, given, a:
Courtright* notes, its liminal position between south and north.

The contrast between these two views of GaneSa suggests that myth:
are tied to regional conceptions of the relationships between gods; thei
selective use relates to an individual's sense of social identity. People in ur
ban areas come from many parts of India. Though individuals may bs

. aware of different variants of Ganesa’s marital status, they make sense o
it in a fashion tied to their regional heritage.

In the south, married/single opposition was structured not only ir
terms of north/south but also a perpendicular Murukan/Gane§a (Pillaiyar
opposition. GaneSsa’s celibacy is justified by pointing out that Murukan i:
married. The brothers’ opposition reveals the fundamental duality of male
adulthood obscured through the syntagmatic ideology of asramadharma
Man can be — is perhaps unavoidably — both householder and ascetic
wife-taking and wife-rejecting.*° This duality is usually read in alternative
contexts to the paradigmatic construction of self, whether the historical in
compatibilities of dharma and moksa,”’ the ideologically encompassed anc
encompassing,*® the moral conflict of particularistic and universa
norms,*? and of course the developmental struggle between paternal anc
maternal identification,*° the usual rendition of GaneSsa’s origin. Which
ever of its etiologies is chosen, however, the duality remains a model fo
comprehension and resolution of the ambiguities of divine and humar
male sexuality.

Gane§a’s state of brahmacarya should not be understood as an Indian.
ized sort of Oedipal fixation, despite the critical mass of the god’s relation

--- Page 14 ---
128 Lawrence Cohen
ship with Parvati. Lannoy notes that ‘“‘we should be careful not to use the
‘familiar Western model of the mother-dominated son.’’*! Even when com-
pared to his powerful and unambiguously masculine married brother, Ga-
nega is often seen as a locus of unusual strength. He is the embodiment of
both his parents, Siva and Sakti. Though his unusual birth and mutilation
are often textually justified as necessary for preventing the cosmic imbal-
ance that would result if a natural son of Siva and Parvati were ever cre-
ated,°2 several individuals spoke of GaneSa as precisely that microcosmic
locus of totality. One man in Varanasi, my Tantric friend mentioned above,
in defending GaneSa’s celibacy identified the sakti of Ganesa with his red
color, implying that to speak of the marriage of a god who contains within
his corpulent self both male and female would be redundant.

The Ganesa Purana stories from the walls of the Siddhi Vinayak tem-
ple in Pune offer two versions of the source of Ganesa’s color— one exter-

__ nal, the spilled blood of a demon, and another internal, the swallowing of
a demon whose heat causes GaneéSa to develop a raging fever. Many of Ga-

_ ne§a’s ritual preferences are explained in terms of his need to be cooled;
durva grass, for example, is said to be a very cooling substance. Wendy O’-
Flaherty has discussed at length the potential for equivalence of erotic and
ascetic heat. GaneSa’s demonic heat, acquired through the displaced sex-
ual actions of swallowing or the exchange of fluids, becomes ascetic tapas

_ through his brahmacarya status. The god is daubed in the vermillion of his —
own sakti; contained and containing both male and female, he renders cir- ™
cular the distinction between erotic and ascetic. Fluid cannot be lost; sex
equals no sex.

Gane$sa’s power often remains true to its demonic origin in its liminal
and largely negative signification for devotees; Brenda Beck*® contrasts Ga-
nesa’s role in south India as someone “who helps overcome obstacles and
inauspicious influences” with his brother’s ability “‘to respond to a devo-
tee’s expression of affection and need.’ Susan Wadley, in describing the
delegation of divine powers in the structuring of the pantheon ina western
Uttar Pradesh village, notes that in Karimpur Siva’s powers of creation and
destruction are divided between GaneSa as destroyer of obstacles and
Guru Gorakhnath as source of fertility and controller of snakes.

GaneSa’s power can often function generatively, however. Stella
Kramrisch discusses the fat yaksa as ‘‘the Eater,” prefiguring a class of gen-
erative deities including Brahma, Agni, and Ganeéa.*> Given his liminal
position GaneSsa is uniquely associated with weddings. In Varanasi, on
Gane§Sa’s Chaturthis each month some women observe a vrata to acquire
sons by fasting until the moon comes out and worshiping at a Ganeéa tem-
ple. On Magh Chaturthi couples wishing a son together come to worship

--- Page 15 ---
The Wives of Ganesa 129
GaneSa. The god’s tradition of generativity in Varanasi is prefigured in the
Vayu Purana story of the king Divodasa requesting a son from the ganesa
Nikumbha.°*

In Madurai, the Ganesa Nataraja temple is well known for its efficacy
for childless couples, who come to bathe the image and circumambulate it
in the early morning for forty-eight days. One woman in Madurai associ-
ated GaneSa’s fertility with his control over snakes, reminiscent of Guru
Gorakhnath in Karimpur. GaneSa is worshiped in the presence of nagas,
themselves signs of fertility, not only in Madurai but in cities throughout
the south and at least at one temple in Allahabad.

Another framework for the paradox of Gane§Sa’s fertility is offered by
E. Valentine Daniel, who in his ethnology of a Tamil village views Ganesa
not in terms of Freudian ambiguity but using a Marriottian scheme of
coded substance transactions:

Ganapathy, by symbolizing both fertility and celibacy, recommends to the

' mind not indefinite celibacy but controlled sexual transactions so that poten-

tial fertility may be enhanced rather than threatened.”

In short, the god of fertility is not necessarily a locus of neutered sexuality
and weakness. He can be; witness the humor many Bengalis took in his
sham marriage. Weakness is part of Ganesa’s semiotic repertoire, but so is
power, and often it is the nature of superimposed discourses that shape
his public image. Compare Tilak’s vision of GaneSa as a symbol of a united
and empowered India with the self-image of one south Indian in Varanasi,
structured again through a north/south opposition:

We are a south Indian temple, and worship GaneSa as our families’ istadevata;

but in the north people worship Mahadeo and Hanuman. They are very

healthy people as Hanuman is their istadevata—he is very strong.
Paired Consorts

Throughout India, on contemporary poster art GaneSa is portrayed
primarily in three situations: alone; with the family group of Siva, Parvati,
and Kartika; or with Laksmi, Sarasvati, or both. However, in temples and
over doorways he is almost ubiquitously flanked by two smaller female fig-
ures. They often hold fans and may be joined or replaced by paired fish,
rats, peacocks, parrots, monkeys, elephants, yalis (lions with elephant
trunks), the two sons of GaneSa, yaksas carrying fruit, swastikas, the
words ‘‘Subha”’ and “‘labha;’ planetary deities, or even other GaneSas.

--- Page 16 ---
130 Lawrence Cohen

Throughout north India, these female figures are identified as Rddhi
and Siddhi. There are no Puranic sources for Rddhi and Siddhi, but the
pairing parallels those of Buddhi and Siddhi in the Siva Purana and Rddhi
and Buddhi in the Matsya Purana. They are depersonalized figures, inter-
changeable, and given their frequent depiction fanning Gane§a are often
referred to as dasis—servants. Their names represent the benefits accrued
by the worshiper of Ganesa, and thus GaneéSa is said to be the owner of
Rddhi and Siddhi; he similarly functions as the father of Subha (auspi-
ciousness) and Labha (profit), a pair similar to the Siva Purana’s Ksema
(prosperity) and Labha. Though in Varanasi the paired figures were usu-
ally called Rddhi and Siddhi, GaneSa’s relationship to them was often
vague. He was their malik, their owner; they were more often dasis than
patnis (wives). Yet Ganesa was married to them, albeit within a marriage
different from other divine matches in the lack of a clear familial context.

Such a context has recently emerged in the popular film Jai Santoshi
Ma. The film builds upon a text, also of recent vintage, in which GaneSsa

- has a daughter, the neophyte goddess of satisfaction, Santoshi Ma. In the
film, the role of Ganesa as family man is developed significantly. Santoshi —
Ma’s genesis occurs on Raksa bandan. Gane§Sa’s sister is visiting for the
tying of the rakhi. He calls her bahenmansa — his “‘mind-born” sister. Ga-
neSa’s wives, Rddhi and Siddhi, are also present, with their sons Subha
and Labha. The boys are jealous, as they, unlike their father, have no sister
with whom to tie the rakhi. They and the other women plead with their
father, but to no avail; but then Narada appears and convinces GaneéSa that
the creation of an illustrious daughter will reflect much credit back onto
himself. GaneSa assents and from Rddhi and Siddhi emerges a flame that
engenders Santoshi Ma.**

The film articulates the role of Ganesa as grhastha —as householder.
Like his father, he remains an ambivalent householder, not wishing to
have another child and not engaging with normal relations with his wives.
And yet Gane§Sa is envisioned with wives, sons, a sister, tying rakhis—im-
ages of normative family life. For many in Varanasi, Ganesa was unques-
tionably married to Rddhi and Siddhi; for others, the relationship was less
clear. Although Ganesa was seldom considered brahmacarin, the identity of
his wives was often problematic. GaneSa’s relationship with Laksmi added
an element of uncertainty to his relationship with the far less charismatic
Rddhi and Siddhi, as will be discussed below.

In Mysore, Madurai, and Tiruchchirapalli, the paired figures were
almost always identified as Siddhi and Buddhi. Given local knowledge that
Ganesa is brahmacarya, they were usually viewed symbolically as the pos-
itive fruits of the worship of Ganesa. Thus the South Indian discourse on

--- Page 17 ---
The Wives of Ganesa 131
GaneSa’s celibacy is still more complex: a ‘marriage’ is recognized, but
one exclusively iconic and not indexed to any real divine event. M. Arun-
achalam retells a south Indian temple myth that exemplifies this union:

Gane§Sa is a confirmed bachelor. But the devas, out of gratitude to him for the
slaying of the asura, gave him in marriage two celestial damsels, Siddhi and
Buddhi (Siddhi is attainment of desires and Buddhi is intellect). This is only
an allegorical way of saying that GaneSa is the giver of all success and of all
knowledge to his devotees. Similarly, he is said to have married one Vallabha,
daughter of a sage. “Vallabha’’ is just power; the elephant is the biggest ani-
mal on earth and this only indicates that he is the giver of all prowness to
bhaktas.*

Yet an ascetic continually flanked by women presents a contradic-

_ tion, and individuals drew upon various traditional materials to structure
its resolution. One common explanation was offered to me on several oc-
casions. As aman from Mysore noted, the reason Gane§Sa can be an ascetic
and yet be imaged with two Saktis is that the god has several avatdras;heis *
currently single, but in another incarnation had two consorts, Siddhi and
Buddhi, and ina third only one consort, Siddhi. Thus all iconographic per-
~ mutations are accounted for.

One woman in Madurai explained that Vinayaka (GaneSa) created ,
Siddhi and Buddhi for Brahmadeva, but Brahma did not have enough
strength to hold on to the saktis and so appealed to Vinayaka to control
them. Thus Vinayaka is partially bound to these two saktis: they are too
powerful for him either to destroy or to marry. Here Gane§a’s relationship
to women is liminally structured. He can neither break free of their sakti
nor enter into the stable and dominant position of the householder. His
brahmacarya is here not self-imposed but occurs precisely because of the
dangerous power of the saktis with whom he remains ambiguously asso-
ciated. The two dasis bound GaneSa; the triptych they form with him again
suggests his mediatory position, never quite celibate, never quite married.
Furthermore, their obvious duality affirms the central significatory role of
the split female for Ganesa. The particular splitting of the female that en-
compasses the division between celibacy and marriage is that which we
have already seen to be central to the conceptualization of the god’s sakti—
mother versus wife.

Sarasvati

Trudging back to our pilgrimage bus after darsana of one of the Asta

Vinayak, the eight important shrines of Ganesa near Pune, a group of

--- Page 18 ---
132 Lawrence Cohen

older women and I were discussing the mirti we had just seen, which was
flanked by two small goddesses. I asked if Ganesa was married. One per-
son immediately said that he was married to Sarasvati. Her friend cor-
rected her: ‘“No, he is married to Sarda.” The first woman turned back to
me with the revised answer: ‘He is married to Sarda.” A third person
muttered ‘““Rddhi Siddhi”’ quietly to herself, and this set off a wave of dis-
cussion as we boarded the bus. Later, stopping for tea on the way back to
Pune, the group approached me in unison. GaneSa has two wives, I was
told, Sarasvati and Sarda.

The confusion among the group reflects again that the issue of Ga-
nesa’s marriage is not central to his devotional persona. And yet through-
out Maharashtra, GaneSa heartland as it were, people associated him with
Sarasvati or Sarda. The two goddesses were identified as the same person,
and thus the single wife of Ganesa, by some. An elderly man sitting in the
Kasbah Ganapati temple in Pune argued that GaneSa is only married to
Sarda and that Sarasvati is a wife of Visnu. Others noted the reverse, that
GaneSa was only married to Sarasvati; and a few, like the women on pil-
grimage, suggested that Sarasvati and Sarda were the two consorts im-
aged with GaneSa.

Unlike GaneSa’s connection with paired consorts or Laksmi, no
mythological or ritual contexts were offered to explain the liaison with Sar-
asvati or Sarda. The i971 Maharashtra State Gazeteer tor Nanded district de-
scribes the practice, on the day before a wedding, of women singing

_ praises to both GaneSa and Sarasvati while preparing bundles of turmeric,
_ wheat, and areca nut for a ceremony;® this pairing of the god and goddess
in the context of a marriage may be tied to their being invoked as a couple.

GaneSa and Sarasvati have many parallel roles but rarely function in
tandem. Both are associated with learning and music. Together with
Laksmi, they appear on poster art; in Bengal, the three are siblings. Ga-
neSa is the divine scribe, who wrote the Mahabharata with his broken tusk
while Vyasa dictated it. Like his father he is a dancer®' and is the mrdangam
player of the gods. He has come to be the patron deity of tabla players; it is
said that Ganesa through his father’s anger created the tabla. He was play-
ing his mrdangam too loudly, and ultimately Siva in anger sundered the
percussion instrument into two with his trident, giving rise to the split
tabla. None of the parallels between GaneSa and Sarasvati, however, seem
sufficient to explain their particularly close, if ambiguous, connection for
Maharashtrians.

Laksmi

In a large house on Assi Ghat in Varanasi, a European art historian

lives amidst a great assortment of collected sculpture. In a niche on one

--- Page 19 ---
The Wives of Ganesa 133
side of a stairwell sits GaneSa; flanking it is the figure of a yaksi. Each Di-
wali, the servants of this woman garland both images and offer them puja,
treating the yaksi as Laksmi. Although the figure lacks any of the tradi-
tional ornaments of the goddess, her position next to Gane§sa clearly iden-
tifies her as Laksmi. Elsewhere in the city, displaced images of Ganesa and
a female figure, both nearly unrecognizable from years of daubing with
sindur, lean next to one another against a tree overlooking the Ganges. For
many passersby, this goddess is also Laksmi. Throughout Varanasi, single
goddesses in close juxtaposition with Ganesa may be labeled this way.

For many people with whom I spoke in Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan,
this close association between Laksmi and Gane§Sa was expressed through
kinship terminology: Laksmi was Gane$a’s sister or — more often— they
were married. Unlike her Saivite counterpart Parvati, Laksmi was rarely
described as GaneSa’s mother. Her association with GaneSa was rarely tied
to the Tantric tradition of Laksmi as GaneSa’s Sakti discussed above.
Rather, three reasons were variously offered for the relationship: (1) their
functional equivalence, (2) their joint worship on Diwali, and (3) their joint
worship by the ‘‘business community.”

Ganesa, Laksmi, and Sarasvati are often grouped together as the di-
vinities immediately responsible for material welfare. Ganesa and Saras-
vati share the control over Buddhi, but as noted above this functional
equivalence does not translate into shared or even parallel ritual action.
GaneSa and Laksmi are both deities of Rddhi and Siddhi, Subha and

*- Labha and their ritual spheres intersect and parallel one another. In a
sense each is the transformation of the other: Laksmi, surrounded by two
elephants (male, as they are “watering” her) is the opposite of Ganega, an
elephant surrounded by two females. Both, as noted a man on a train in
Madhya Pradesh, are unique among the gods in their role as mediators be-
tween the material and divine worlds. They occupy adjoining space inside
homes and occasionally upon thresholds.

In a niche in the wall of a Jaiselmer inn is inscribed

Sri
Rddhi Ganesay Nama Siddhi
Mahalaksmenam
This invocation structures the household and inn in space and time. It
transforms the inn into auspicious space, and represents an attempt to se-
cure good fortune for the establishment and its inhabitants in time. The
niche is only ritually used on Diwali; images of Ganesa and Laksmi are
purchased and installed, are the objects of devotion and offerings through
a special puja, and are immersed at the end of the festival. As with the joint
worship of the Kala Bo and GaneSa or Gauri and GaneSa, the recurrent Jux-

--- Page 20 ---
134 Lawrence Cohen
taposition of Ganesa and Laksmi in rituals that invoke the auspicious 1s in-
terpreted through the idiom of the epitome of the auspicious — marriage.

In the niche, Ganega is related to women on two axes; horizontally,
with Rddhi and Siddhi, and vertically with Laksmi:

Rddhi = Ganesa = Siddhi
||
Laksmi
To adopt a structuralist logic,” Rddhi and Siddhi are metonymic wives,
each representing a part of the total function of Ganesa in a syntagmatic
relationship; Laksmi is the metaphoric wife, functionally equivalent to Ga-
neSa and existing independently. As one man in Udaipur noted, GaneSa is
married in two different senses; he is of course the malik of Rddhi and Sid-
dhi, who each are a component of his persona, but Laksmi is his dharm
patni, his ritual or practical wife. In a sense, the joint worship of Ganesa
and Laksmi gathers its power through metaphoric redundancy. The
Rajput miniature in Getty’s book, described above, is the mirror image of
this niche:
elephant = Laksmi = elephant
I |
GaneSa .

This joint Diwali puja ensures a financially successful new year.
Though in Varanasi it is observed by families of widely diverse caste and
class, the ritual is specifically associated by many Banarsis with the busi-
ness community. In one of several helpful conversations, Professor J. N.
Tiwari Gf Banaras Hindu University speculated that the origins of the joint
puja lie with the rise of urban merchant capitalism. Others in Varanasi felt
that if not the origins then the rise in prominence of this puja was tied to
an increasingly commercialized culture. Throughout India, business peo-
ple and merchants are said to be the greatest devotees of Ganega and
Laksmi. A cloth merchant in Varanasi told me as we sat in his shop that
‘“Ganesa and Laksmi are the gods of businessmen. They are married. In
the morning, first GaneSa puja is done, and then Laksmi puja.”

There are few temples that worship Ganesa with Laksmi as Sakti.
One, the Dasboddhi GaneSa temple, not far from the Dwarakadesh temple
in Mathura, has a murti of a ten-armed GaneSa with a consort on his knee
and two rats facing them. The sakti is Mahalaksmi, and the Ganega is Ma-
haganapati. According to the temple priest with whom I spoke, the two are
married. Here Jantric as well as contemporary categories are drawn upon
in the structuring of relations between the deities. Laksmias Sakti is placed

--- Page 21 ---
The Wives of Ganesa 135
in a dependent position; she loses her metaphoric equivalence and her
power. There remains a fundamental discontinuity between the Ganapa-
tya tradition of the pairing of Laksmi and GaneSa and their modern asso-
Clation.

The “marriage” of Laksmi and GaneSa each Diwali is real. Individu-
als structure the relation between the gods utilizing kinship metaphors to
give mythic coherence to ritual praxis. The kinship is relative; it is not ar-
ticulated as an alternative to GaneSa’s relationship to Rddhi and Siddhi or
Laksmi's to Visnu, but functions within a specific framework. The danger
in asking the question “Is GaneSa married?,”” and perhaps its elegance, is
in forcing the comparison of what may be incommensurable frameworks.
In an alley in Varanasi, a man once told me: ‘‘Gane§a is married to
Laksmi.” His friend disagreed violently: ‘‘Laksmi is Visnu’s wife!’ The
first man was forced to acknowledge this, and thought long and hard. Fi-
nally he turned to me again and said: ‘‘Laksmiis married to Visnu. Ganesa
loves her but cannot have her, so he remains brahmacarya. Only on Diwali
can they be together.’” Only one day a year can the impossible love of Ga-
neSa find ritual consummation. In the person of Laksmi, the split female

_ is united in metaphoric equivalence with the male, and it is in her narra-
tively unattainable person that Ganesa comes closest to achieving an un-
ambiguous marriage.

Analyses

There are several ways, both Indian and Western, of making sense of
the diverse and divisive traditions of the marriage of Ganesa. The unfold-
ing of complex and contradictory conjugal possibilities can be an expres-
sion of the god’s lila, or divine play. The diachronic solution of avatara is
frequently used to explain the coexistence of different marital permuta-
tions through history: different wives for different lives. Streetcorner my-
thopoeisis, as we have seen, may articulate romantic triangles. Acommon
and very contemporary apologist solution is the distinction between
‘true’ and ‘‘mass” culture and religion; this has roots in discourses of
both caste and Kaliyuga. In this solution, the masses have lost sight of the
simple reality of Ganesa’s marriage, whatever that be. Through ignorance
and illiteracy, they have transformed the basic myth into multiple differing
versions. |

This idea, of the corruption and transformation of one original var-
iant, underlies a classical Western approach to cultural diversity, that of
diffusionism. One can explain the multiplicity of variants of Ganesa’s mar-
riage as transformations of a tradition as it was transmitted from region to

--- Page 22 ---
136 Lawrence Cohen

region; the task is then to trace the flow and pattern of change. Other pro-
cessual approachs of more recent vintage might push us to read Ganesa’s
diverse sexualities in terms of changing local ideology — whether it be that
of class (the ‘business community”) or regionalism (the salience of north/
south and other discourses of self and other).

Western interpretations of Ganesa’s sexuality, however, have almost
exclusively focused on a Freudian reading of his mythic corpus.® Kakar
and after him Courtright offer a more Eriksonian analysis. They stress Ga-
nesa’s mediation of those powerful oppositions— mother and father, free-
dom and responsibility, egoism and hierarchy — that structure a young
boy’s passage from childhood into youth. Gane§ga is promoted to the verge
of young manhood, and for Courtright his mediation of this transition is
tied to his overall liminal function in ritual and history.™ Yet both retain the
basic father-mother-son triangle as the conflictual neart of the matter.

The tendency of psychoanalytic readings to totalize obscures as
much as it reveals. R. P- Goldman’s article on Oedipal conflict in the Epics
is a case in point. Goldman tends to assimilate all hierarchical relations to

: the Oedipal triangle. By positing these ‘‘displaced Oedipal encounters,”’
the textual field of analysis is enlarged, but critical oppositions in the text

_. are glossed over. Men’s wives come all too easily to signify their mothers
through the convenient device of ‘‘unconscious reference to the oedipal
crime.’’® But the opposition of wife to mother is central to many stories,
and certainly critical for that of Ganesa. A. K. Ramanujan demonstrates
how the Oedipus in India may function in opposition to the “Greek” Oed-
ipus — not sons displacing fathers for their mothers, but mothers displac-
ing wives for their sons.® This “Indian Oedipus” is not just the crystalli-
zation of an infantile moment of crisis; the shuttling of men between their
wives and mothers unfolds as the primary sexual dynamic of male adult-
hood.

Through examining narratives embedded in the regional context of
their telling, we have seen that the ambiguity of Gane§a resides in large
part in the paradox of his relation to the split Goddess: she is never com-
pletely a mother and never completely a wife. It is in this experience of a
man caught between the conflicting spheres of husband and son that the
locus of ambigu.ty rests. As his Sakti is split, so is Ganega: his regional
identity and his role as granter of fertility depend on the duality of celibate
and householder, a duality central and perhaps essential to the social con-
struction and psychosexual maintenance of Indian masculinity.
