--- Page 1 ---
Ganesa: Myth and Reality
MK, Dhavalikar*
G anesa, the elephant-headed god, is one of the most important divinities 
of the Hindu pantheon. Although he is a very popular god, as he is invoked for success at the 
beginning of every undertaking — the godbeing the success grantor, Siddhidata—his admission into the hierarchy of
major divinities was quite late, sometime in the late Gupta times in the
sixth century A.D. But he gained importance in a short period of time; so
much so, that the cult of Ganapatyas came into being in the ninth century
A.D. The main reason for this appears to be that the god was first the ob-
stacle creator (vighna-karta) and later became the obstacle averter (vighna-
harta). His popularity reached a high point in the early medieval period
(ca. eighth century), when even the Buddhists and Jains borrowed the god
from the Brahmanical pantheon and began his worship. It was during this
period that the worship of GaneSa traveled beyond the frontiers of India
into other areas of Asia, including China. He is perhaps one god who can
be rightly described as the god of Asia.' This fascination for Ganesa has
been rightly explained by Wendy O'Flaherty:

GaneSa has everything that is fascinating to anyone, who is interested in re-

ligion or India or both: charm, mystery, popularity, sexual problems, moral

ambivalence, political importance, the works. One can start from Ganesa

and work from there in an unbroken line to almost any aspect of Indian cul-

ture.’
Consequently, there are conflicting views about many aspects of the god.
The present paper describes some early images of Ganesa and attempts at
*I am thankful to the American Institute of Indian Studies, Varanasi, and the Ar-
chaeological Survey of India, New Delhi.

49

--- Page 2 ---
50 M. K. Dhavalikar

explaining his true character with the help of evidence from numismatics
and contemporary literature.

The Artistic Evidence

It was the late Professor R. G. Bhandarkar who first propounded that
the antiquity of Ganega does not go back beyond the sixth century A.D.?
However, there are certain images that can be dated to pre—sixth century.
Among these we can include two images from Afghanistan, of which one
can be assigned to the fifth century and the other to the fourth century.*
The former was discovered at Gardez and was subsequently removed to
Kabul, where it is now worshiped by the Hindu residents of Dargah Pir
Rattan Nath locality near the Pamir Cinema (fig. 1). This image bears an
inscription on its pedestal that records that this great and beautiful image
of Mahavinayaka was consecrated by the renowned Shahi King Khingala,
who on the basis of numismatic evidence can be said to have ruled in the
fifth century.°

The other image, also from Afghanistan, was reported from Sakar
Dhar (Shankar Dhara), about sixteen kilometers north of Kabul, from
where also come some interesting images of Surya and Siva (fig. 2). It is
characterized by rather slender limbs; even the bulging belly is not of huge

, proportions, as is usually the case. The chest is muscular and reminds us
of the Gandhara statuary. Stylistically, the statue resembles the early
Gupta sculptures and can be placed in the early fourth century when the
Gupta influence had begun but the Hellenistic was still lingering.

The Ganega images from several Gupta-period sites, such as Bhu-
mara and Udayagini (M.P.), are well known. Among the recent discoveries,
those on the Ramgarh Hill in Vidisha district, Madhya Pradesh, are note-
worthy (fig. 3). Here GaneSa is shown sitting on a raised seat.° He is two
armed, holding a bowl of sweets in his left hand; the trunk is turned
toward the left and is shown resting on the bowl of sweets. He is potbellied
and ithyphallic. Stylistically this image is closely related to that in Udaya-
giri Cave 6 and can therefore be dated to the iate fourth or early fifth cen-
tury. It should therefore be clear that there are Ganesga images, though
quite few, that belong to the fourth and fifth centuries. Had they not been
there, it would not have been possible for Varahamihira to prescribe his
iconography in the Brhat Samhita, which is dated to the late fifth or early
sixth century.

Still-earlier sculptural representations of the elephant-headed god
have been housed in the Mathura Museum. As far back as 1932, three Ku-
sana-period Ganesa images were noticed in the collection of the museum.’

--- Page 3 ---
Ganesa: Myth and Reality 51
One of these (no. 758) is said to have been found in the Yamuna River near
some ghat at Mathura (see Brown, fig. 8, this volume). It is a red-sandstone
standing Ganesa whose portion below the knees is missing. Carved in the
round, the god has two hands only. Of these, the left holds the bowl of
sweets, and the god is eating them with his trunk. The attribute in the
right hand is lost. The god is potbellied and wears a yajnopavita. He is na-
ked with the genitals prominently indicated, but is not ithyphallic (ardhva-
medhra) as is shown by several images of Gane§Sa.

There are two other Mathura Museum GaneSas (nos. 792 and 964;
see Brown, figs. 6 and 5, this volume) carved in the round and similar to
the one described above. It should be noted that carving figures in the
round was the speciality of the Kusana artists of Mathura. All three images
have been assigned to ca. first to third century A.D. There is yet one more
image that is originally said to have come from the Sankisya mound. Alice
Getty believes this to be the most ancient representation of the god in stone
as yet discovered, although she dates it not before the fifth century.® It is
carved out of the typical mottled red sandstone of Mathura. It depicts the
elephant-headed god standing with two arms, of which the left one holds
a bowl of sweets that the god is eating with his trunk. The right hand, |
slightly curved, holds a pointed object that may be the radish or broken
tusk. The ears are inordinately large, and the head is bare. The figure is
potbellied and has stumpy legs, but the other limbs are of relatively slen-
der proportions. As with the Gane§a in figure 1, the god is shown nude
with the genitals prominently depicted. The image is small and of rela-
tively crude workmanship, suggesting, perhaps, an early attempt at carv-
ing representations of the god. The image may reasonably be assigned to
the late second or early third century A.D.

Another image of GaneSa that can also be dated to the Kusana period
displays a number of characteristics similar to those of the GaneSsas dis-
cussed above (fig. 4).° It is a small image, showing the god in a standing
posture, with two arms, the left one holding a bowl of sweets, to which the
god helps himself by means of his trunk. The right hand rests over the hip.
The figure is marked by a protrusion on the forehead (urna), which is one
of the marks of great men (maha-purusa-laksana). A most remarkable fea-
ture of this image is that yet another figure is carved on the back. Such ad-
dorsed images are a characteristic feature of Kusana statuary. !°

An early terra-cotta image of GaneSsa has recently been reported
from Andhra Pradesh (fig. 5). In the course of excavations at Veerapuram,
District Kurnool, a small terra-cotta figurine was found in the levels of Pe-
riod III, which is assigned, on the basis of combined evidence of stratig-
raphy and artifacts, to the time bracket ca. 50 B.c. to 300 A.D. This stratum

--- Page 4 ---
52. M. K. Dhavalikar

could be securely dated because of the evidence furnished by some Sata-
vahana coins. Hence the GaneSa image can certainly be dated to pre-300
A.D.

The terra-cotta figurine from Veerapuram is unfortunately fragmen-
tary. It represents probably a standing elephant-headed figure of which
the legs are broken. It has two arms, but they too are broken. The head-
dress is mutilated. The trunk is upturned toward the left, probably for eat-

- ing the sweets from the bowl in the left hand. The sacred thread of the god
appears to be a ndga-yajnopavita. The lower garment, which is only partly
seen on the waist, was probably a short dhoti reaching the knees (ardho-
ruka). The figure gives a somewhat gruesome appearance because of the
bulging eyes and the corpulent body. This potbellied, yaksa-like figure is
undoubtedly that of Ganesa. Although this is the only terra-cotta Ganesa
that is securely Satavahana in date, the terra-cotta figurines of Ganesga
from Akra, which have been referred to by Getty,'! may also belong to the
same period because the site has yielded a number of pre-Gupta antiqui-
ties of the second century.

All these early images of GaneSa are characterized by somewhat
slender limbs; they are not as corpulent as those of the later period. In
some cases even the belly is not shown bulging. They are all dwarfish fig-
ures with stumpy legs that suggest the yaksa lineage of the god. There is
little doubt that they would have occupied a subsidiary position ina shrine
complex, and the god therefore does not seem to have attained an exalted
status. We may therefore identify these images as those of Vinayaka, the

 vlgna-karta (obstacle creator) who, if properly propitiated, becomes vigna-
harta (obstacle remover) as described in the Yajnavalkyasmriti (Ganapati-
kalpa section). And as he belongs to the yaksa class, his representations
could also occur in Buddhist shrines, as at Amaravati and in Sri Lanka.
The Numismatic Evidence

The existence of Kusana-period GaneSa images takes the antiquity of
the elephant-headed god back to pre-Gupta times. It is indeed enigmatic
that his worship should begin in the early centuries of the Christian era,
which was not the golden age of Hinduism. This was possibly due to the
sanctity attached to elephants in some parts of the Kusana empire, most
particularly in the Gandhara region. The elephant was held in great rev-
erence by the citizens of Kapisa (present-day Begram in Afghanistan), as
is testified to by the celebrated Chinese pilgrim Xuanzang, who visited In-
dia during 629-45 a.D. During his prolonged journey he spent consider-
able time visiting Buddhist establishments in Afghanistan and spent a

--- Page 5 ---
| Ganesa: Mythand Reality 53
whole summer in ancient Kapisa. He has recorded a very curious and in-
teresting legend regarding the tutelary deity of the inhabitants of Kapisa.
We can do no better than quote the words of the pilgrim:

To the southwest of the capital (Kapisa) was the Pi-lo-sho-lo mountain. This
name was given to the mountain from its presiding genius who had the form
of an elephant and was therefore called Pi-lo-sho-lo."?
The pilgrim’s testimony amply demonstrates that during the sixth and sev-
enth centuries the people of Kapisa were worshiping their tutelary god Pi-
lusara (Pi-lo-sho-lo), who had the form of an elephant. It is necessary to
emphasize that Xuanzang merely records a tradition that was prevalent
long before he visited Kapisa. This tradition is confirmed by the evidence
furnished by an important coin type of Eukratides, an Indo-Greek king
who ruled about 170-150 B.c. over a part of the Asiatic possessions of Al-
exander. The coin type is as follows:
Zeus sitting on throne to front, holds wreath and palm; to the right of throne
forepart of elephant and to left a pilos (?); above this indistinct monogram;
Kharoshthi legend: ‘Kavi (pi)sive nagara-devata.’"
Two of the coin symbols (the head of the elephant and the mountain ac-
companying the central devise) and the Kharoshti legend are of especial
interest in as much as they can be explained with the help of the account
‘of Xuanzang. Rapson was the first to connect the two symbols and the leg-
end, identifying the mountain symbol as representing Mt. Pilusara (Pi-lo-
sho-lo) and the elephant symbol as representing the elephant god of the
mountain and of the city of Kapisa. Eukratides’ respect for the god of his
subjects is evident from its portrayal on his coins. It is again significant to
find the elephant head on some of the copper coins of Demetrius” and
other Indo-Greek and Saka rulers like Menander'® and Maues,!” which can
also be associated with this deity peculiar to Kapisa and its environs.
The coin evidence points to the existence of the elephant god of Kap-
. 184 well before the second century B.c. The representation of the elephant
- iS quite common on the early series of Indian coinage; it even occurs on the
. earliest punch-marked coins, where, however, it is represented as a full-
. bodied animal and not only by its head. In sharp contrast to this, the head
of the elephant on the early coin devices of foreign rulers in India" are cer-
tainly indicative that the elephant god was on the way to assuming an an-
. thropomorphic form. But since he was a god of the mountains, the Greek
rulers naturally tried to identify him with their own Zeus, for to Greeks “a

--- Page 6 ---
54 M. K. Dhavalikar

mountain god could not well become anything but Zeus." Perhaps this is
why the deity of Kapisa and Zeus were depicted together on coin devices
of foreign rulers of India. This then represents a stage between a totem and
its anthropomorphic form. It also shows that the god was elephant headed
who originated and developed into the elephant-headed deity of the envi-
rons of Kapisa. Foucher too observes that

when dealing with a therianthropomorphic figure of Ganesa’s type, we can

easily trace it back to the animal prototype from which it came; and here we

plunge into the oldest layer of superstition which our developed minds can
grasp: totem worship and agrarian rites.”"

Kapisa by its very name, which means “endowed with elephants,”
suggests an association with elephants. Other place names mentioned by
Xuanzang also indicate an importance for elephants in northwestern In-
dia. He visited a town called ‘‘Polusha’”’ that Cunningham identified with
Palo dheri.?' Furthermore, to the northeast of Polusha rose the hill of Dan-
taloka (‘place of tusk’’). A second city the Chinese pilgrim mentions, Pus-
karavati, may also refer to elephants, as one of the meanings of puskara is
“elephant.”

The important Gandharan city of Taxila also supplies evidence of el-
ephants and their worship. Tarn writes:

There is a story which may bear on the elephant of Taxila. It is known that

Philostratus, when he wrote on the life of Apollonius, he had before him a

pretty accurate description of Parthian Taxila by some one who had visited

it, and he says that at Taxila there was a very old elephant, once belonging to

Porus whom Alexander had dedicated in the temple of the Sun and had

named Aias, and whom the people used to annoint with myrrh and adorn

with fillets. ... Philostratus attributes many things to Alexander and Porus,
but the story might really be evidence for the existence at Taxila of a sacred
elephant, the elephant of the coins; the bell round the elephant’s neck on the

‘elephant head’ coin type ot Demetrius, Menander and Maues would sup-

port this.”

Thus Taxila was also known for its sacred elephant in the ancient
past. However, J. N. Banerjea is inclined to identify the elephant on coins
with the elephant deity of Kapisa. He states that

on the basis of our main hypothesis, it will be possible for us to suggest that

the device ‘elephant’s head with a bell round his neck’ used by Demetrius on

--- Page 7 ---
Ganesa: Myth and Reality 55
some of his copper coins and other Indo-Greek and the Saka rulers like Men-
ander and Maues was associated with this elephant deity, peculiar to Kapisa
and its environs. We are not certain whether the elephant used as a device |
on so many coins of these kings is in any way connected with it; but if any
connection between the two could be proved, then one could demonstrate
the extreme popularity of the device.?*

An extremely interesting feature of the elephant depicted on these
early coins is that it is almost always shown with a bell around its neck. In
this connection we may note that the image of Gane§a in the Bhumara tem-
ple is shown wearing bells around his neck, which has been taken to be an
unusual feature. This has been explained by Coomaraswamy with the
help of an ancient Tibetan legend that is connected with the time of Bim-
bisara, acontemporary of Buddha. According to the story, one of the gate-
keepers of Vaishali had died but was reborn as a demon. He requested the
inhabitants of the city to confer on him the position of yaksa and hangabell _
around his neck so that whenever there was any danger he could ring it.
Thereupon the inhabitants made a yaksa statue and hung a bell round his
neck and set it up at the gatehouse.* This legend is probably fairly late,
and one fails to grasp its significance as it relates to GaneSa. Coomaras-
wamy was attempting to relate Ganesa to what he felt were his yaksa ori-
gins, but the special use of a bell by one yaksa hardly argues for its appear-
ance on GaneSa. In fact, it is more plausible to suggest that the presence of
bells around GaneSa’s neck may possibly be due to their being worn by the
already popular and sacred elephant of Taxila and Kapisa.

In sum, the evidence suggests that the elephant, or a deity in the
form of an elephant, was sacred to the people of the Gandhara region.
Hence the Indo-Greeks gave it a place of honor on their coins, and the
Indo-Scythians and Indo-Parthians followed them in order to please their
subjects. The Kusanas who succeeded them went a step further; they had
statues of various gods and goddesses made for the first time. It must not
have been easy to make statues of Ganesa, which obviously required con-
siderable imagination, for in this case it was the representation of a sacred
animal. Here the Greco-Roman artists, who were quite active in the Ku-
sana empire, more particularly in the Gandhara region, must have been of
great help. The Greeks were adept at fashioning therianthropic represen-
tations, such as centaurs, and their experience must have come in handy
for carving the first images of the elephant god. This is now amply borne
out by the evidence of an Indo-Greek coin type in the British Museum that
has on its reverse the representation of Ganesa. Observes A. K. Narain,

--- Page 8 ---
56 M. K. Dhavalikar
if this [that it is Ganega] is accepted, surely this would be the earliest repre-
sentation of Ganega and a veritable specimen of syncretic tendencies which
started operating from the time of the Indo-Greeks and resulted in the for-
mation of many new gods and goddesses. This is also an example of how a
local deity was transformed or, if you may like to say, elevated to the respect-
able status.”
It should be noted in this connection that Hermaeus (c. 75-55 B.C.), prob-
ably the last of the Indo-Greek rulers, at the end of his career had associ-
ated Kujula Kadphises, the Kusana chief, into the administration of his
kingdom, as is evident from the joint coin issues that give the names of
both in the legend. This should help to explain the occurrence of the im-
ages of GaneSa, though few, in the Kusana period.
The Literary Evidence
The artistic and numismatic evidence discussed above is to a consid-
erable extent corroborated by literary evidence. It should be noted here
that the references to the elephant-headed deity in the Maitrayani Samhita
have been proven to be very late interpolations, and thus are not helpful
for determining the early formation of the deity.”° Regarding GaneSa in the
epics, M. Winternitz concludes: “‘Itis, however, worth mentioning that (as
far as I am able to see) it is very doubtful whether the elephant headed god
can claim a place in the Epic pantheon.” So far as the legend that the great
sage Vyasa secured the services of Ganesa as scribe for writing the great
epic, Winternitz has shown that it is a late legend that was known only
from about 900 a.D.”* The Mahabharata tells us that among the ganas of Siva
there were two groups: one group were benevolent deities of nine classes
who dwelt on Mt. Kailasa, and a second group were malevolent deities,
called vinayakas, who, however, could be propitiated.”’ Propitiatory rites
and ceremonies have been mentioned in both the epics.*° They are also
mentioned in the Manava Grhyasitra in the subsection titled Vindyaka-kalpa
or “The Pacificatory Rites for Vinayakas,’” where the four names of vindya-
kas appear as Usmita, Devayajana, Salakatankata, and Kusmanda-raja-
putra, and the appeasement of the trouble-creating god is prescribed.

The worship of Ganeéa is also alluded to in such later Smrtis as the
Yajnavalkyasmrti (1, 271-94). In the Baudhayana Grhyaparisesasutra (II, 10),
which can be assigned to the same time as the Yajnavalkyasmrti, we come
across reference to a single Vinayaka. Herein the group of four vinayakas is
addressed as one god, and he is looked upon as the son of Ambika. This
one Vinayaka was appointed by Siva as Ganapati Vinayaka, who may be

--- Page 9 ---
Ganesa: Myth and Reality 57
considered as the earliest form of GaneSa. He is given the role of creating
difficulties and obstructions if not properly propitiated.* In the Baudhday-
ana Grhyaparisesasutra (III, 10), among many invocations to the spirit under
various epithets, there is one that speaks of it as hasti-mukha, or elephant
faced. It is interesting to note that the same epithet has been applied to
Vighna and Vinayaka in the Baudhayana Dharmasitra. In it the spirit or de-
ity Vighna (obstacle) is given most of the epithets of Ganesa, such as Vi-
nayaka, Hastimukha, Vakratunda, Ekadanta, Lambodara, and so on.
Thus it appears from the literary evidence that in the early centuries of the
Christian era one Vinayaka had come to supersede the concept of four or
more, making his identification with Ganapati easier. But his malevolent
character is conspicuous, for he is invoked both as Vighna (obstacles) or
Vighnesvara (lord of obstacles). G. S. Ghurye writes:

Only one step further, and that a very radical transformation, was needed to

enthrone GaneSa being the ‘Lord of Obstacles’ as the ‘Destroyer or Remover

of Obstacles.’ Such transformations inhere in the very nature of early religio-

magical systems of beliefs. ... So Vinayaka, the trouble-maker becomes the

much prayed to trouble-averter Ganesa.™

_ This transformation in all probability was completed long before the fifth

century and hence the occurrence of the images of GaneSa in the late Ku-
sana period.
Two Important Kusana-period Mathura Sculptures

Two more sculptures in the Mathura Museum are of importance to
our discussion. One of these is a frieze (no. 2335) carved with three hori-
zontal bands of which the upper one has a railing and the middle one con-
tains six arches showing worshipers. In the band at the bottom, which is
partly preserved, are depicted five elephant-headed figures (fig. 6). V. S.
Agrawala identifies each as a yaksa, which according to him is “the earliest
representation of Ganesa figure in Mathura art, perhaps an offshoot of
Kubera iconography.’ We are also inclined to identify these figures as
representations of Ganesa, more particularly vinayakas, although P. K.
Agrawala has expressed doubts about their identification. They rather
appear to be the prototypes of the Pancha-Ganesa images of the later pe-
riod. As already discussed, the vindyakas are usually mentioned as four,
and the earliest reference to them is to be found in the Manava Grhyasiutra,
which is supposed to be one of the earliest Grhyasutras, dating back to
about the second century B.C. The four vindyakas are said to have been in-

--- Page 10 ---
58 M. K. Dhavalikar
voked under four separate formulae in the Manava Grhyasitra (II, 14, 47),
and they again appear in the Yajnavalkyasmrti (L, 285). The elephant-
headed figures in the Mathura frieze have also been identified as vindyakas
by P. K. Agrawala, who observes:
In the art of Amaravati and Mathura during the first three centuries of the
Christian era the portrayal of Vinayakas— who were originally a team of at-
tacking beings of evil disposition — appears possibly to render them as ele-
phant-headed demons or Yaksas. The Mathura relief . . . may be identified as
Vinayakas or Ganeéa figures. The presence of five such beings on this frag-
mentary relief is more or less certain.”
It may, however, be stated that five vinayakas have been mentioned in the
Ganapati-kalpa section of the Yajnavalkyasmrti (I, 285). They are Mita, Sam-
mita, Salakantaka, Kusmanda, and Rajaputra.*” The increase in number
from four to five is due to the separate mention of Kusmanda and Raja-
putra, who, as already seen, have otherwise been referred to as one Kus-
manda-rajaputra. Again Mita and Sammita are phonetically similar to Us-
mita, which occurs in the Manava Grhyasitra. But Devayajana, which
occurs in the Manava Grhyasitra, has been dropped in this list. Be that as
it may, it appears that the concept of five, as well as four, vindyakas was
prevalent in the early centuries of the Christian era.
The second Mathura sculpture depicts Gajalaksmi flanked by Ga-
neSa on the right and Kubera on the left. B. N. Sharma observes that
Shri V. N. Srivastava, the Curator of the Mathura Museum, says that there
are three such sculptures in his Museum. Of these, one belongs to the Ku-
shan period and the other two to the Gupta period.*
For us, Sharma’s dating of the one sculpture to the Kusana period helps
support our contention that in the Kusana period Ganega was becoming
popular. His association with Laksmi and Kubera is not without signifi-
cance. Both Laksmi and Kubera are deities of wealth. Kubera, a yaksa who
is referred to as Dhanada (“‘wealth-giving’’) has many features in common
with Ganesa. Both are grotesque in appearance and potbellied. Even
Coomaraswamy has noted this similarity, for he says that
GaneSa is undoubtedly a yaksa type by his big belly and general character;
but he is not cited by name in any lists. He is effectively and perhaps actually
equivalent to Kubera or Manibhadra.”

--- Page 11 ---
| Ganesa: Myth and Reality 59
: Perhaps that is why the artist selected Kubera and Ganeéa to flank the god-
_ dess in the center to balance the sculpture. But in doing so, he was uncon-
_ sciously elevating Ganesa, who was an obstacle creator, to the level of a di-
| vinity, ranking him with Gajalaksmi and Kubera in importance. Both
| Kubera and Ganesa were yaksas first, but the former remained a yaksa,
_ whereas Gane§Sa attained divine status.
Conclusion
The foregoing discussion makes it clear that the worship of Ganesa
came into vogue in the Mathura region during the Kusana period. The sa-
cred elephant, which originally may have been the totem of some tribe like
the Hastinayanas or the Hastikas in the Gandhara country, later came to
be depicted on the coinage of Indo-Greeks and other foreign rulers. The
credit of giving the deity the therianthropic form has to be given to the
Indo-Greeks. With the Kusanas, his worship came to Mathura, but still
GaneSa was only a demigod and can be identified as Vinayaka of the Brah-
manical literature; earlier there were four vindyakas who were later merged
into one. Originally a creator of obstacles, he came to be worshiped as an
obstacle remover. We have sculptural representations of the five vindyakas
in the Kusana period and single images slightly later that look more like
those of yaksas.* That the elephant-headed god was known more as Vi-
nayaka than as GaneSa is amply clear from literary references, and that he
continued to be known as such is clearly demonstrated by the inscribed
Kabul Museum statue that records his name as Maha-Vinayaka. In fact it
appears that the god was not known as “‘GaneSsa” in the early period, for
a repertoire of early personal names shows that the earliest occurrence of
it is to be found in the early Gupta period in the Allahabad prasasti of Sa-
mudragupta, which mentions one Ganapatinaga. Slightly earlier, how-
ever, in the Yakhnavalkyasmrti, the propitiatory rites for the god have been
described in the section called Ganapati-kalpa, whereas in the much earlier
Manava Grhyasutra it is entitled Vindyaka-kalpa. Even Bharata in his Natyas-
astra, which has been placed between 200 and 400 a.D., also refers to Ga-
nea as one of the lesser gods.*! Thus sometime in the late Kusana and the
early Gupta period, the god came to be known as “’Gane§Sa,” and he seems
to have become popular in the Gupta period, during which quite a number
of images of the god came to be carved. That is why it could be possible for
Varahamihira to describe the iconography of Ganesa. We may therefore
reasonably conclude that the worship of Ganesa came into vogue much
earlier than the sixth century, as was earlier thought; it begins, as the Ma-

--- Page 12 ---
60 M. K. Dhavalikar

thura evidence shows, in the Kusana period in tne early centuries of the
Christian era.

NOTES

1. M. K. Dhavalikar, ““Ganesga beyond the Indian Frontiers,” in India’s Contri-
bution to World Thought and Culture. Vivikanada Commemmoration Volume, ed. Lokesh
Chandra, et al. (Madras: Vivekananda Rock Memorial Committee, 1970), 1-16.

2. Wendy O'Flaherty, “Forward,” in Paul B. Courtright, Ganesa: Lord of Obsta-
cles, Lord of Beginnings (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985), vil.

3. R. G. Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious Systems (Strass-
burg: K. J. Trtibner, 1913), 147-48.

4. M.K. Dhavalikar, ““A Note on Two GaneSa Statues from Afghanistan,” East
and West 21, new series (1971):331 -36.

5. Dhavalikar, ‘Two GaneSa Statues,’’ 331 - 32.

6. Carmel Berkson, ‘‘Some New Finds at the Ramgarh Hill, District Vidisha,”
Artibus Asiae, 40 (1978):216.

7. D. B. Diskalkar, ‘Some Brahmanical Sculptures in the Mathura Museum,”
Journal of the U.P. Historical Society 5, pt. 1 (1932):45-47.

8. Alice Getty, Ganesa: A Monograph on the Elephant-faced God (1936, reprint,
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1971), 26, pl. 2a.

9. The image is in the collection of Mr. and Mrs. James W. Alsdorf, Chicago,
Illinois, USA. See Stella Kramrisch, Manifestations of Siva (Philadelphia: Philadel-
phia Museum of Art, 1981), 75, fig. 61.

10. For example, John M. Rosenfield, The Dynastic Arts of the Kushans (Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1967), fig. 21.

11. Getty, Ganesa, 26.

12. Getty, Ganesa, 25-26. For a recent discovery of an elephant-headed figure
at Amaravati that has been identified—incorrectly, in my opinion—as Ganeéa, see
I. K. Sarma, “A Unique Usnisha (Coping Stone) from Amaravati,’” Journal of the An-
dhra Historical Society, Somasekhara Sarma Volume 35 (1975-76):279 —84.

13. Thomas Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, vol. 1, 1st Indian ed.,
(Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1961), 129.

14. A. N. Lahiri, Corpus of Indo-Greek Coins (Calcutta: Poddar Publications,
1965), pl. XVI, i. For different opinions regarding the representation of the deity
see M. K. Dhavalikar, “Antiquity of Ganesa: The Numismatic Evidence,” Indolo-
gica Taurinencia, Prof. Ludwig Sternback Volume 8—9 (1980—81):141 —42.

15. Percy Gardner, Coins of Greek and Scythic Kings of Bactria and India in British
Museum (reprint, Chicago: Argonaut, 1966), pl. III, 2.

16. Gardner, Coins, pl. XII, 6.

17. Gardner, Coins, pl. XVI, 1.

18. J. N. Banerjea, ‘‘Indian Elements in Coin Devices of Forei
dia,” Indian Historical Quarterly 14 (1938):300-1. reign Rulers of In- :
