--- Page 1 ---
GaneSa in Southeast Asian Art: Indian
Connections and Indigenous
Developments
«Robert L. Brownr*
haraputramasesaganadhipatim
varacandrasunirmalacarungunam
alicumbitagandasamakulitam
varadam vighnavinayakamide'
I praise the remover of obstacles,
who grants wishes, the son of Hara,
the leader of the Sesa-gana, having the
perfectly pure, lovely quality of the
excellent moon, agitated from bee-kissed cheeks.
I. The Earliest GaneSa Images
Ne one since Alice Getty has attempted a discussion of GaneSa in
Southeast Asian art.*? This is understandable considering the scat-
tered locations and relative scarcity of the images and the lack of related
inscriptions, texts, and archaeological excavations. The use of a few, hap-
hazardly available examples led Getty repeatedly to form conclusions that
cannot be supported today. While much more information and material |
pertaining to Ganesa in Southeast Asian art are available at present, the
*A number of people who helped me with this paper deserve my thanks, including
Carol Bolon, Susan Buchanan, Paul Courtright, Martha Davidson, Pinya Krai-
riksh, Kathy Harper, Stephen Markel, Mona Meredith, Judy Mitoma, A. K. Na-
rain, Pratapaditya Pal, and Hartmut Scharfe.
171

--- Page 2 ---
172 Robert L. Brown

evidence remains extremely spotty; and the danger of drawing false con-
clusions, based upon an inadequate and nonrepresentative sampling, is
still strong. The insufficient number of examples, coupled with the modest
length of this essay, make any attempt here at a comprehensive survey of
the Southeast Asian GaneSa impossible. What I will attempt is to identify
the ways in which the GaneSa images from Southeast Asia are specific to
the area. That is, in what ways did the Southeast Asian artists follow the
Indian forms of Ganesa, and what new forms did they introduce? What
meaning did the Southeast Asians give to their Ganesa images? I will pro-
pose from this analysis conclusions about Ganesa’s place and nature
among the Indic gods.

Southeast Asia will include for us the mainland countries of Burma,
Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Malaysia, as well as the island archipelago
of Indonesia. I will, however, deal with the mainland and the islands sep-
arately (beginning with the mainland), as the issues relating to Ganesa
tend to be different for the two areas.

The initial step in associating the Ganesa images in Southeast Asia
with those in India is to identify the earliest Southeast Asian images and
their possible Indian prototypes. Such an undertaking, the search for the
“earliest” Southeast Asian examples of an iconography or form and their
Indian connections, is a slippery path and usually relatively unsuccessful.
In the case of Ganesa, however, the results of the search are revealing, if
not without major problems of their own.

The early images of GaneSa in Southeast Asia are found over a wide
area of the mainland, including areas in present-day Thailand, Cambodia,
and Vietnam. They form a surprisingly homogeneous group. That their
style and iconography have uniformity supports what I feel is a new per-
ception among art historians? that the earliest Indian-related art in main-
land Southeast Asia exhibits a consistency of style and iconography.
Rather than a series of different stvles, each a copy of an Indian style, oc-
curring in various areas of the mainland, a few major indigenous but In-
dian-influenced styles appeared suddenly and spread quickly to widely
scattered areas of the mainland. These Southeast Asian objects shared
more characteristics among themselves than they do with any Indian pro-
totypes and formed the shared seed from which the later regional South-
east Asian styles grew.

Bearing this in mind, let us look first at examples of the earliest seated
GaneSsa images from mainland Southeast Asia. We may begin by compar-
ing the Ganesa from Tuol Pheak Kin in Cambodia (fig. 1) and an image
from Prasat Phnom Rung in Buri Ram Province of Northeastern Thailand
(fig. 2). The two Ganesas are stylistically and iconographically similar.

--- Page 3 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 173
They share an overall naturalism and simplicity. The shapes of their heads
and ears are similar, as are the ways in which their heads are attached onto
their bodies without any necks, each of the awkward junctures masked by
the use of a plain band, intended to represent a roll of flesh. Similar large,
plain bands are used to separate the chest from the abdomen. In both cases
the bodies are relatively thin, and both have two arms that, although the
right arm in figure 2 is broken, are held in the same position. The list of
similarities can be much expanded.

A third early seated GaneSa was found in Phu-ninh in Champa (Viet-
nam). With only a drawing by Parmentier as evidence (figs. 3 and 4), a
great deal cannot be said about this image, although it appears stylistically
to fit well with the two GaneSas discussed above. Jean Boisselier cau-
tiously places it among the earliest Cham material, perhaps the second
half of the seventh century.‘ For our purposes, the Phu-ninh Gane§Sa en-
ables us to extend the appearance of the earliest Southeast Asian type

- from Thailand to Vietnam.

A 650-700 date for the Phu-ninh GaneSa agrees with the approxi- —
mate dates of the other two early Southeast Asian GaneSas. Piriya Krai-
riksh has dated the Prasat Phnom Rung GaneSa (fig. 2), based on the style
of the sampot he wears, to the Prei Khmeng style, that is, the second half of
the seventh century.° Pierre Dupont has dated the Tuol Pheak Kin GaneSsa
(fig. 1) to the Phnom Da style, that is, the second half of the sixth century.°®

With parameters of 550 to 700 A.D. for some’ of the earliest seated Ga-
neSas in Southeast Asia, we can now look to India to seek relationships.
Here there is a surprise. The Indian images that compare most closely to
the Southeast Asian GaneSas are not Indian images of the sixth and sev-
enth centuries but are the earlier Indian examples. It is true that these ear-
liest Indian GaneSas (figs. 5, 6, and 8) are themselves at the center of con-
siderable debate regarding their date. They consist of a modest group of
small sculptures carved from Mathuran Sikri sandstone.* The images are
either standing (fig. 8) or seated (figs. 5 and 6), and share a number of char-
acteristics, such as being small, two-armed, dwarf-like, relatively una-
dorned, and frequently nude. Getty published one example that she felt
‘‘may be the most ancient representation of the god in stone as yet discov-
ered.’”? While she does not date it specifically, she states that ““GaneSa is
not to be found in sculpture before the Gupta period,”” by which she means
that ‘“‘no images ... have been discovered which could be placed unques-
tionably earlier than the fifth century."

As more examples of this type of Ganega have been recognized, how-
ever, some scholars have considered an earlier dating, either Kusana (first
to third centuries A.D.) or Gupta-Kusana transitional (ca. fourth century

--- Page 4 ---
174 Robert L. Brown
A.D.).!' I feel there is nothing to argue against a Kusana-period date for
some of these images, but whether the earliest Indian Ganesa scuiptures
are of the Kusana period, are Kusana-Gupta transition, or are early Gupta
need not be resolved here. If the type began in the Kusana period, it cer-
tainly continued into the fourth century, and we will accept an uncontrov-
ersial fifth-century or earlier date for these images. :

We are fortunate to have a seated Gane§Sa carved in relief at Cave 6 at
Udayagiri in Madhya Pradesh, where there is a dedicatory inscription
dated to 401-2 a.D. (fig. 7).!2 The Ganesa can probably be dated in relation
to this inscription.'? The image follows closely the early Mathuran type,
with the additional interesting iconographical detail of being ithyphallic
(urdhvaretas). Therefore, with aca. 400 A.D. date for the image, we can
compare it to the Tuol Pheak Kin GaneéSa (fig. 1) of 150 to 200 years later.
The similarities are striking. The two share such general likenesses as
body proportions and the relation of the head to body, as well as such spe-
cific characteristics as the shape of the ears with the fold of skin along the
top and the plain band at the throat. If we allow a comparison among all
six of the early seated GaneSas (three Indian: figs 5, 6, and 7, and three
Southeast Asian: figs. 1, 2, 3, and 4), we can derive a convincing list of con-_
cordances, with such details as the plain headbands found on the Udaya-
giriand Mathura GaneSas (figs. 7 and 6) and the band on the Prasat Phnom
Rung GaneSa (fig. 2).

While this list can be much expanded, there are general characteris-
tics that the two groups, Indian and Southeast Asian, do not share. The
Indian GaneSas, for example, hold a bowl piled high with rounded cakes
(modaka), while the Southeast Asian images hold what appear to be empty
bowls. Likewise, the three Indian GaneSas are apparently naked, as fre-
quently are the early Indian GaneSas (cf. fig. 8), but the three Southeast
Asian examples are clothed; and on the two where the clothing is clearly
depicted, they wear Southeast Asian dress. These types of differences are
perhaps not unexpected. The modaka, while taking a variety of forms in In-
dia,'* would supposedly be an unknown food and symbol to the Southeast
Asian and thus be susceptible to elimination in the art. The unabashed re-
vealing nature of Indian sculpture, particularly the exposure of the geni-
tals, was generally rejected by the Southeast Asians, who clothed Ganega
as they did most of their gods. In other words, the changes in the South-
east Asian Ganesas are the result of seeing or reading Indian models
through an indigenous Southeast Asian perspective. The important point
here is that the three early Southeast Asian examples from areas separated
by over one thousand kilometers share a stylistic and iconographic unity
that already can be defined as Southeast Asian.

--- Page 5 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 175
I have thus far considered only seated examples of Ganeéa, but
equally early standing images occur in India (Mathura, see fig. 8) and in
Southeast Asia (although to my knowledge only in Cambodia; see fig. 9).
The Indian Ganega we may date to the fifth century or earlier, while the
Cambodian GaneéSa is, to judge by the sampot, an example of Dupont’s
““prolongements du style du Phnom Da’’!> and would date to the seventh
century. I need not belabor the many similarities these standing Ganegas
share with the seated images, nor that we are again matching the South- ,
east Asian object to the proper Indian prototype, although they are sepa-
rated by perhaps two centuries. There are, however, two major changes in
the standing Cambodian GaneSa: he is not naked but wears the Khmer
sampot, and his legs and body, while stocky, are naturally proportioned.
These two characteristics will be consistently found on later Cambodian
GaneSas, and they relate to a point I will return to, which is that the Ga-
nesa in mainland Southeast Asia largely shed his yaksa and gana form, in-
cluding his dwarf-like proportions, while retaining his early yaksa func-
tion.
By the sixth century GaneSsa images are prevalent in many areas of
India. The earliest form of GaneSa seen at Mathura and Udayagirihasnow
_ by and large changed, the deity taking the fully developed form he will es-
sentially maintain up until the present. A sixth-century example from Sa-
malaji in Gujarat (fig. 10) shows, when compared to the standing Cambo-
_ dian GaneSa, the lack of correspondence of which I am thinking. The
sixth-century Indian image has now the presence, the girth and propor-
tion, the flexion of the body (bhanga), that we recognize as typical of the
Indian GaneSa.!°
Not all sixth-century Indian GaneSas are necessarily as elaborate as
the Samalaji Ganesga; some are simpler and tend to suggest the earlier Ma-
thuran type. Nevertheless, such details as the sunken heads of the South-
east Asian GaneSas point rather precisely to the earliest Indian images.
The earliest Southeast Asian GaneSas (second half of the sixth to the
seventh century) appear therefore not to be modeled on the contempora-
neous Indian GaneéSas but on types that date to the fifth century at the lat-
est. There is thus a possibly 150-200 year gap between the Indian models
and the resulting Southeast Asian images. The gap is not easy to explain.
“One explanation, that there could be a time lag of this length for Indian
models to reach Southeast Asia, is in my opinion highly unlikely. Evidence
supports that Indian art and ideas reached Southeast Asia, on the whole,
very rapidly.’” That sixth- to seventh-century Indian models, such as that
from Samalaji (fig. 10) were somehow unavailable to the Southeast Asians,
while the earlier Mathuradn types were introduced at this late date, is

--- Page 6 ---
176 Robert L. Brown

equally unlikely. It is probably not that the later Indian models were not
available, but that, however haphazardly introduced, they were not gen-
erally adopted by the Southeast Asians.

The time lag is perhaps less problematic if we assume that the Indi-
ans and Southeast Asians shared the Mathuran type as their earliest
model. The four early Southeast Asian GaneSas illustrated here (figs. 1, 2,
3, 4, and 9) are not “copies” of the Indian GaneSas, but are developments
of the earliest Indian type, just as are the sixth-century and later Indian
GaneSas. The later Indian GaneSas, as I mentioned above, vary as to how
closely they follow the early Mathuran type. While the Samalaji Ganeéa
(fig. 10) is quite divergent from the Mathuran type (fig. 8), an even later
seventh-century seated GaneSa from Benisagar in Singhbhumi District of
Bihar (fig. 11) can be used as an example that in many ways retains more
characteristics of the early Mathuran type while evincing a later style. The
sharply turned trunk, the raised left hand with the modaka bowl, and the
simple bands between the breasts and stomach and at the throat, are par-
ticularly archaic features. Yet we cannot argue that the Benisagar Ganesa ~
type could have served as a model for the earliest Southeast Asian Gane-
Sas. The GaneSa from Bihar reveals its seventh-century date in such char-
acteristics as the head raised above the shoulders and the flattened and
more stylized face, aspects not reflected in the early Southeast Asian im-
ages. In other words, the Benisagar and contemporaneous early Southeast
Asian images correspond in certain ways not because they are model and
copy but because they have developed from a shared prototype.

II. Eighth-Century Ganesa Images

We are, nevertheless, left with many unanswered questions. How,
when, and where were the early Mathuran GaneSas introduced into
Southeast Asia? Were there earlier Southeast Asian GaneSas (made in
wood and now lost, or in stone or metal and as yet undiscovered) that are
closer to the Indian model? Is the Southeast Asian style we find character-
izing the earliest examples due to the dominance of one Southeast Asian
center or to a similar interpretation of the model due to a shared indige-
nous aesthetic? The attempt to answer these and similar questions would
involve comparisons with other early Southeast Asian art and take us far
from our immediate topic. One point raised in the last question, however,
that the sixth- to seventh-century GaneSas partake of a Southeast Asian
style, leads us to ask if eighth-century Southeast Asian GaneSas that fol-
low relate in a similar way.

--- Page 7 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 177
By the eighth century Gane§Sa is fully implanted in Southeast Asia,
and his popularity is attested by numerous artistic remains. One of the
most remarkable eighth-century examples is the Cambodian GaneSa from
Triton (figs. 12 and 13). This standing, two-armed image would be over two
meters high if complete and is unusual in several respects. The attributes
he holds, a water jar (kalasa) in his left hand and a rosary (aksamla) in his
right, identify an ascetic’s nature. While the rosary is a common attribute
of GaneSa, the ascetic’s jar is very rarely held by the god in either Indian or
Southeast Asian art.'* A second unusual, perhaps sculpturally unique,
characteristic is that his trunk is kept tightly rolled up.

The Triton Ganesa can be compared quite closely to another large (H:
80 cm) GaneSa of about the same date, the Mi-so’n E.5 GaneSa from Viet-
nam (figs. 14 and 15).”° It is similar to the Triton GaneSa not only in fron-
tality and stance, but also in such details as the peculiar three-braided belt
that these two Ganesas alone share. The E.5 image has its own idiosyncra-
sies, such as the tiger’s skin worn around his hips, the only known in-
stance of this in Southeast Asian art. Also peculiar to this example is the
attribute held in the lower right hand. It is known only through Parmen-
tier’s drawing (our fig. 14), the hand and attribute being lost today.*' Par-
mentier describes it as ‘‘une sorte de bouquet pendant, dont le bout au-
dessus de la main est brisé.’’? Jean Boisselier discusses two possible iden-
tifications, that it is a tusk with its “‘roots”’ or a radish (mulaka), but is skep-
tical of both.* The more likely of the two, that it is a radish, he doubts
based on Getty’s opinion that the radish is an attribute confined to Nepal,
Tibet, and Japan and is “almost unknown in India.” Getty suggests that
the radish may have arisen from “‘a misinterpretation of a badly executed
broken tusk.’’?> In actuality, however, the radish is quite popular in early
Indian GaneSa iconography. One need only look at the seventh-century
GaneSa from Benisagar (fig. 11) to’see a radish held in the right hand with
the leaves, divided into three, pointing downward. The presence of this
attribute can be pushed back at least to the sixth century with such exam-
ples as the Amjhara GaneSa that Sara Schastok dates to ca. 530 A.D.” One
may be tempted to ask, in fact, if the broken tusk may not have evolved
from a misunderstanding of the radish.”

The ‘‘radish” that comes closest in form, with the long fall of foliage,
to that of the E.5 Ganega (that I have found) is held by the Ganesa in the
mid sixth—century Ravana Phadi Cave at Aihole (fig. 16). The comparison
between the two images does not stop there. The Aihole Ganesa’s heavy
yajnopavita of twisted strands of beads may help to explain the unusual

. thick and similarily granulated (indicated by the cross-hatching in Par-

--- Page 8 ---
178 Robert L. Brown

mentier’s drawing) cord that falls over the E.5 GaneSa’s left shoulder and
rests on top of his belt. The depiction of the E.5 image’s sampot in strong
horizontal bands may relate to the similar, although narrower, bands on
the Ravana Phadi Gane§a’s loin cloth, especially as this treatment is highly
unique in the art of both cultures. Furthermore, the ambiguously placed
side panels of the E.5 GaneSa (again rare in Cham art of this period) may
be compared to the side falls of cloth on the Aihole Ganesa.

Nevertheless, the Indian sources possible for the Cham GaneSa are
not restricted to this Chalukyan site, for the presence of the tiger’s pelt (vy-
aghracarma) leads us in just the opposite direction, to the northern part of
the subcontinent. As R. C. Agrawala has written: ‘The lion-skin [sic] is
usually not to be found in early Indian GaneSa statues other than those
from Mathura, Kabul, and Brahnmor (Chamba). .. . ”?* The extant Indian
examples are few, but the Gardez (Afghanistan) GaneSa’s tiger pelt is very
similar to that of the E.5 GaneSsa, both having frontal, flattened faces (see
Dhavalikar, fig. 1); the skins on both images are similarly tied over a cloth
skirt that falls to a point between the legs.” Do relations from Aihole to .-’

_ Afghanistan make sense for the E.5 GaneSa? Boisselier says

le GaneSa de Mi-so’n E.5, comme tant d’oeuvres chames, semble ainsi bé-

néficier d’apports tres divers tant dans le domaine de la technique que de I'i-

conographie mais il est dommage que les sources de cette derniére restent

encore, dans ce cas particulier, impossibles a préciser.™
We now can at least propose certain specific Indian sources, however im-
perfectly understood the actual relationships may be. The sources show,
as stated by Boisselier, a complicated diversity.

Yet a third large Ganesa that can be compared to those from Triton
(figs. 12 and 13) and Mi-so’n (figs. 14 and 15) was recently discovered in
Thailand (figs. 17 and 18). When found at Muang Pra Roth, Dong Si Ma-
hapot (Prachinburi) in 1972, the Ganesa was broken into pieces. As re-
stored in the National Museum in Bangkok it is 1.70 meters high. The two-
armed image wears a lower garment, indicated by the belt at the back, but
no jewelry. M. C. Subhadradis Diskul relates the Muang Pra Roth Gane§a,
not unreasonably, to the Tuol Pheak Kin image (fig. 1), saying the two im-
ages should date to about the same time (he says sixth to seventh cen-
tury).°*! I find a much closer relationship, however, between the Muang Pra
Roth Ganesa and that from Mi-so’n: a comparison of the shape of the head
and remaining arm with those of the Mi-so’n Ganeéga shows a very close
similarity (figs. 15 and 18), and a late-seventh- to eighth-century date for
the Muang Pra Roth GaneSa appears most reasonable to me.

--- Page 9 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 179

There is yet another interesting connection between these two im-
ages: each was placed on a stone slab with grooves on top (somasiitra) to
drain off liquids used during worship (a snanadroni). Again we must rely
on Parmentier, who clearly depicted the snanadroni in his drawing (our fig.
14). Unfortunately his comment in the text is not particularly helpful: ‘‘le
piédestal que portrait le dieu est simple; il est creux, et les morceaux en
sont assemblés d’une facon curieuse.’’* Boisselier does not mention the
pedestal in La Statuaire du Champa, and his illustration (our fig. 15) shows
the sculpture without the snanadroni. The Muang Pra Roth Ganeé§a, unlike
the E.5, is a seated figure, but he is sculpted with a small attached base
that in turn sets into a snanadroni. Diskul writes that ‘‘he [GaneSa] sits on
a large stone base which has a groove for holy water in the front (yoni).’"*
That these two GaneSas were placed on snanadronis is not in itself surpris-
ing. The placement of Hindu deities, usually individual images of Visnu
and Siva, on pedestals with snanadronis is well documented in Vietnam,
Cambodia, and parts of Thailand.* Specific evidence for this practice with
GaneSa images is, however, rare.

We have seen GaneSa images, this time dating to the eighth century,
appearing from distinct cultures and in several widely spaced areas of
Southeast Asia, that reveal an unexpected mutual influence. It is reason-
able to suggest, given these images’ size, elaborateness, and, in two ex-
amples, placement on a snanadroni, that GaneSa at this time was consid-
ered an important deity in his own right, assuming, perhaps, an
independent status that he had not yet achieved in India.

III. GaneSa as a Major Deity

There is additional evidence that supports this assessment. All the
Southeast Asian GaneSas we have seen thus far are independent images.
They maintain a frontality; they lack subsidiary figures and a narrative
context; and they have no vehicles, that is, no rat vahanas. They share these
characteristics with the earliest Indian GaneSas. Unlike in Indian art, how-
ever, these characteristics will continue with few exceptions in the art of
Cambodia, Champa, and Thailand. The mainland Southeast Asian Ga-
neSas are thus essentially icons.

It is not always easy to tell how the GaneSa icons were placed and
used, as most images have been loose finds. Nevertheless, archaeological
and epigraphical evidence indicates that some GaneSa images had sanc-
tuaries of their own. The Triton GaneSa (figs. 12 and 13) was, according to

_ Malleret, probably installed in a now-ruined brick temple.** Likewise the
Muang Pra Roth GaneSa (figs. 17 and 18) was found associated with a rec-

--- Page 10 ---
180 Robert L. Brown

tangular temple, only the laterite base of which remains.” One later (tenth
century) Cambodian Ganega was found by Parmentier in a small temple.
This Ganega appears to have been the only image housed in the temple,
and, although the sculpture is broken, Parmentier could reconstruct its
placement as at the center of the sanctuary. The importance of this image
is apparent from its size, being, at 2.30 meters including the base, the larg-
est Cambodian Ganesa known.” In Champa the Mi-so’n E.5 Ganesa (figs.
14 and 15) apparently had his own sanctuary, as did another Mi-so’n Ga-
neSa and one from Nha Trang.*

Inscriptional evidence for Ganesa images having their own temples
includes an inscription at Angkor Borei dated 611 A.D. that dedicates a
sanctuary to ‘“Mahaganapati’’” and one dated to the reign of Jayavarman
I (r. 656-81) that dedicates a sanctuary to “’Sri-Ganapati.’’*’ Two monaster-
ies (““aSramas’’) were dedicated to GaneSa (called ‘‘candanadriganesa” or
GaneSsa of Sandal Mountain) by Yasovarman I (r. 889 - 900).*! Likewise a
Cham inscription dated 817 states that a iemple was raised for Sri Vinay-
aka at Po Nagar.”

None of the Ganesa images referred to in these inscriptions, nor in
any of the other Cham and Cambodian inscriptions that mention the god, _
can be identified today. Only one intriguing seventh-century inscription
from Prasat Prei Kuk in Cambodia refers to a specific seated image in a
sanctuary niche. Unfortunately, we must again rely on drawings by Par-

" mentier (see our fig. 19). These, along with his textual description, convey
an odd arrangement indeed. On the inside back wall of a now mostly ru-
ined brick sanctuary was a large niche in which sat a GaneSa image: “‘Elle
ena les jambes plies a Il’indienne, la taille fine et le ventre gros, la téte large
attachée au fond.’’* The Gane§a is placed on a sndnadroni, which in turn,
along with the entire niche, is supported by what Parmentier identifies as
“un garuda posé en atlante.’’* Equally curious is that the central Ganesa
is flanked by what appears in the drawing to be two other GaneSas, al-
though Parmentier calls them crouching elephants that project but half-
way out of the wall (‘‘elephants accroupis sortant 4 mi-corps du mur’’*).
Above each of these elephants is an inscription, only one of which is read-
able.

When Coedeés published this inscription he said its meaning was not
clear and the translation he proposed was to be considered tentative.*° The
Sanskrit text is as follows: )

(1) ya + kas cid danavendra paravisayaharo niryjito nyena Saktya

(2) vaddho vai Srnkhalabhis ciram iha patito yam stuvan chailarud-

dhah

--- Page 11 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 181

(3) tan drstva kinnarabhis Sataganasahitas svapnasose himadrer

(4) ayato moksanarthan jayati ganapatis tvaddhitayeva so yam
Coedeés’s translation is this:

La victoire est a ce Ganapati qui, ayant vu dans son sommeil le roi des Dan-

ava, le ravisseur des territoires d’autrui, vaincu par son ennemi, puissam-

ment enchainé, tombe ici depuis longtemps, retenu par la montagne, chan-
tant ses louanges, est venu, a son réveil, de |’Himadri avec les Kinnara, en
compagnie de cent Gana, ayant en vue la délivrance, comme si c’était pour
ton bien.
My own translation, which follows, considerably modifies that of Coedés
but is offered with equal reservation:

This Ganapati, who, for your welfare, conquers for the purpose of liberating,

has come from the Mountain of Snow accompanied by one hundred ganas

and kinnaras, having seen [there] upon awakening the Chief of the Danavas,
who, ravishing other's territory, was conquered by another with might [and]
bound with chains, praising him [the conqueror] after having fallen here for

a long time [and] shut up in the mountain.

The reference may be to Ravana” shaking Mt. Kailasa. As told in the
Ramayana, the demon Ravana, after defeating Kubera (“ravishing other’s
territory’’?), attempted to lift Mt. Kailasa on which Siva and Parvati were
making love. Siva merely pressed his toe on the shaking ground, which
trapped Ravana within the mountain. The demon king was allowed his
freedom from the mountain prison after singing Siva’s praises (‘praising
him [the conqueror]’’) for one thousand years.

Scenes of Ravana shaking Mt. Kailasa are very popular in Indian art.
B. N. Sharma has traced the theme back to the Gupta period.*® GaneSa is
present in many of the scenes, which is not surprising considering that
Kailasa, located in the Himalayas (the snow mountain “‘himadri’’), is home
to Siva’s family.*? The presence of Ganega in Ravana shaking Mt. Kailasa
scenes is also found in Cambodian art. One of the finest, dating to 967, is
on a pediment of a library at Banteay Srei. The pyramidical Kailasa has
Siva and Parvati seated on top, while other denizens of the mountain are
lined up on each level.* Ganesa appears on the second level from the top.

Whatever the interpretation of the inscription, the Prasat Prei Kuk
evidence confirms that GaneSa was the focus of worship with his own tem-
ples as early as the seventh century in Cambodia. The phrase in the Prasat

--- Page 12 ---
182 Robert L. Brown

Prei Kuk inscription, moksanarthan jayati (conquers for the purpose of lib-
erating), suggests that GaneSa was regarded as able to lead a worshiper to
moksa, a role reserved for the major deities and not assumed by Ganesa in
India until the seventh century at the earliest, but to any Significant degree
only considerably later.°!

IV. Roles and Innovations of Ganesa

While Ganesa may thus have been considered a major deity in the
seventh and eighth centuries in Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam, it was
Gane§Sa in his role as remover of obstacles that was primarily accepted in

_ mainland Southeast Asia. Even today in Buddhist Thailand Ganeéa is re-
garded as remover of obstacles and thus god of success.** Ancient evidence
for this role includes inscriptions. The Po Nagar inscription mentioned
above refers to GaneSa as Vinayaka, literally ‘‘removing”’ in the sense of
removing obstacles. The same name for GaneSa is used in a Cambodian
inscription dating to the reign of Jayavarman V (r. 968 — 1001).°° It is from
Vinayaka that the Old Burmese name for Ganesa, Mahapinay purha, is de-
rived. Other names with a similar meaning occur frequently in Cambo-
dian inscriptions, such as Vighnesa and Vighnesvara, both of which mean
‘Lord of Obstacles.’”* Yet another name with an identical meaning, Vigh-
napati, occurs in an inscription from Prah Phnom dating to 930 A.D., but
with the added interest of the text referring specifically to the purpose of
the Vighnapati image as being “‘to remove obstacles” (avighnakarint).°°
Other evidence for this role in Cambodia includes the frequent use of Ga-
nesa images on dedicatory and territorial markers where his function as
remover of obstacles is paramount.°*”

Gane$a’s role as lord of obstacles is very popular in India as well. It is
also probably the role associated with his earliest Indian forms,** and pre-
sumably came to Southeast Asia along with them. As noted in part 1, the
Indian GaneSa is a gana or yaksa type with a large belly, dwarf-like propor-
tions, and informal postures. The Southeast Asian tended to reject these
characteristics, transforming Gane§a into a more naturally proportioned
and formalized deity, while, however, accepting his propitiatory function.

Thus far two uses of GaneSa in mainland Southeast Asia have been
outlined: as a major deity, with his own temples and monumental images,
and as a popular but subordinate lord of obstacles. In both cases Ganeéa is
represented by individual, icon-like images.

In Indian art, Ganesa has numerous other roles. While these were
certainly introduced into mainland Southeast Asia, they were hardly de-

--- Page 13 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 183
picted at all in the art. Some of the largely neglected roles of which I am
thinking are that with his Sakti; that in his female form, Vainayaki; that of
a dancer; and that ina family scene, as in the familiar Indian Uma-Maheé§-
varamurti. There are no mainland Southeast Asian examples, of which I
am aware, of the first three types. While the absence of GaneSsa with his
sakti and in a female form can perhaps be understood in light of their rel-
ative scarcity in India, the lack of a dancing GaneSa, a very popular form
in India, is surprising. One possible reason for the absence of the dancing
GaneSa in Southeast Asian art is the rejection, as already noted, of his gana
nature; ganas love to dance and are frequently shown in Indian art playing
and dancing to music. GaneSga also, however, danced to mimic his father,
Siva. It is perhaps the late sixth-century relief in Badami Cave 1 where Ga-
ne§a, his feet still firmly planted on the ground, first attempts to mimic his
father’s dance by extending his right arm. This relief is of particular in-
terest as its type was the model for two seventh- to eighth-century Cham

' reliefs, one of which, from Mi-so’n A’.1, includes a GaneSa. The Mi-so’n
A’.1 GaneSa, placed in a relationship to Siva similar to that of his Badami
counterpart, gains some animation by extending his trunk in the air
toward his father, but cannot be considered dancing.®' In Cambodian re-
liefs of Siva dancing, Gane§a is also sometimes present, but he apparently
never dances himself.

Yet another early form of the dancing Gane§Sa in Indian art is that as-
sociated with the matrkas.@ The mothers, however, are not often found in
the art of Southeast Asia. Both the Cambodian examples of which I know
have GaneSa present, but he is seated.™

Gane§Sa is even more frequently depicted in Indian sculpture as ."anc-
ing alone than with other figures, yet no independent images exist in
Southeast Asia (there are very late, nineteenth- and twentieth-century, ex-
ceptions in Thailand). The absence is understandable due in part to the rel-
atively late popularity in India; examples before the eighth century are
very rare.® It is again, however, not the lateness of its probable introduc-
tion into Southeast Asia that is significant, but that by the eighth century
the Southeast Asian Ganega has the two primary roles discussed above
and was hesitant to adopt others.

The final neglected role, GaneSa in a family context, is also one that
occurs with any frequency only after the seventh century in Indian art. Ga-
ne§a’s familial role, as son to Siva and Parvati and brother to Skanda (Ku-
mara), is the one elaborated upon in the Puranic literature. The Puranas
defy precise chronological ordering, but the more detailed narratives of
Gane§a’s life are in the late texts (ca. 600-1300 A.D.). Artistic representa-
tions of GaneSa in a familial context tend to increase in popularity over

--- Page 14 ---
184 Robert L. Brown

time as well, culminating in the often tender scenes of Siva with his family
at home in the cremation grounds depicted in eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century Pahari paintings. On the whole, this role of Ganesa as family
member was not stressed in Southeast Asian art. It is not that Ganesa was
not frequently associated with Siva. He was, and with Skanda and Parvati
as well. The Prah Phnom inscription mentioned above (see the text given
in note 56) dedicates images of Siva, Uma, a linga, and the grahas, along
with Ganesa. The Hoa-qué stele of the Cham king Bhadravarman III,
dated 909 a.D., says the king’s mother dedicated images of Devi, Gana-
pati, and Kumara.” But it is clear that GaneSa is always being invoked as
an independent deity and an independent image.

GaneSa’s relation to Siva as a separate deity, rather than as son to
father, is stressed in what may be a unique Cambodian arrangement. Be-
fore introducing this innovation, however, I want to address generally the
extent of GaneSa’s iconographical and iconological novelty in the art of
mainland Southeast Asia. While there are dozens of regional modifica-_ .
tions, GaneSa’s iconographic changes have been on the whole minor. I
mean by this the visible changes, such as Ganesa in Cambodian art hold- |
ing the conch and the discus, Visnu’s attributes. Unfortunately, we have
no means (that is, no texts) to know what the precise iconological impress
(the level of symbol and meaning) may have been for this modification, as
well as for most others. Perhaps it indicated a radical shift from Indian per-
ceptions of Ganesa. The ““explanation’”’ on which scholars have relied for

_ the attributes is either Dupont’s ‘‘contamination de |’iconographie
vishnoutite’’*” or Bhattacharya’s ‘‘un syncrétisme religieux,’’** both of
which amount to almost the same thing and tell us very little.

Furthermore, as Getty has pointed out, these attributes as related to
Ganesa are not unknown in Indian texts.” In this regard, many of Bhat-
tacharya’s and Getty’s own suggested innovations need to be reconsidered
as Indian examples are found. One, for example, is Bhattacharya’s publi-
cation of a three-headed Cambodian Gane§Sa as ‘’unique in Brahmanical
iconography,’ and which Boisselier calls ‘‘une énigme iconograp-
hique.”’”' In actuality, the three-headed Gane§a is not unknown in medie-
val Indian art,” and the antique shops in Delhi are today filled with
wooden, South Indian three-headed GaneSas. There is even a twelfth-
century three-headed Gane§sa from Pagan in Burma.”

One unpublished Southeast Asian innovation, however, is as radical
as any change Ganesa underwent. The stone Cambodian stele in figure 20
shows Siva riding on a lion at the center, flanked by his two sons, Skanda
on the peacock on his left and GaneSa on an elephant on his right. This
triad is unusual in itself; it is never found, to my knowledge, in India. In

--- Page 15 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 185
Cambodian art it is also rare,” and I have not found it mentioned in the
scholarly literature. ,

The source for the arrangement and form of the deities and their ve-
hicles on the stele appear to be the depictions of the navagrahas in Cam-
bodia. The example from Kuk Roka (fig. 21) dates to 1001 A.D. As is stan-
dard in these reliefs, Ketu is the ninth deity and rides ona lion; Indra is the
central deity and rides on an elephant; Skanda appears infrequently as a
graha and in various positions on the reliefs, but here he is the fourth deity
and rides a peacock. It appears that the sculptor of the Los Angeles sculp-
ture used the familiar form of the grahas when depicting his Sivaite triad.
The adoption of an elephant as the vehicle of GaneSa (used for Indra on the
graha reliefs) must have seemed the most logical. Please remember that the
rat vehicle was not adopted in Cambodia.”

The next step that this iconography took was even more innovative.
Illustrated here are two tiny bronze triads, one from Cambodia (fig. 22)
and one probably from Thailand, but in the Khmer or Lopburi style (fig.
23). Dating to the twelve and tkurteenth century respectively, the deities

. and vehicles are the same as those on the stone relief, but an amazing
transformation has taken place. Ganesa has become fully human. Iam not
unaware of the irony and appropriateness in this change, considering that
the earliest literary references to Ganapati/Ganesa make no mention of an
elephant head and that GaneSa was probably initially an anthropomorphic
deity. It remains to be seen whether there are other such examples of Ga-

- nesa in Southeast Asian art that have gone unidentified because of their
fully human form.

V. GaneSa in Indonesian Art

GaneSa was extremely popular in the art of the islands of what is to-
day Indonesia, and nowhere in Southeast Asia did he adopt more novel
and interesting forms. The island material is largely unpublished and
unexplored, however, and I can here only note very briefly some of the
peaks of what remains a vast uncharted area of study. The earliest Ganesea
images in Indonesia may be those from the Dieng Plateau (fig. 24). These
sculptures deserve a careful study, but they do not, in my opinion, date
much before.the eighth century and can be compared with such eighth-
century Indian examples as the GaneSa in Cave 17 at Ellora.”” The Dieng
GaneéSas already have, as did the earliest mainland images, a style and ico-
nography of their own, as for example the “empty” modaka bowl and the
seated posture in which the soles of the feet press together before the
body. The first, the empty modaka bowl, connects the Dieng Ganesas to

--- Page 16 ---
186 Robert L. Brown

other Southeast Asian images, raising again the question of a Southeast
Asian aesthetic and its possible sources. The second example, the seated
posture, is almost always said to be found only in the Archipelago.” How-
ever, in the 1930s H. G. Quaritch Wales and his wife found at Kedah in Ma-
laysia a GaneSa seated in this posture. Wales wrote that “the soles of the
feet are represented as touching. This attitude seems to have been consid-
ered hitherto as found exclusively in Javanese GaneSas; but the present
discovery suggests that the attitude is of Indian origin.’’”* The posture does
indeed occur in Indian art, although I have found only one example, a
terra-cotta image in the collection of the Bharat Kala Bhavan.”

The posture and other characteristics of the Dieng Ganesas® contin-
ued to be popular for centuries in Indonesian art. There were, however,
particularly when compared to the mainland GaneSas, several major In-
donesian innovations. In Bali, for example, a GaneSa image was used as a
water spout at an important sacred bathing place, Goa-Gajah. The appar-
ent central location of the Ganesa between groups of human-figure spouts
suggests that the GaneSa was the focus at the bath. The exact significance
of this tenth-century Ganesa, however, has defied even the most thorough
and careful research.®!

On the other hand, a second unique Indonesian GaneSa has recently
been subjected to a sensitive analysis by Stanley O’Connor that helps to
explicate a hitherto enigmatic image.*®? At Candi Sukuh in central Java a re-
markable fifteenth-century relief shows three figures, an iron smith squat-

. ting on the proper right, a dancing Gane§Sa in the center, and a bellows op-
erator on the left (fig. 25).®° The scene is interpreted by O’Connor as
representing Bhima, the focus “‘of a cult of deliverance of souls during the
fifteenth century,’ as the smith who is miraculously forging iron, “iron
working ... [being] a metaphor for spiritual transmutation in ancient
Java.” O’Connor continues that

within the framework of Tantric thought, it is possible to discover the mean-

ing of the dancing elephant man who is the central figure of the relief. He

wears a crown and is GaneSa, the guardian of thresholds, the remover of ob-
stacles, and his presence here, in my view, embodies the process of crossing
over from one state to another through the transformative power of the me-
tallurgist’s art.”
It is thus Ganesa’s typical liminal character that enables him to play a role
in the metaphysical meaning of the relief. But it is Ganega in a demonic
guise: he is dancing on one leg, the other drawn up; he is nude with his
genitals exposed; and he holds in one hand a rosary of bones and in the

--- Page 17 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 187
other an animal, probably (according to O’Connor) a dog, the most un-
clean of animals and a scavenger of burial grounds.

The Sukuh artist’s choice of a Tantric form of Ganega can be under-
stood first of all because the matrix of fifteenth-century Javanese religion
is largely Tantric, and demonic Ganesa images, as we shall see, abound.
O’Connor, however, has suggested that “‘in our relief it is the darkly en-
ergetic dance of Ganesa, the guardian of thresholds, who brecks open a
path for the soul.’’®’ In other words, GaneSa’s unconventional form and ac-
tions are necessary, in the context of this relief, literally to dislodge the soul
from the dead person.

Before turning to other Tantric forms of GaneSa, I want only to add
one observation. The Sukuh GaneéSa is, O’Connor assumes, dancing. The
dance is appropriate considering the supposed Tantric nature of the relief,
as esoteric rituals frequently involve dancing. O’Connor suggests a possi-
ble connection between GaneSa’s dance posture and a 1932 account by W.
F. Sutterheim of a Javanese court dance, which includes such Tantric char-
acteristics as liquor and sex, in which a performer dances by hopping from
one foot to another.®* While this reference is helpful, another may be sug-
gested. GaneSa’s actual leg positions, with the night stiffly upright, the
other raised with the heel of the foot near the buttocks, is an Indian dance
pose;®? it is, however, a pose that is not common in Javanese dance, if we
may judge from contemporary practices.” In Indian dance the pose is as- .
sociated with Siva in his destructive manifestation, particularly as Kalari-
murti (the enemy of time, or death) and as Gajasurasamharamurti (de-
stroyer of the elephant demon). In South Indian art, the pose is most .
frequently used in depictions of Siva as the destroyer of the elephant de- |
mon. As in this thirteenth-century example from the Nataraja Temple at
Cidambaram (fig. 26), Siva in this dance posture is usually shown with his
legs in profile, buttocks in three-quarter view, and torso and head en face.
The profile depiction of the Sukuh GaneSa, while not identical, is worth
noting in this connection. It is also noteworthy that in some Indian myths
it is the destroyed elephant demon (Gajasara) that supplies Ganesa with
his elephant head. There are, in fact, myths in which GaneSa fights the el-
ephant demon himself, and Courtright discusses what he calls the “Siva-
Gajasura-GaneSa cycle of myths.’’?! I do not wish to make more of these
connections than is warranted, but assuming the Tantric practices associ-
ated with Gane§Sa came from India, as with the Ganacakra mentioned be-
low, would not the adoption of this destructive dance position of his father
have been appropriate for the demonic Gane§ga? In other words, might we

be seeing in the Sukuh GaneSa’s dance a reflection of an esoteric ritual
dance performed by GaneSa and his followers in India?

--- Page 18 ---
188 Robert L. Brown

The Sukuh dancing Gane§a shares his Tantric character with a num-
ber of other Javanese Ganesa images. The example I am illustrating (fig. 27)
comes from Singasari in Eastern Java but is today in the National Museum
in Bangkok, having been taken to Thailand, along with other Javanese
sculpture, by King Chulaiongkorn at the end of the nineteenth century.”
It is an image of enormous power, and at 1.72 meters in height is even
larger than the much more frequently illustrated monumental Singasan
Ganeéa now in Leiden. The two Singasari images are very similar, how-
ever, and share characteristics with many other Tantric Ganesas.** Among
these are their attributes: the upper hands hold an axe (parasu) and rosary
(aksamala), while both lower hands hold bowls depicted as skulls. The Tan-
tric nature of these images in fact rests entirely on this one motif, the skull.
As in the Bangkok Singasari GaneSa, skulls are used as adornment (in Ga-
nesa’s crown and earrings), as the bowls he holds, and as decoration
around the base (to suggest the cemetery?). The removal of the skulls for
most of these GaneSas, including that in Bangkok, would eliminate their
Tantric identification. The association of the skull with horrific Indian dei-
ties and the skull cup with Tantric rituals is well known. The skull is not,
however, seen with any frequency on Jndian GaneSas (Getty says it is ‘’a
purely Javanese conception’) although instances among the numerous
late (seventeenth century on), predominantly folk, and largely Tantric In-
dian metal Ganesas would hardly be surprising; Mrs. J. LeRoy Davidson,
for example, owns a late (eighteenth century?) metal Ganesa who holds a
severed head in one hand.

In Indonesian art, however, the skull, placed at the center of the jata
above a crescent moon, was a standard motif seen on central Javanese pe-
riod GaneSas (that is, eighth to tenth centuries). The source for this was
images of Siva, where this motif was frequently placed in the hair. The
twelfth- and fourteenth-century Javanese artists created their Tantric Ga-
neSas merely by multiplying this single skull.

The Bangkok Singasari Gane§a, as with many of the other Tantric Ga-
neSas, is carved against a stele and was intended to be placed in a temple
niche. The original location of the Leiden Singasari Ganega has been pro-
posed for a niche of a reconstructed temple at the site, the funerary shrine
of King Krtanagara, whose death in 1292 may have been due to a Tantric
ritual.*° Ganesa would have been placed in the temple’s rear or east niche,
with Durga (as Mahisasuramardini) in the north and Agastya in the
south.” This is precisely the arrangement found in Javanese temples dur-
ing the central Javanese period as well, so the Tantric nature of the eastern
Javanese GaneSa did not change his iconographic placement in the tem-
ples.

It is difficult, however, to know exactly what role Ganeéga may have

--- Page 19 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 189
played in his Tantric guise in Java. We do know from the fourteenth-cen-
tury Javanese text Nagara-Kértagama that the Singasari king mentioned
above, Krtanagara, ‘‘in His somewhat old age ... held to the esoteric
(sense) of all kriyds (rites).’’°* The poem goes on to mention specifically the
Ganacakra and Prayogakriya.” Elsewhere in the text Prayoga appears to re-
fer to GaneSa, as he is said to remove obstacles.'® The Ganacakra (Gana =
Gane§a) is referred to in Taranatha’s history as a nocturnal rite performed
on a burial ground.!°! Pigeaud comments that ‘evidently in Javanese eso-
teric religious thinking the elephant-god had the function of a guide, a pre-
parer of the Way.’ This is, of course, the role O’Connor suggests for the
Sukuh Gane§a, and it is consistent with the god’s most characteristic func-
tion as remover of obstacles on a worshiper’s path toward enlightenment.
It may be that no matter how complex and esoteric the Tantric rites and
their desired ends were, GaneSa’s basic role, his reason for being, re-
mained essentially the same as before.

One last innovation that substantiates the Indonesian GaneSa’s con-
tinuing function as creator and remover of obstacles is the addition to many
of a face of glory (kirttimukha) or face of time (kalamukha). The well-known
GaneSa from Bara dated 1239 is a good example (figs. 28 and 29). The kala
face is sculpted on the back of GaneSa’s own, and GaneSa’s upper arms
have the hands turned toward the rear, functioning simultaneously as

‘* those of GaneSa and of kala. The kalamukha is placed over temple doorways
and windows throughout Java, in order to keep out the unworthy butallow .
the prepared to enter.'® In other words, the kalamukha is a threshold
guardian, a creator and remover of obstacles, as is Ganega, and their jux-
taposition (or amalgamation) is conceptually appropriate. The Bara Ga-
neSa (figs. 28 and 29) was intended to be seen in the round, unlike the Sin-
gasari GaneSas, and perhaps the addition of the kalamukha was a device to
allow GaneSa’s protective power to emanate in all directions on images in-
tended to be placed in the open.

The presence of a kaélamukha on a Gane§Sa does not mean that the im-
age is Tantric. P. H. Pott has argued that the Bara Ganesa was recut when
skulls were added to what was assumedly a nondemonic image.' I have
also seen in a private collection a large central Javanese-period Ganesa
with a kalamukha. Nevertheless, the amalgamation became more popular
in later Indonesian art.

VI. Conclusions

Let me now make some final conclusions, including some drawn
from the brief discussion of Indonesian GaneSas. For mainland Southeast
Asia, the earliest Ganesa images date to the second half of the sixth cen-

--- Page 20 ---
190 Robert L. Brown

tury through the seventh and cover an area from Thailand to Vietnam.
They appear to’relate most closely to the earliest (that is, fifth century or
earlier) Indian examples. These earliest Southeast Asian GaneSas do not
relate as closely to their contemporaneous sixth- and seventh-century In-
dian GaneSas. There is, therefore, an unexplained time lag of one to two
or more centuries between the Indian model and the Southeast Asian re-
lated image.

Even with the earliest Southeast Asian GaneSsas, however, there is a
homogeneity of style, a Southeast Asian aesthetic, and not a direct copy-
ing of Indian forms This Southeast Asian interrelation is seen as well in
the eighth century, in this instance among three monumental images from
Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam. These images had their own temples
in which they were the focus of worship. Their size and placement indicate
that Ganesa was a god of importance. The seventh-century Ganesa from
Prasai Prei Kuk with its inscription supports the possibility that Ganesa
was regarded as a supreme deity.

GaneSa’s most popular role in mainland Southeast Asian art, how-
ever, is as remover of obstacles, a function thoroughly documented in
Cham and Cambodian inscriptions. Other roles Indian GaneSas assumed __-
were on the whole rejected by the Southeast Asians.

In adopting Ganesa, the Southeast Asians made some consistent
modifications. For example, the god’s yaksa form was usually not ac-
cepted. He was given more human proportions and a more formal, iconic
stance. Nevertheless, major iconographic innovations were slight.

In Indonesia, the earliest GaneSa images are later than on the main-
land, dating perhaps to the eighth century. They do not reflect the earliest
Indian Ganesa type but that of the contemporaneous (that is, eighth cen-
tury) Indian GanesSas. But, like the early mainland GaneSas, the early In-
donesian images have their own style and iconography that define them as
separate from the Indian GaneSas but connect them to those of the main-
land. :

Ganesa was extremely popular in Indonesia, and he took a number
of innovative forms. He adopted a demonic form as Tantric practices be-
came important. His function as threshold guardian and obstacle remover,
however, appears to have remained his primary role.

It is, in fact, this role that best explains GaneSa’s ready adaptability
throughout Southeast Asia. GaneSa is the god whose aid is enlisted before
any task is undertaken, including the worship of other deities. In this ca-
pacity, Ganesa must be worshiped frequently and is largely nonsectarian.
He therefore could be adopted by various sects, classes, and castes of Hin-
dus and even by Buddhists in Southeast Asia.'°* His use by various sects

--- Page 21 ---
Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art 191
was facilitated by his being usually depicted as an independent icon in
Southeast Asian art and thus free of exclusive Sivaite associations inherent
in many narrative contexts. The Southeast Asian GaneSa’s nonsectarian
character is apparent in his adoption, as noted above, of Visnu’s attributes,
the conch and the wheel. A metal plaque in the collection of the Los An-
geles County Museum of Art (fig. 30) exemplifies the independence that, |
think, helped Gane§ga win broad popularity. The plaque shows a two-
armed Siva standing between Visnu on his left and Gane§a on his right.
Both Visnu and GaneéSa hold in their upper hands the conch and wheel
and, in their identical size, demonstrate that they are considered of equal
importance and in a similar relationship to Siva.!

While GaneSa was used by the Buddhists in Southeast Asia as well
as the Hindus, he never became an important Buddhist deity as he did, for
example, in Nepal and Tibet. The only exception would be such eastern
Javanese GaneSas as those from Singasari, if, participating as they do in
the idiosyncratic Buddhist/Sivaite religion of the time, they can be consid-
ered to be Buddhist. Otherwise, we can cite the small Ganesa plaques and

_ figures from Pagan in Burma that Luce published.” Of interest here are

~ the examples that sit in padmdsana and, although four-armed, place one _
right hand, holding a rosary, in the earth-touching gesture (bhumisparsa- ;
mudra).'° While the exact meaning is not known, the Buddhist context is
clear. In Cambodian art, GaneSa appears on bells with Buddha images
(figs. 31, 32, and 33). These bells were used in religious rituals by the

_ priests, and GaneSa’s role as remover of obstacles again makes his appear-
ance here appropriate.'” Such relatively minor uses of Gane§ga as these by
the Buddhists at Pagan and in Cambodia occur within what appears to be
the limited iconological parameters for the Southeast Asian Ganesa
sketched above.

If then, our final summation is that the Southeast Asian GaneSa
tended to rely predominantly on his role as Vinayaka, remover of obsta-
cles, for his popularity, he nevertheless took such numerous and inventive
forms as to place him among the major artistic and intellectual accomplish-
ments of the area.

NOTES |

1. The quotation is from a manuscript, written in Tamil grantha script, kept
in the National Library in Bangkok. It has been published by Neelakanta Sarma,
Textes Sanskirts et Tamouls de Thailande (Pondichery: Institut Francaise d’Indologie,
1972), 86.
