--- Page 1 ---
2 J e e e

GaneSa’s Rise to Prominence in

Sanskrit Literature

CCCs Rocher

S cholars who have studied GaneSa and the GaneSa cult in India often

express surprise concerning two facts that are seemingly difficult to

reconcile. On the one hand, there is Ganesa’s enormous popularity, at

least in modern times: he “was, and still is, the most universally adored of

all Hindu gods.” On the other hand, there is the fact that he appears rather

late on the scene in Indian religion; Ganesa was ‘‘among the latest deities
to be admitted to the Brahmanic pantheon.”!

Gane§a’s true rise to prominence, as far as Sanskrit literature is con-
cerned, is connected with the Puranas.” Not only does he make occasional
appearances in a large number of Puranic texts; some Puranas reserve en-
tire sections for him, and two Puranas are exclusively devoted to the G ina-
patya cult.

Surveying the entire Puranic literature dealing with Ganesa would
require more than an article. Before touching on some of these materials,
I will first concentrate on some rare references to Gane§Sa in that section of
Indian literature that is generally considered to be older than the Puranas.

The term ganapati appears as early as the Vedic Samhitas. In fact, it
appears twice in the oldest of all Vedic texts, the Reveda. | am convinced,
though, that neither passage has any connection with god Ganesa. One
passage (2.23.1),

gananam tva ganapatim havamahe

kavim kavinam upaméésravastamam
jyestharajam brahmanam brahmanaspata
a nah érnvann atibhih sida sadanam,"
clearly refers to Brhaspati— who is the devata of the hymn—and Brhaspati
only. The second passage (10.112.9),
69

--- Page 2 ---
70 Ludo Rocher
ni su sida ganapate ganésu
tvam ahur vipratamam kavinam,‘

equally clearly refers to Indra. Expressions such as gandnam ganapatim or
ganapate ganesu —as well as brahmanam brahmanaspate at Rgveda 2.23.1 —
are well known in the Veda. They mean nothing more than that Brhaspati°
and Indra® were heads of ganas. They do not imply that either Brhaspati or
Indra were ever given the name Ganapati.’

Even though, from a strictly historical point of view, within the con-
text of the Reveda these passages have no connection whatever with Ga-
nesa, they had to be mentioned — for, as far as I know, at least the first one
is quoted repeatedly in later Ganapatya literature. When the authors of
more recent Ganapatya texts look for Vedic respectability for their deity,
they do so by quoting the Rgvedic verse gananam tva ganapatim havamahe.*

Far more important for the study of GaneSa in early Indian literature
are two texts belonging to the Black Yajurveda. Both the Maitrayaniya Sam-
hita and Taittiriya Aranyaka exhibit a series of gdyatris. These gdyatris, how-
ever, are not addressed to Savitr, as was the case in the original gayatri in
the Reveda (3.62.10), but to such deities as Rudra, Garuda, Durga, and
Visnu. One gayatri in particular is addressed to a deity called ‘’Danti” or
“Dantin.” Thus, in the Maitrayaniya Samhita (2.9.1):

tat karataya vidmahe

hastimukhaya dhimahi

tan no danti pracodayat;
and in the Tuittiriya Aranyaka (10.1):

tat purusaya vidmahe

vakratundaya dhimahi

tan no dantih pracodayat.

Both texts clearly appeal to a deity Danti(n) ‘the tusked one,’’ who, more-
over, is called hastimukha ‘“‘elephant-faced” in one text, and vakratunda
‘with a curved trunk” in the other. These terms are, indeed, very sugges-
tive of Ganesa. As a matter of fact, Sayana explicitly establishes the iden-
tification in his commentary on the Aranyaka.°

I now proceed to the next “period” in early Sanskrit literature: the
Sutras and Sastras. The Manava Grhyasutra devotes an entire chapter (2.14)
to four vindyakas: Salakatankata, Kusmandarajaputra, Usmita, and Deva-
yajana. It describes, at length, the sufferings of those who are possessed
by these dreadfully malignant creatures. The text, subsequently, pre-
scribes the necessary rites to propitiate them, including offerings of raw
and cooked fish and meat.

--- Page 3 ---
Ganesa’s Rise to Prominence 71

Even though, at some time, Vinayaka became a name of GaneSa,
there is little in the Manava Grhyasitra to suggest that its vindyakas are con-
nected with him. The passage, however, becomes important when we
compare it to a passage from the Yajnavalkyasmrti (1.271 —94).'° The verses
in the Yajnavalkyasmrti are very similar to— occasionally identical with —
the text of the Manava Grhyasitra. Yajnavalkya enumerates the same four
vinayakas, although in the Mitaksara version" their number has been in-
creased to six: Mita, Sammita, Sala, Katankata, Kusmanda, and Rajapu-
tra. The signs of being possessed by the vindyakas are similar to those
listed in the Grhyasutra, and so are the means of propitiating them, al-
though these now include such items as radish (miulaka), cakes, and sweet-
meats (modaka). But there are also significant differences between the two
texts. First, the four—or six—vindyakas of the Yajnavalkyasmrti are said to
be only different manifestations of one single Vinayaka, the Vinayaka. Sec-
ond, this single Vinayaka was appointed by Brahma and Rudra as the re-

_ mover of obstacles and as the lord of ganas (gananam adhipatye). Third, the
Vinayaka of the Yajnavalkyasmrt1is, explicitly, called ‘‘“Mahaganapati,”’ and
the text reveals the name of his mother: Ambika.”

Some of the data examined so far—a god Danti(n) called hastimukha
and vakratunda in the Black Yajurveda, and the Vinayaka of the Yajnavalkya-
smrti— might seem sufficient to conclude to a relatively early date for the
appearance of Gane§a in Sanskrit literature. This conclusion is, however,
jeopardized by the place GaneSa occupies in the epics.

The Mahabharata knows the vindyakas,”? but they are malignant de-
mons, even as the bhitas, rdksasas, and pisdcas. The Mahabharata also
knows the terms Ganesa, Ganadhipa, Ganakara, Ganakrt, and Ganapati, but
they invariably refer to Siva.'4

The single passage in which the real Ganesa appears in the epic has
not fared well with Mahabharata scholars. I am referring here to the pas-
sage in which GaneSa is said to have written down the entire Mahabharata
at the dictation of Vyasa. Ganesa mischievously accepted to do so on one
condition, that Vyasa never stop dictating. Vyasa, in turn, accepted Ga-
nesa’s challenge on the condition that he only write down if and what he
understands. Vyasa then dictated such complicated sentences that Ga-
ne§sa could not help halting and, thereby, provide Vyasa with the pauses
he needed.

Moriz Winternitz was first to draw attention to one of the distinctive
features of the Southern manuscripts of the Mahabharata: ‘‘A remarkable
omission is that of the legend of Ganesa, who, at the request of Vyasa,
writes down the whole of the Mahabharata.”’> The story appears in the in-
troductory scene of RajaSekhara’s Balabharata or Pracandapandavanataka —
in which Vyasa and Valmiki inquire from each other about the progress of

--- Page 4 ---
72 Ludo Rocher

their respective works. On the other hand, it is absent from Ksemendra’s
Bharatamanjari, so Winternitz was prepared to accept that the story was
known ca. 900 A.D., but he also maintained that it was not part of the Ma-
habharata in Ksemendra’s time, some 150 years later. He concluded, even
more generally, “that (as far as I am able to see) it is very doubtful whether
the elephant-headed god can claim a place in the Epic Pantheon.’’’®

To Winternitz’s arguments we may add that the story was known to
al-Birunt:

Vyasa asked Brahman to procure him somebody who might write for him
the Bharata from his dictation. Now he entrusted with this task his son Vi-
nayaka, who is represented as an idol with an elephant’s head, and made it
obligatory on him never to cease writing. At the same time Vyasa made it
obligatory on him to write only that which he understood. Therefore Vyasa,
in the course of his dictation, dictated such sentences as compelled the
writer to ponder over them, and thereby Vyasa gained time for resting
awhile.’

Whatever the case may be, the editors of the critical edition of the
Mahabharata seem to have agreed with Winternitz. The twenty-line pas-
sage has been relegated not only to an appendix — the normal procedure
for suspect passages— but to a footnote to an appendix.'* In doing this, V.
S. Sukthankar clearly underscored his belief that the Mahabharata — the
‘Encyclopaedia Brahmanica” as he called it— did not know GaneSa. Even
if his decision ultimately proved to be wrong, and even if the passage
about the dictation of the Mahabharata could indeed be claimed as an inte-
gral part of the epic, the fact remains that a single reference to GaneSa in
the itthdsa is in sharp and as yet inexplicable contrast with the important
role GaneSa plays in the Puranas, to which we now turn our attention.

As far as the Mahapuranas are concerned, as could be expected, Ga-
nea appears in those texts that the tradition classifies as tamasa—or Saiva
— Puranas. He does, indeed, appear in the Siva, Linga,”" Skanda,?? and
Agni Puranas.” Gane§Sa plays no role in such sattva— or Vaisnava — Pur-
anas as the Visnu or the Bhagavata Purana,*4 but he is present in the Varaha
Purana.® The Garuda Purana includes him among the major gods,” and the
Padma Purana describes his cult.”” Among the rajasa Puranas GaneSa ap-
pears in the Bhavisya,”* Brahma,” Brahmanda,® and Vamana Puranas.*' More
important, he is the sole object of the entire Ganesa or Ganapatikhanda of the
Brahmavaivarta Purana, in forty-six chapters.*

Several Upapuranas® deal with Gane§a, including two that are en-
tirely devoted to him. The Ganesa Purana* consists of two parts: the Upa-

--- Page 5 ---
Ganesa’s Rise to Prominence 73
sanakhanda, with 92 chapters, and the Kridakhanda (also called Uttarakhanda
in the colophons), with 155. Chapters 138-48 of the second part constitute
the Ganesa Gita,* a shorter version of the Bhagavad Gita, displaying a num-
ber of verses practically borrowed from the latter, but adapted to relay a
new message. The Mudgala Purana, a complete edition of which appeared
only recently,* is a much longer text. It is divided into nine khandas, with
a total of 428 adhyayas, each khanda being devoted to the story (carita) of
a different manifestation of Ganega: Vakratunda, Ekadanta, Mahodara,
Gajanana, Lambodara, Vikata, Vighnaraja, Dhumravarna, and Yoga (a
combination of different forms of Gane§Sa).

As I indicated earlier, this article is not the place for an exhaustive
survey of the vast Puranic literature connected with Gane§a. In the follow-
ing pages I will restrict myself to pointing out a number of general trends I
have perceived in the course of extensive but as yet incomplete readings of
Puranic GaneSa materials.

Above all, one cannot help being struck by the fact that the numerous
stories surrounding GaneSa concentrate on an unexpectedly limited num-
ber of incidents. These incidents are mainly three: his birth and parent-
hood, his elephant head, and his single tusk. Other incidents are touched
on in the texts, but to a far lesser extent. ;

For instance, the Puranas, like iconography, know that GaneSa’s
mount is a rat. GaneSa is called adhasthan musakanvitam.*’ When all the
gods offered him presents after his name-giving ceremony, the Earth gave
him a rat to serve as his vehicle.** Yet even the story in the Ganesa Purana
(2, ch. 134) that, in the dvdparayuga, Vamadeva cursed the Gandharva
Kraunca to become a rat, which, to punish it for its misbehavior, Gajanana
made into his own vahana, does not explain the special connection be-
tween both. Hence modern speculations that Ganega did so “because of
its mischievous character,”’ or that Ganesa in some way became connected
with agriculture and that “some agricultural deity, riding a rat, was iden-
tified with him.’’? Or, since musaka also means “‘thief,’”’ the rat as GaneSa’s
vehicle “‘implies that he is riding over the thief of the field (field rat).’"*°
Elsewhere the rat is “‘the animal that finds its way to every place.’’*! One
scholar reminds us that the rat ‘‘is a totem of at least one Dravidian tribe,
the Oraons,”’ and uses this argument to claim Dravidian origin for Ga-
nesa.*”

Similarly, very little attention is paid to the question whether or not
Ganeé§a is married, and, if he is, to the name and identity of his wife — or
wives. To quote Venkatakrishna Rao,* the texts ‘‘are not agreed as to
whether he is married or not.’’ There are texts that describe GaneSa’s wed-
ding to Siddhi and Buddhi,* the daughters of Prajapati Visvarupa. On the

--- Page 6 ---
74 Ludo Rocher

other hand, descriptions of Ganesa as siddhi-buddhi-samanvita ‘‘accom-
panied by, followed by siddhi and buddhi,”’ often seem to mean no more
than that, when Ganeé§a is present, siddhi ‘‘success” and buddht ‘‘wisdom”
are not far behind. Such may well have been the original conception, of
which the marriage was a later development.

The relatively few incidents in Ganesa’‘s life that are told in the Pur-
anas display two principal trends. First, not only are they told again and
again; they are also told in an infinite variety of ways. The GanesSa stories
are a perfect illustration of the ‘‘variants and multiforms’’® that are char-
acteristic of Purana literature generally. In this particular case the compos-
ers of the Puranas were obviously aware of the situation, and they formu-
lated their own justification for it:

The story of how GaneSa came into being is told differently in different kal-

pas. Sometimes his head was cut off when Sani looked at him. Here we will

tell the story of Ganeéa as it is told in the Sveta(varaha)kalpa, and according
to which his head was cut off by the merciful Siva.*

The second trend I perceive in the Puranic GaneSa stories in some
ways counterbalances the one just mentioned. The point is that, behind
the many variants and multiforms of each of the principal incidents in Ga-
neSa’s life, there are certain basic, unifying ideas. To be sure, we meet with

rare stories that are totally isolated from the mainstream; in general, how-
ever, the variants and multiforms are based on some common denomina-
tor. I will now illustrate the interaction between these two trends for the
Puranic stories dealing with the three main events in Gane§a’s life.

Although the stories surrounding his birth vary greatly, there is,
without doubt, one common element that underlies most of them.

Only in very exceptional cases is it Siva who takes the initiative to cre-
ate Gane§a. In the Linga Purana’’ Siva himself created GaneSa at the re-
quest of the aevas, to remove the obstacles the gods were subjected to on
the part of the daityas. Ambika, like the other gods, praised the newborn
lord of the ganas. Or, again at the request of the gods, Siva created, from
his laughter (hasatah), a being endowed with all the qualities of lord Para-
mesthin, truly a second Rudra.*

In most birth stories, however, it is Parvati, not Siva, who is anxious
to have a son. It is she who tries, hard but unsuccessfully, to convince Siva
to have a son with her. For this reason Ganesa becomes the son of Parvati
alone, not of Siva. Even though this may, in last resort, have more to do
with the nature of Siva than the nature of Ganeéa, GaneSa’s status is,
nevertheless, very much determined by it.

--- Page 7 ---
| Ganesa’s Rise to Prominence 75
; For example, in one text,’ in answer to Parvati’s insistent request,
Siva makes it clear to her that he does not want, in fact does not need, a
son. Sons are necessary for householders who will eventually die and need
sons to perform the ritual for the dead (putrah pindaprayojanah). He, how-
ever, is not a householder; he is immortal.

I am not subject to death, so I do not need a son, o Devi. When there is no

illness, what is the use of taking medicine against it?

In another text Siva himself is made to fell Parvati that GaneSa is her son;
and he explains that GaneSa will be called ‘‘Vinayaka’’ because he was
born nayakena vind, ‘without the intervention of a husband.’’>!

In the case of GaneSa’s birth, this first common denominator — the
fact that he is not really Siva’s son — finds its counterpart in a second one.
Most texts insist, often with words put in the mouth of Siva himself, that
Siva fully approves of Uma’s child, and that he is pleased to have him as a
son.

For instance, in the aforementioned passage from the Vamana Purana
Siva is said to have been pleased when he saw the child;>? and immediately
after his etymological explanation of the name Vinayaka as nayakena vina,
he proudly predicts:

Vinayaka will create thousands of obstacles for the gods and everyone else;

and, o Devi, the worlds, both movable and immovable, will worship him.*
Also, there are numerous indications in the texts to the effect that Ganesa
resembles Siva, in fact that Siva wants “his son” to be exactly like him-
self.

Against the background of these two common elements the birth
stories of GaneSa go in different directions. In several stories Ganesa is
born from the mala of Parvati’s body, which she rubs off during or after a
bath. Sometimes® Parvati creates this son because Nandin proves to be an
inadequate gatekeeper while she is taking her bath; Siva just has to rebuke
Nandin to be allowed in and disturb Parvati’s bathing. The goddess then
decides to create her own gatekeeper who will listen to her orders and to
no one else’s. Ganesa, indeed, becomes the ideal gatekeeper, who fights
off the ganas and Siva himself. .

In a variant on this story Siva and Parvati are engaged in mahamoha,
so much so that the gods become afraid that the son born of their union
will be imperishable, and deprive them all, including Indra, of their ex-
alted positions. They go to Siva and have him agree to have his semen

--- Page 8 ---
76 Ludo Rocher
drunk by Agni, rather than having a son with Parvati. Parvati is angry,
bathes,°” and out of her mala creates Ganeéa. The text even calls him ma-
lapurusa (v. 65b).

In another text>® Parvati beholds Krsna and desires a son like him.
Her subsequent lovemaking with Siva is interrupted by Visnu in the dis-
guise of a beggar. Asa result, Siva’s semen does not enter Parvati’s womb,
but falls on the bed. At the end of a long discourse by the beggar, Visnu
suddenly disappears, hastily takes on the form of a newborn boy, and
mixes himself with Siva’s seed. A voice from the sky announces to Parvati
that Krsna has manifested himself in her house as her son. Parvati, Siva,
and all the other gods rejoice in the birth of Ganesa.

Elsewhere” a very different story is told. Siva, upset because of Par-
vati’s incessant requests to have a son, finally promises that he will make
one for her to kiss. He pulls Parvati’s clothes off and shapes them in the
form of a child.*! Parvati, in disbelief, takes the doll on her lap; it falls on
the floor, comes to life, and addresses her, ‘“mam, mam”’ (v. 29d).

I now pass on to the second major element in the mythology of Ga-_ -
neSa, the fact that we are dealing with a deity with the head of an elephant.

There are Puranic stories according to which Gane§ga was actually
born in that form. For example, when Siva agreed to have his semen drunk
by Agni rather than deposit it in Parvati’s womb, Uma was, understanda-
bly, angry, and she created a son out of the dirt of her body. The text ex-
plicitly says: malac cakre gajananam.” The possibility that we might have to
interpret the term gajdnana as merely anticipatory — ‘‘a son who later
would be called Gajanana’’® — is eliminated later in the chapter. When
Siva and Parvati were again united on the throne, with the malapurusa at
their feet, Uma realized “the wonderful thing that, from the dirt of her
body, she had produced a divine being that was elephant-headed.’’

The expression naram cakre gajananam also appears in other texts. Ac-
cording to one story® Parvati rubbed scented oil mixed with powder over
her body and, with the dirt of her body, “produced a male being with an
elephant’s head.” Sportingly she threw her son in the Ganga, where his
body expanded enormously, until he eventually filled the entire world.
Parvati called him “son,” but so did Ganga, whence his name Gangeya.
The gods worshiped him, and Brahma appointed him as the lord of the
ganas.

Although there are, therefore, texts according to which Ganega was
born elephant-headed,® these are the exceptions. As a rule, Ganeéa ac-
quired the head of an elephant at a later stage only, be it in different ways.

I referred earlier to the story of Sani, “Saturn.” According to this leg-
end,°” when GaneSa was born, Parvati proudly wanted to show him to -

--- Page 9 ---
Ganesa’s Rise to Prominence 77
Sani. Sani, however, the kriiradré (“evil-eyed”’) was cursed that anything
he would look at would be burned to ashes. When he was encouraged to
look at GaneSa, he did so reluctantly, with one eye only. Ganega’s head
was, nevertheless, reduced to ashes. Visnu immediately mounted Garuda
and flew northward. There he found an elephant exhausted from inter-
course with his mate; he cut off his head, and returned to join it to the body
of GaneSa.

Notwithstanding this story of Sani, in which Siva plays no role, in the
vast majority of cases Ganeéa is beheaded by Siva, who then replaces — or
orders replaced — the missing head with that of an elephant. The stories,
again, vary in detail, but there clearly is one single, broad motivation be-
hind them. Whenever Gane§a is beheaded by or through Siva, this hap-
pens ‘because he has come between Siva and Parvati in some way.”

In one story,” after Siva killed and beheaded Ganega — as Parvati's
doorkeeper—in a fierce battle, the goddess became so angry that the gods
feared an untimely world destruction. She threatened that only if her son
be brought back to life would there again be peace in the worlds. Sivathen

sent the gods to the northern region, with the order to cut off the head of
the first being they met. This happened to be a single-tusked elephant.

_’ They brought the head with them, attached it to Ganega’s body, and Siva
revived him.

Elsewhere” GaneSa is said to have been born from Prakrti— ob-
viously, here, the ParaSakti of Siva. Siva, who does not know him, engages
in a battle with him. The interesting point here is that GaneSa is said to be
“mounted on an elephant” (gajariidha) and that Siva uses his trigila to kill
both Ganeéga and his elephant. The Paragakti praises Siva and obtains a
boon. She then tells Siva that he has killed her son and asks him to bring
him back to life. Siva revives the mayaputra and attaches the elephant’s
head to the body of GaneSa.”! |

In the story from the Varaha Purana, in which Siva created Ganesa
from his laughter, he soon became jealous and afraid that his son might
allure the ladies. He himself cursed Ganesa to become elephant-headed,
to have a protruding belly, and to carry a garland of serpents around his
neck.”

The question why GaneSa’s head was replaced with that of an ele-
phant rather than that of any other living being is, as far as I know, not ad-
dressed in the texts. The one form of the legend that establishes a connec-
tion between Gane§a and the elephant that was his mount prior to his
death, seems to be a rationalization rather than an explanation. It might be
worth noting that, in some cases at least,” the elephant whose head was
to replace GaneSa’s was none else than Indra’s mount, Airavata.

--- Page 10 ---
78 Ludo Rocher

There has been quite some speculation among modern scholars on
the date—and the reason why—Gane§Sa was provided with the head of an
elephant. According to Bhandarkar,” ‘When and how the god came to
have an elephant’s head, is difficult to determine.” Based on the first
stanza in Bhavabhtti’s Mdlatimadhava he considered the beginning of the
eighth century as the only certain terminus ante quem. Hazra” examined a
wider variety of sources and concluded that the elephant head ‘‘must have
been added to him at a comparatively late date,’’ however ‘‘earlier than the
sixth century A.D.” As to the reason why this happened, Hazra suggests
either that it “may be due .. . to the mediaeval idea about the queer forms
of Siva’s Ganas,” or, based on Ganega Purana passages (1.46.48,72—73), “to
his identification with some popular deity conceived and worshiped for
immunity from havoc created by wild elephants.’’”°

Without pursuing the problem any further in this paper, I would like
to suggest two approaches toward a possible solution. First, there is in
Hindu mythology a parallel case in which the burnt head of Daksa is, at
Siva’s command, replaced with that of a goat. Understanding the symbol-
ism that made Siva relate the figure of Daksa to a goat might help us un-
derstand the reason why Gane§a’s head was replaced with that of an ele-
phant.” Another possible approach to understanding Gane§a’s elephant
head might be through further investigation into the role and meaning of
the elephant in classical India — and elsewhere.”8 Writers on this subject
notice that ‘’from the most ancient classic times this sagacious and most

’ useful animal has been known.” Elsewhere too, “the elephant’s head is
the emblem of sagacity.””” Or, “in India at any rate the idea of hugeness is
conveyed by comparison with an elephant, the biggest animal known.’’8!
The elephant is “the greatest and most interesting of Indian animals.’’®?

The third prominent element in the Ganesa myths is the fact that his
elephant head only has a single tusk. The explanations in the texts of how
this unusual situation came about are, once again, very different. Either
Gane§a’s elephant head was single tusked from the time he acquired it, or
one tusk was lost at a later stage. Both alternatives appear in the literature.

In the story from the Siva Purana referred to earlier, Siva, after be-
heading GaneSa, sent the gods northward with the order to cut off the
head of the first living being they would encounter, which happened to be
a single-tusked elephant.**

It seems, however, that, even as with GaneSa being born with an el-
ephant’s head, his being single tusked from the beginning is the exception
rather than the rule. It is my impression that Hindu mythology prefers him
to lose one of his original two tusks, although those responsible for it may
be different. In one Puranic story* it is Parasurama who cuts off a tusk,

--- Page 11 ---
Ganesa’s Rise to Prominence 79
when he comes to visit his teacher, Siva, in Kailasa. GaneSa, in his role as
gatekeeper, refuses him entrance because Siva is resting. In the ensuing
battle ParaSurama cuts off one tusk. But there are also stories in which Ra-
vana cuts off the tusk,®> or in which Gane§a loses his tusk because of a
wager with Skanda on who could go most quickly around the earth.®

In conclusion, there is no doubt that in classical Indian literature Ga-
neSa comes to real prominence in the Puranas, which are considered to be
relatively late texts. Admittedly, the fact that a particular element appears
in the texts at a certain moment does not prevent it from having existed
earlier, even much earlier. In the case of GaneSa the gayatris to Danti(n) in
texts belonging to the Black Yajurveda might be taken as an indication that
he, by far, antedates the Puranas. This does not, however, solve the prob-
lem of GaneSa’s absence from the epics, especially the Mahabharata, which
deals with anything imaginable. The story of his writing down the Mahab-
harata at the dictation of Vyasa looks like an effort, ex post facto, to connect
Gane§a with the epic, even an effort to do so in a big way.

NOTES

1. Both quotations are from Alice Getty, Ganesa: A Monograph on the Elephant-
faced God (1936; reprint ed., Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1971), 1. Among those
who claim an early origin for GaneSa are Auguste Barth, The Religion of India (Lon-
don: Kegan Paul, 1921), 197, with a— casual and undocumented — statement on
GaneSa as a god “whom we meet with early as the god of arts and letters’’; and

_ Haridas Mitra, ‘“Ganapati,’”” The Vishva-bharati Quarterly 8 (1930—31):461-81, who
argues that ‘‘the beginnings of GaneSa worship must be pushed back at least to the
Indo-Skythian and Indo-Parthian periods of Indian History, or perhaps even ear-
lier.”’

2. This paper was written for the Ganesga conference, prior to the publication
of Paul Courtright’s study Ganesa: Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1985). On Gane§a’s rise in relation to Skanda/Karttikeya,
see Juan Roger Riviere, ‘“The Problem of GaneSa in the Puranas,”’ Puranam 4
(1962):96— 102.

3. Trans. Griffith: ‘“Lord and Leader of the heavenly hosts’; Geldner: ‘dich,
den Herrn der (Sadnger)scharen.”

4. Trans. Griffith: “Lord of the hosts, amidst our bands be seated’’; Geldner:
“‘Setz dich fein nieder, du Herr der Schar, unter den (Sadnger)scharen.”

5. Cf. Rgveda 4.50.5, which says of Brhaspati: “sa sustubha sa rkvata ganéna va-
lam ruroja:’ Sayana: ‘’ganena angirasam.”’ See also Aitareyabrahmana 1.12.1, etc.

6. Cf. Reveda 6.40.1: “utd pra gaya gand a nisddya. ..."’ Sayana: “gane ‘smatsto-
trsamghe.”

7. Cf. the expression rudrasya ganapatyam, ‘‘Rudra’s leadership,” in several Ya-
jurvedic texts (Taittiriya Samhita 4.1.22; 5.1.23; Vajasaneyi Samhita 11.15; etc.).
