--- Page 1 ---
mon

het

—

tat

ms

=

Lo

a

onl

ney

=z -

=o

=

aw"

i. BT

meee 94.5515
HER

--- Page 2 ---
The Problem
Of
GanaPati

H. HERAS
With Introduction by Shri Jamuna Dass Akhtar
Indological Book House
DELHI 1972 VARANASI

--- Page 3 ---
aan
LEK
TONGA ue
To
‘h eure )\
of +8
3 ae af
SOO Sree,
PUBLISHED BY GAJENDRA SINGH FOR
INDOLOGICAL BOOK HOUSE & PRINTED
AT NEW ERA OFFSET PRINTERS, DELHI-6,

--- Page 4 ---
CONTENTS

CHAPTER Page

|. THESON OF GOD IN THE VEDA... . 2.001

Il - THE GENERATION OF THESONOF GOD. . >. 4

Hi. TH@ PHILOSOPHY OF GOD'S PATERNITY . . 1. 8

1V . THR BEGINNING OF THE INDIVIDUALIZATION . ..

OF THE SON OF GOD re |

V »MURUGAN-SKANDA IS THESONOF SIVA... 18
VI. THE APPEARANCE AND DEVELOPMENT...

OF GANAPATL © 6 2 2. Py
VIE-SKANDA AND GANESA 2 6. Dee 40
VIIL- THE STORY OF GANESA’s ORIGINS © 2... 4%
1X. THE GANAPATI‘S CONNECTIONS WITH»...

SKANDA , 0. 2. 0 eee 34
X - TRUTH ABOLT GANESA’SBIRTH . . 2... C1)
XI-CONCLUSION 5 0. ot 63
APPENDIX
Plates 1 To XL

--- Page 5 ---
a

of Ganesa wearing a datamubuta. The image stands on a pedestal placed in the centre
of a yon-shaped sacrificial stone. This image was discovered in Java, Another image of
Ganesa found on the Diang platea at Tanda Priksic (lava) is seared on a lotus throne
supported by two ganas, Ina niche in che ruins of a temple near Dena Weediel, in Java,
a fine stone image of Ganesa was found which is now in Lesden, He is represented
as a four-armed god carrying tbe usual symbols and wearing a high Jata-mubuta on his
bead, One of the most remarkable examples of this ¢ype is the celebrated Singasart
statue. Unlike the other images ot Ganesa :n Java, thw soles of the feet of this image
do not touch and the night knee is raised in almost the maharasaita pose."

‘The Balanise Gane “is represented short and thickesz, with che head often
disproportionately large and wearing a huge and comphcated crown, in graduated tiers
of leaf-motives with an ornament in the centre. He usually has the third eye and his
normal eyes are large, often gogéled, and sometimes round and staring.”

Ganesa is also called Siddiudatza, “Bestower of success.” His adoration was taken
over by the Buddhists, eho claimed that 2 mystic mantra in praise af the Elephant.
faced god, called the Ganapatr-Ardya was dixlosed to Ananda by the Buddia himself at
Rajgrha, The maniva reters 2 Ganesa and contains a sadaana to be used in his invoca-
tion, According co a Buddinst legend, one of the daughters of Asoka founded a tenple
in Nepal which was dedicated :o Ganesa, Near Rimpi: Tauda there is an ancient
Nepulese temple dedicated to Ganesa. At Kathmandu there are two stone
statues Ganesa of with a rat under each foot. Ganesa holding the serpent-god Sesa over
bis head like Siva in the form of Natarusa it popular in Nepal. He was one of the
wos popular gods in ancient Khotan.' In tace be was worshipped inal the Buddbast
temples 10 nortber and central Ama that bad fallen under the influence of Mabayan
Buddhism.

Buddhist preachers carried the worship of Ganew ta China and Japan. He
was known to these countries under two aspects Vinayaka, the single form, and Kian.
abi-t-Sten (Kangi-ten), the double form. In the Vinayaka form, be a represented as an
elephant-faced god with two arms and is usually cros-legged. The docble form is
represented by two elephant-faced deitiws standing vis a ras. interfaced. Ie is said
that Fa-hien who returned tu China from India in the beginning of the 5th century,
and Yasgupea, Buddbonamh ard three other Ceylonese Baddhisc monks who viuted
China in the Seb century A.D. introduced the worship of Ganesa in China. There are
Chinese texts to show that in the second half of the Bth century Ganesa wes worshipped
in China in his double form.

Orissa was one of the biggest Tantric centres of India in the seventh and eigheh
centuries A.D. According to traditions Subhakara Simha, King of Orissa (A.D, 637-
735 alter baving abdicated in favour of bis brother. was imuated into the Secpet

--- Page 6 ---
iti

Doctrine by the celebrated guru Dharma Gupea, who asked bim to go to China to
reveal the tenets of the yogacara schoo!, He carried with him mang Taneric texts.
and the Maha vairocana sutra, He arrived in China in 716 and was recewed with
many honours by tha greatest of Tang emperors Husuan-tsung. He translated a
namber of Buddhist texts into Chinese ; and among his most important translarions
was said to be Maha-Vairocana Sutra It us interesting t9 note that Genesa was looked
upon century later in Japan a manifestation of Vairncana, One of the last trans-
lations made by Subhakara was a ritual for the worship of Kuan shi-t ven (Ganesa).
According to a tradition. Kobe-Daishi. the celebrated disciple of the Chinese mystic,
Hui-Kuo, introduced the cult ef Ganeta into Japan, incorporating in the Hidden
Doctrine of the Shingcon sect which he founded on his retutn so Japan from China
in A.D, 806, The Chinese emperor Cken Tsung issued an edict in A.D, 1017 prohibiting
the making of «mages of Ganeu in double form.t However, Ganesa)s still worshipped
in other forms in China. The Chinese ritual consists in cons:ructing an attar for
celestial beings or the purpose cf ‘dispersing evil spirits and gaining the desired results
of prayer’, He 1s worshipped in the form of Vaira-Vinayaka. In this form he carries
a vayra in one of bis hands.

Many stoties are associated with the birth of Ganesa and the evolution of bis
worship. In the present work. the celebrated scholar Rev. H. Heras bay tried to go deep
into these stories which I need not repeat. Buddhist texts have their own versions, In
the Vinagaka sutra, for instance. Ganesa was associated with the Bodhisateva, as the
following legend: “Mahesvara (Siva) had 3,000 childsen of whom 1,000 were
benevolent and were commanded by his son, Senanavaka. while the res: were demoas
under the command of Vinayaka. At that time there was a wicked king by the name
of Kang: who had plunged his kingdom into a state of misery to such extent that iis
nunusters and people revolted and addressed their prayers to the Fleven-headed Kannon
tosave chem, The Rodbisartva accordingly cook on the aspect a of beautiful woman ;
and appearing before the xing excited his passions, She, however. resisted his advan-
ces, telling him she wasa fervent Buddhist, and tha: if he desied her, be must be
converted to Budd:sm. He corsented and took a vaw to follow the precepts of the
Buddha, whereupon the Eleven-headed Kanzon became his sife and the king was
proclaimed as god.”

Iv is very difficult to trace the origin of the worship of Ganesa. The ward gana,
occurs for the first time in the Vedic texts.* Most authorities derive the word from the rout
fan, meaning “to count™ or “to reckon”, and explain chat the nown gana literally means

ta flock’ or “a troop." ‘Thus the term Ganapati means Lord or commander of an army.”
Genesa or Ganapati is generally regarded as a leader of the troops or attendants of
Siva. {nthe Rig Veda (11, rxitiL), Brihaspat: is addressed as gananam ganupati ; and
it is argued chat Brihaspaci, who is identified with Vachaspgti is some thing like a Vedic

--- Page 7 ---
Cd

counter-part of Ganesa, god of learning? In a collection of Vedic Mantras in the
Taittriva Avanyaka’ there is a mystic prayer addressed to god, Dantin, “He of the
Tusk" (danta), which seems to refer tothe Elephant-taced god, becaure the nganiva
comes in a suit of mantras addressed to two deities Kacttskeya and Nandi, with whom
Ganesa is often associated. In addition to this, the commentator, Sayana indicates an
elepbant-faced god and explains that he possessed a tunda (nose or trunk) which was
vabra (twisted, carved), and that fe carried a pile of corm.a club, and a sugarcane,
all of which might be aurributes of Ganesa, In the Ganapati-Stotra, he is addressed a8
vabra tunda, “He of the Curved Trimk “*

There ie. genuine difference of opinion among scholars about Ganesas connec-
tion with'ehe Ved:e reiian, Rao identifies him with the celestia! ¢uru Brihaspati, himself
While referzing to this arfument, Getty says. “Ic is interesting to nove thar Bnhaspac,
an important god in Ris-Veda, is descnted as carrying the axe or ‘golden hatchert’, an
actribute particularly ascrited to Ganesa, and chat he also was referred to as Ganapati.’®
The eminent western scholar. Allain Danielea is of the opimon that the word gana
means “category” and the term Ganapati means the “lord of categories”, “Ganapati, the
ruler of a!l categories.” according to Karapatti, can be identified with divinity in its
perceptible manifestation." In the Rig-Veda, Ganapati is addressed tn the following
words.

“O Ganapati. you are the lerd, the seer, of seers, unrivalled in wealth, king
of elders, Lord of principle of principles, Hear us ard take thy place,
bringing with chee all enjoyment.” (231i)

On the basis of these attribunons, Karratr: identifies Ganapati of the Rig-Veda
with the Elephant-taced god Ganesa, Alain Danielen also identifies Ganapati with
Ganesa and points out that Ganapati has mans rames. The main ones are Ganesa
ord af categories). Vighnesvars, Cord of obstacles), Vinayaka (great leader), Gajanana
(elephant faced), Gaiadhipa (lord of e'ephanss), Ganagati is identified with Ganesa in che
Mahabharata, Maudgala Purana, the Skanda Parana and in the Ganesa Upaniskad™®
The Svastika is said to be the graphic symbol of Ganess. Explaining the meaning of
Ganapati and ite relation to the Number Principle, a prominent wester scholar
says: “Ganapati stands for one or the basic concepts of Hindu mythological symbolism,
the identity of the macrocosm or. in religious terms. the notion tbat man is the image
of God. This notion of the divinity af man and the immanence of God should be
present before the mind whenever ane begins anstbing. hence one should firse bow to
Ganesa, The identisy of the macrocosm and the microcosm car o¢ observed in the
permanence of the relations found as the substracum of all the percept ble universe.
‘These relations can best be expressed in terms of number. Hence number is easily
teen as che common elemenc of all forms, che all pervading unicy of all substance.”

--- Page 8 ---
’
He adds ; “Ganapati is represented 2s 2n elepbant-headed man to express the unity of
the small being, the inicrccosm. that is man. and the Great Being. the macrocosm,
pictured as an elephant.!*

The late Rev. Heras and others, who do not accepe this contention, are of
the view that god Ganapati mentioned in the Rig-Veda can noe be identified with che
Elephant-faced god Ganesa because he 1s nut mentioned as such in the relevane hymn.
From this some scholars derive that Ganesa was actually the god of the pre-Dravidian
aboriginal population and was, later on. adopted by zhe Dravidians and the Aryans.
According to others. be seems to have been originally a Dravidian sun-gcd adopted in
the Hindu pantheon,’

Whatever the fact may be, # well-known verse. attributed to Manu, 1s very
significant. It says that “Sambu (ix. Siva) is the God of Brahmans, Madhava (Visou)
of the warriors, Brahma of che merchantile classes, and Gaowsa of the Sudras, or abori-
ginal population.” The rat, en which Ganesa is shown as riding said to be the
totem of at least one Dravidian tribe. the Orsone.*

The late Rev. H. Heras, who, on the basis of his own reading of the Indus
Valley seals, claimed tha this civilization belonged to the Dravidians.'* 1s of the view that
Subrahmanya (Sanat Kumara or Skanda of the Puranas) was the only son of Siva, He
claims to have found in she inscriptions of the Indus Valley wal names which are
attributed to Subrahmanya . these are Velan, “the one of the trident” and Murughan,
“the boy” (which war, according to him, translated by the Arsans as Kumara). Accord-
ing to him Murughan is the most anciwne Dravidian nase of Subrahmanya."# Thus,
according to him, Purana’s version of Ganesa being the son of Siva is far from truth.
The question naturally arises as to who was the original Ganapati? He may be another
form of Skanda, Subrahmanya or Murughan, but the question stil remains that when
the worship of Ganesa began? It 1s generally said that atthough the tribe of Kasas
or Gajas (Elephants) existed even in toe mor: of an ancient times, the image of the
elephant-faced god began to be worsh:pped in the 4th or the 5th century A.D. The
mention of a god, Dantin.in the Taittetva Aranvaba, however, contradicts this conten
tion, We find images of elephant inserited on sume of the Indus valley seals On another
teal. an aniznal is shows: as having the face of a man, the trunk ot tusk of an elephant,
the horns of a bull, the forepart of a ram, and the hinderquarcers of a ager. These seals,
according to Mackey and Sastn, were used ax amulets or charms.'* This means that
Elephant was worshipped as a god by the people ‘ving in the Indus Valley cities,
The late Rev. H. Heras, very significantly, points out that the elephare was one of the
most celebrated animals in the literature of ancient India. His strength and wisdom
and also bis ternble madness are of common reference in literary texts. Indra, the
war-god of the Vedic Aryans is described as riding over an elephant called Airavat.

--- Page 9 ---
vi
AN the actributions of Indra were later on taken over by Siva who rides on Nandi
(the bull) bur elephant was adopted by him as his son, who became the lord of his
forces (Ganapati).

Ie is wrorg to assume that the worship of the i:nage of Ganesa or Ganapati
began in dhe 4th ar che Sth century A.D. A few years ago, a plate on which a
picture of the Flephant-faced god ix carved, was discovered aca result af excavations
carried our in Lanstan (western Iran). According to Vanden Berghe this belonged
to some peciod berwer 1200 and 1000 B.C Tn thes pictuce the F’ephaat-faced god is
depicted in the shane of a soung warnior. holding a doule-edged sword in bis one hand
while he holds a snake in the orber. Sesnaga is placed war b:s feet. A trated (sridant)
is visible in the right side while che head-dress of che figure depicted in the centre seems
to be that of a scribe. The serpent in his hand srmbolises Sara danda of che
Puranic mythology. It is interesting to nore char in the Tantcic descriptors of Ganesa.
the god is desenbed as holding an axe and a snake co his bands.* In an image of
Ganesa found 1 the Tripura state, Ganes2 is shown wearing 2 serpent belt around his.
bips.” At Kathamnandu there are two unusual statues of Ganesa in which the head
of the serpent ts shown as grasped in the upper ridht hand and the tail in the upper
lett.™

In ancienc times, Persia. Sape Sindbu and Central Asia were parts of a common

' cultural belt. Ancien Lutiscan was populated by the Aryans and the Semitics both.
While the Semizics never worshipped the Etephant god, be was adored by the Hindus.
The discovery of image of Ganesa relating to many centuries before the birth of Christ
in Tran proves that at least some Aryan communities adored him. The presence of
the Elephant-faced god on the Indas Valley sea's, ard the description of the fod
Dantin in the Taittiriya Aranyaba proves that the Elephaat god was worshipped in
India even in the mest aneiert pericd. He was known ta the Buddhist devotees.
‘The future Sakya muni ix said ta have come down in the form of a young elephane.’?!
According to the Buddhist traditions, already referred to, the worship of Ganapati
was carried to Nepal in the third century B.C by the daughter of King Asoka.
Dunng and after the Gupta period Ganese was one of the most popular god in
Afghanistan®.

In my bumble opinion Ganapati is one of the epichers of Ganesa. Even kings
could claim to be Ganapatis, For instance, the name Ganapati is found in a Gupta
inscription on the Allanabad Pilla, where the King Semudra Gupta mentions,
among the kings that be has ‘exzerm:aated’, the king Ganapati Naga, When the
devotees of Ganes elevated him co the position of the Supreme God, they made him
Ganapati,

--- Page 10 ---
vit

Ic is interesting to note chat the Pah word for a “young elephane™ 1s Pullaba.
Bagchi is of the view tbat the Tamil word pille (meaning noble child) originally
meant the "young of the elephant’.* The Tamil word pally and pella both signify
teeth, cusk of the elephant. The Persian word for elephant is pheel. Doesn't it reveal
ancient cultural links between the Dravidians and the Persians ?

T do nat claim that mine is the last word on this subject. However, I hope
that in the light of the present book written by the eminent scholar, the late Rev.
H. Heras, it may help others co carry out further researches on this subject.

Jemna Das Akhtar
1, Foe details oce Scate Manual of Travanzores 11. 5:
2. Allice Getry, Ganess, A Monogeach of ihe Blephent-Faced Sass (Ontord, 19%), page $7.
3a Tod. page tt,
4. Sur Aurel Stein, Ancient Khocam, 9p, il and 431
5. Manjo, no 1661,
6 Reg-Veden b,14, 511, BDL ray B22 1, 35, 30. HO. 3: 5,
7. cf, Monier Willare, Sansbret Englsa Dictionary, According to JeB. Fleet, it raeans a ‘tcribe”
cl, Fleet, SRAS, 1914, pp. 747. 1955, pps 13840, 402, 106.
8, Encetoraadio af Relegions and Fihus, Vol. UT, page 807
9. Tospursaza stdmaks rabry sundaya -ikimahe tan nz dantss pracodepat (Tatts ar. X. 1, $)
12. He baw one Tusk (Ganapat, Cramsad 1-14).
los. Ganesa, op. cit, Pate # Rao T.A.G. ements of Handa lumnogsapby.
Jab. Alica Danilo, Hind Pot, thevamy (Londen, 1964) pp. 291-97
11, of, Crooks. 1604, pp. 8, 287.
Ma. Bid
1b, Ibid.
12. of. Wilson, Religious Sects, 2: Hopkine, Relagcons of India, pate 487.
13. Rieclye TC, (1891), ri, ae (Bombay).
14. Studies sm Proto-inda Meduterrancan Culture, page 16).
15. Ibsd, page 123.
16. Eames Maches, The indus Civifiretion, (London, 1935); The Mew Light on the indus Crnlize.
tyon, (Detha, 1965), Vol 12

--- Page 11 ---
vii
19. Vanden Benthe's atticle publisbed in Berrasha-Ye Tortkht, (Historical Siudies of Lean). Avé-
Sepe. 1970.
18. Ganesa, op. cit., pate 18.
19, thid. page 30.
2. Tbid. page ¥.
21, Allted Foucher, Ganesa, up. cit., page THI
22, Tesages of Ganeas bave been discovered in Alghanutan. Sce plates XXXVI, XXXIX XL
23. Some.Linguistrc Noten, Hast. Quart, Vol- ite no 1, March 1903.

--- Page 12 ---
A PROBLEM of divine filistion occurs in Hinduam
which has not received due stiention up lo now :
the existence of two eons of Siva in the mythological figures
of Ganapati and Skands.
I
THE SON OF GOD IN THE VEDA
‘The existence of one non of God is for the first time
announoed in the 10th mandala of the Rgveda :—
Anit avétam svadhayd tat ekam
Tapotah tat mahind ajayata ekom' ;
which verses may be translated into English thus :—
“That breathless one by his own nature breathes ;
By his great thinking he generated one.”

Some commentators of this passage are of opinion that
the “one” mentioned in both these verses is ove and the
game person, thus the second verse would be an explanation
of the generation of that one whose sclf-subsistence is pro-
claimed in the first. But this view cannot be maintained
seriously. for in this very second verse two persons are clearly
brought forward, one who generates and another who is
generate? am] naturally the generated one cannot be the
eame as that wno generates. In point of fact this generator
is not generated at all, according to this text. He simply
breathes, dmif, ie, exists, and that by himself svadhayd
without the intervention of any other person.

1 Roveda, X, 129, 3-4.

--- Page 13 ---
2

That this is the real meaning of this passage later vedic
Lterature clearly evinces. The Satapathe Brahkmana describes
ore minutely this gencration of the eon of God in an
unmistakable way : “ He (God) loved (akdmayeta) : ‘that a
second myself (dvitiya dima) should be generated (jdyeta)
from me.’ (Consequently), as the fruit of his intellect
{manasa asandyti) the Word (Vdcam) not spoken (mithuagn)
eppeared”.? In a parallel passage we read: “ Prajdpati
the Lord of the whole creation, loved (kameyate) : ‘That I
could be more than one ; that I could reproduce myself.’ And
then he made Brahman the fret of aB.”*

These two passager leave no doubt as regards the dif-
ference between the gencrator and the generated ; they are
two clearly different persons. What is the nature of the
generated one ? The same as the nature of the generator.
He is duttiys dima, “a second myself” ; @ reproduction of
the generator. A aon generally resembles the father ; but in
Cur case it is something more than a resemblance. It is
equality. “a second Himself.” That is the reason why this -
generated one is styled ripam, an image, reflexion’ ; but
this image and reflexion must not be a dead image or a dead
reflexion, as is the image of a person reflected in a mirror, for
in that case the generated would not be a second generator,
absolutely like him. It must therefore be a living image
and reflexion, for being the generator Suayambai, life is the
foundation of all his characteristics.

The generation described in these three passages is be-
aides most extraordinary, for if we pay attention to the words
we find that no woman or goddess is ever mentioned as a
Necessary counterpart of the generator. This after all is but
natural ; for God is sexless (alinga).* The generation is
therefore spiritual, as God isa pure spint (a¢man). Hence the .

? Satapathe Arahmana, X, 4. 5, 6.

+ ibid, VI, 8

* Brhcd4raryoke Upomisad, 1, @, 3.

+ Mattri Upontsad, VI, 35 (Hume, p. 449).

--- Page 14 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 3
generation is done by the mind. by his great thinking, tapassh
tat mahind, as we read in the Rgveds. Consequently the
generated one is called “the fruit of the intellect” (manasd
asandyd) in the Bréhmana, or simply ménasa putra, “son of
the mind”*, or manobhuta “generated in the mind”', of
tapaso jatem, “ generated by brooding ”®.

Though a spiritual generation, this generation i a real
one, as all these texts clearly show, while using verbs coming
from the two roots jan, “to be born, to be generated” and
bhu, “to come into existence.” Consequently the person
generated is a real son, and as such he is called in the Upani-
sads ; “God is a witness of the generation of hie son”*® ; and
necordingly the son calls God his Father : “on the world’s
summit I bring forth the Father” "* — After all we are used to
speaking of our own literary productions as the children of
vur intellect, generated by us through thinking.

Thus finally this son of God receives the name of Vde,
that is ‘the Word,’ but as the Satepatha Brahmana puta it,
“the word not spoken." The Sanskrit word mithunam is thus
translated by Dr. Anands K. Coomeraswamy.'' Afithunam
in fact meang eomething which is a necessary comptement of
another thing. Now the unspoken word, that is the mental
thought, is the neceasary complement of the spoken word,
because without the former the latter cannot exist, while the
former may exist, without the latter. “The mind (thought)
is the earlier form, speech is the later form” **. When you pro-
rounce a word a thought corresponding to that word has
already been issued by your mind ; but if the word is not
pronounced at all, your internal word. your thought, remains

© Visi Purana, I, 7.

1 Mahabhérata, Santi Parva, 12003

® Katha Upenisad, IT, 4, 6.

* Svetievatera, Upanisad, V, 2.

1 Roveda, X, 125, 7

41 Coomaraswamy, A New Approach to the Vedes, p. 21.
12 Aitareya Arenyaka, 11, 1, 1.

--- Page 15 ---
4

unmanifest. Such is God's Word, Vde, internal, avyakta.

Yhat is the reason why it is eaid that “Prajdpati moves

within the womb, invisible but evidently generated’ ; and

again : “ He who is the unborn image (ajasya riipa).” '*
These are very high metaphysical conceptions which the
hyman mind may hardly attain by itself, without the help
of God Himeelf. This is one of those truths which must
have been revealed by God Himself in the beginning of the
history of man and which Indian sruti has diligently kept for
the instruction of future generations. Some ancient Sume-
rian texts also speak of s similar conception among the

Sumerians. They call it enem, which is translated aa“ word”.

Tt is the voice of the god Enlil, the creative word, the moet

important primitive source of the New Testament conception

of the idgos.** Even our vedic Vac bas been rightly equated
with the Alexandrian iégos.* In the eame way in the Egypt-
inn Triad, Thoot is supposed to be the eon of Ra and is
called “The God-word”.'" His eternal generation waa well
known to the Egyptians.'*
O

THE GENERATION OF THE SON OF GOD

When did this generation of the Son of God take place.
The Katha Upanisad says only that the generation was “ very
old,” pirvom, 1 or in the beginning. The beginning of this
generstion is further specified by announcing that Vdc “was

19 Atharceveda, X, 8,13.

14 Roweds, 1, 164, 6.

13 Durr, Die Wertung des pottlichen Wortes ta Alten Testament und
die antiken Orient, pp. 158-159,

4¢ Cf. Weber, “Vie und Meos”, Indischen Studien, IX, pp. 473-486,

4? Wallis Budge, From Fetish to God, p. 14.

4 Rouré, “ Ryplication d'une Inscription egyptienne prouvant que lea
anclems Ygyptions ont conc le generation eternsile du fils de
Dieu”, Annales de Prilosophie Chrftienne, 1051.

19 Ketha Upanisad. UL, 4, 6,

* jeed, TV, 6.

--- Page 16 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 5
born from Brahms before the devas." That is to say ; before
the devas or angela were created,?? the generation of Vée
was already a fact. The epic saya that He is “the fret who
aprang into existence”. But this generation is not like
the generation of other children. They were geticrated at
a certain time and then the generation was over. The gene-
ration of Véc never ends. “Ha is already generated, and
He will be generated in future’.?* Origen explains this
endless geueration of the Word most beautifully. “The Word
was not generated by the Father in s temporary manner,
but He is continually being generated. He is the reflexion
of the glory of the Father ; now this reflexion ir not generat-
ed by the light once and for all ; and then atops being gene-
rated ; for while the light shines, this light continually pro-
duces the reflexion. In a similar way the reflexion of the
glory of God is being generated eternaly ". *
The Svetdsvatara Upanisad, which is relatively one
of the most recent among the thirteen principal Upanisade,
contains nevertheless very old doctrine. We have already
referred to the Upanisad several times explaining theec high
inysteries of the life of God. In connecticn with this genera-
tion of the Word the Sve‘dsvatt'a informs us of the wave
of Gnanda existing between the Father and the Son. “Jedna
(the Lord) contemplated Hiraayagarbha (another name ‘for
Vdc) while he was being generated.” In this contemple-
ton there vould not but be much pleasure of the Father
while seeing His Son. This pleasure ia atill revealed ia a
higher degree in another text, alresdy partly quoted : “God
is the witnens of the gencration of His Son, who is « seer
2) Vejasaneyi Samaitd, XXXI, 20; Katha Upenisad, IV, 6
2 C2. Heras, “ The Devil fo Indian Scriptures”, JB.BRAS., XXVO,
p. 316.

33 bighébharete, Vana Parva, 12602.

6 Soctdsoatera Upentecd, II, 16.

% Origenis, In Jeremiamn, Hom, 1X, 4: Migne, P.G., XI, cole se
357,

3 Sectésvetara Upeniead, IV, 12.

--- Page 17 ---
6
of golden colour, and nourishes kim with wisdom om The
text signifies how the Son appears to the Father, as if He
were golden, that is bedecked with the best possible material
eppare) ; and the Father, seeing Him so beautiful and rich,
feeds Him with the best possible food. Kings chooee the
most precious and substantial food to be given to their eons,
God selects for His Son the best food imaginable considering
his spiritual nature. Such food is wisdom. This is to say
that the Son is the repusitory of the Wisdoin of the Father.
Two marvellous words of the Upanisad summarise this tale
of wondrous communication between the Father and the Son.
‘The Father is named bhoktd, “ the one who enjoys” ; and the
Son is called baeyyam, * the enjoyed one”.™ As if it were
saying; “This generation of the Golden Son is the cause of
great enjoyment in the Father. He communicates all his
wisdom to Him. For the Son being the joy of the Father,
the Father does not know any other enjoyment than the
Son.” Of this divine dnanda, the Son also participates, for
if He is the joy of the Father, the Father is also the joy of
the Son. That is the reason why it is eaid that Brahma is
Vée paramam vyoma, “the highest heaven uf Vac”, ™ that
ja to esy the higbest and purest enjoyment of the Word.

Vedic literature still gives us a few more details about

this generation. When sons are born to the kings in this
world, they are not born kings themselves, but they are
babies like any other babies in the world. The kingly blood
is their only difference, princely upbringing develope that
ruyal element little by little and only when their fathers die,
they may finally become kingy But it 2s totally different with
our Vée. “In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, born only
Lord of all crested things.” At the time of his generation
He was already the only Lord of the whole creation ; that is
the reason why, He is often called Prajdpati. Again the

oT Toad, V. 2.

48 Ibid, I, 12

%¢ Roveda, I, 164, 35.

* Ibid, X, 121, 1; Vasaseneyi SemAite. XU, 4; XOOUIT, 1.

--- Page 18 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI ?
Svetdavetara gives the Father and the Son two names which
are full of extraordinary meaning. The Father is called Jaa,
“the Lord.” The Son is styled Anisa,"" “one who has
no Lord" *+ ; now ‘one who has no Lord” is one who is the
Lord himself, Henze the Upanisad by giving them two dif-
ferent names, openly declares that the Son is different from
the Father ; but while studying the meaning of the Son’s
name one easily realizes that even the Son is as good Lord
as the Father is. Even in this is the Son a perfect ripam
of the Father ; both are Lords of the whole creation..

But the relation of Vac to the whole creation is still
deeper. “Everything was made by Vac.” He is “ that
one who as the unborn’s image hath established and fixed firm
these world’s six regions’* For Vae being the image of
the Father ia the prototype or model of the whole creation.
So He, as “the unborn’s (Father's) image, established and
fixed firm these world’s six regions.” Hence it is said of Him
that “the Babe unborn (garbha)* supported this world’s
burden.” Vie himself is once introduced saying :—

“Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them
each man who sees, breathes, hears the word outspoken ;
They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me.

Hear, one and all, the tauth as I declare it." ?*

+ On account of this intimate connection of the creation
with Vac, the latter is called the creation archetype, visvacah~
rah," and more commonly Hiranyegarbhe, “the golden
seed"*, for He is the eeed out of waich the whole universe

31 Svetdsvatara Upanivea, 1, 6

32 Ibid

43 Serepatha Brahmana. VIII, 1, 2 9; IX. 1. 5, 18

1 Rgveds, I, 164, 8

23 Such is Griffith's translatcn, according to Skyana’s intergretsuoa ©
*garbha does not mneon “sed” here, but foctus.”

™* Rgveda, I, 157, 3; Atharvaveda, IX, 10, 23

at uid. X, 125, 4

43 Ibid, X, 81,1

39 Passim. Dr. Ananda K Coomaraswamy, op. cit, p. 82 calls the Son
of God Visvaripa, “the Form of the Universe.”

2

--- Page 19 ---
8
has spcung, s denomination which may be equated with the
“légos apermatikés”, “ the serrinal word,” of the Greek phi-
losophers. The Rgveda treasures a byinn in honour of Hiran-
yagarba, as one of the most precious poctical specimens of the
whole book.
utr

THE PHILOSOPHY OF GOD'S PATERNITY

A few philosophical notions concerning the life of God
will be of somo help to understand the fact of God's Paternity.

There is no doubt that the Paternity of God (not the
paternity concerning all creatures by virtue of the creation,
on account of whicn he is called Prajapsti ; but the Paternity
concerning this Son whose filistion we are- studying) is s
Paternity totally different from the paternity in human gene-
rations. God is proclaimed olings, sexless *', and it ehould be
20 being # pure epirit.** From the moment myth introduces
sex in the sphere of the godhesd, truth is being besmeared by
the darkness of ignorance.

Moreover there cannot be any dcubt either about the
intellectual nsture of God. The Creator of the wonderful
machinery of the whole world must be endowed not only
with an omnipotent power by which every thing has Leen
created, but also with an eminent intellectual vision by which
every thing was planned with unparallel wisdom. “The
supreme Brahman ”, says Sankara, “is eternal knowledge”. ¢
St. Thomas Aquinas avers that God is « pure intellectual
act, ‘Le. that He is eternally thinking without potentiality or
power to think, but actually doing so, for otherwise there
 Roveds, X, 121
“1 Ketha Upanisad, V, 8.

‘ Maitri Upantsad, 11,5; VI, 13: Suetiscetara Upenssad, VI, 16.
‘9 Sankara, Arhodoranyoka Upanisad Bhacya, 1, 9, 28, 7
4 St. Thomas Aquina,, Summa Theologica, I, q. 3, @. 2, inc,

--- Page 20 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 9
would be a change m his mind, which cannot be conceived
in the Immutable ; and, indeed, thinking not @ succession of
thoughts which cannot exist in eternity, but baving always
one and the same thought.

Ancient Indian philosophers substantially agreed to the
views of St. Thomas when they crudely but truthfully stated
that God is unable to think, for He has no potentiality. God
is being introduced saying : “I am without all things headed
by intellect (i.e. intellectual operatione). I am the highest,
the greatest of the great. I am always the form (ripa) of
thourht ; I am without thoughts." They admit moreover
that he is in eternal meclitation (fapas), that is to esy eternally
thinking without interruption, and consequently without
sucecesion of different thoughts, having always one and the
same thought. For since Brahma is in reality nirguna, with-
out qualities. this thought is not a quality attached to Him.
but it is Himself. his own Being.

We are now in a position to understand what is tne
subject of this thought. Gort eternally knows Himself, neither
is there anything worthy of his thought beyond Himself. “Tt
mow only Etself as ‘I am Brahman'’”.“© And Sankara
agrees: “The Supreme Brahman, being eternal knowledge,
ever knows itself as Bliss Absoltte,"*T Tt is essentially the
knowledge of the Oneness Otherwise there would be a suc:
cession of thoughts which cannot exist in the Eternal. This
thought of Himself is the knowledge he has of Himself, known
philosophically as the Word. the tégus in Greek, Vae in Sans-
krit. That is the reason why St. Paul calls the Word “ “he
splendour of God's glory. and the figure of His substance nes
and also “the image of the invisible God” ; and the
Brahmana calls the Vae of God. “a second Himself,” * for

43 Matzreya Upanisad, ITT, 10

48 Brhaddraxyalsa Uperisad, ¥ 4, 10

47 Sankara, Brhadacanvaks Uparitad Bheepe, ITT, 19, 26,7
4 Hobe, Ld

+ Colcss., 1 15.

© Brkedarasyake Uprcirad. 1, 6, 3

--- Page 21 ---
10
‘ Vae, the World, docs not say but what the intellect contem-
plates”. *' “It in essentially the knowledge of the oneness
of Self”

Now the knowledge that God has of Himself being
most perfect, the Word must be a moat perfect image of Him-
self, without any blemish or flaw, just as He is “a second
Himself.” In this world when a portrait of a person is taken,
there is always room for improvement : there may be another
photogrepher who may take a better likeness than the preced-
ing one. This is the reason why many portraits of the same
person are taken. Moreover persons change, grow mature
and old. That is another reason why many portraits of the
eame person are taken at different stages of one's own life.

But such reasons cannot be given in God. There can-
not be any improvement over the reflexion and portrait of
God, which is called the Word, Vée. And since God never
changes nor does He grow old, there is no room for a second
portrait either. Consequently there is no need of a second
Vée ; one is enough.

Now this Word is produced in such a way as to receive
We full substance of the Divine Intellect in himself. and
thus this may be rightly called “generation”, which is but
the transference of s being’s own life into that of another.
Thus the Generated Word may fully be called the Son of
the Generator, who is therefore his Father.

But this generation never ends, for it is eternal. “He
is already generated. and He will be generated in future”,
tays the Svetasvatara In this worlu once the generation of
a son is finshed, there may be room for the generation of
another son. Not 80 in God, for the generation of His Son ie
never finished, it is eternal. There cannot be « new aon
generated while the generation of the first aon is still going
on. Hence God eannot have more than one Son.

4) Satepatha Brichmana, V. 6,7, 10
8¢ Mandukye Uparntecd, 7, Cf. Sircar, Hindu Mystictem, p 4.

--- Page 22 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI u
This is not to say that the paternity of God is limited.
The Word, because it is infinite (the eame as the Father), is
complete, su to say; we may even say in # human way of
speaking that the infinite capacity of God, after the genera-
tion of his own knowledge. is fully exhavsted. In the gtnera-
tion of His Son Gort has displayed His infinite fecundity, for
the Son is as infinite as the Father.
Iv
THE BEGINNING OF THE INDIVIDUALIZATION
OF THE SON OF GOD
Between the early age of theological conceptions and
the much later period of mythological development of epic
and purenic Literature, there is s transitional period when
myth is already introduced into philosophical speculations
ar an embroidery to enliven a dry subject. The abstract
metaphysical ideas of the early philosophical period were
not easily grasped and not remembered without difficulty
by the common man in the strect. ‘The personal individuali-
zation of those ideas with proper nouns and characteristic
action was equivalent to communicating life to dry bones,
making them live. In this period the Son of God is called
Sonotkumara, that is “the eternal Son”, o “the ever virgin”.
The earliest mention of Sanatkumara is found in the
very Upanisadio period. The Brahman Narada wants to
know the doctrine of the Atman, and, in order to obtain thie
knowledge, goes to Nanatkumara, who enlightens him ac-
cordingly. In this passage this Sauatkumdra is styled “ the
God of War.” But in another passage of the same Upanisad,
he is identified with Skanda ™ which identibeation is confirm-
ed by Sankara. “This same Sanatkumara, people also call
the deity Skanda~-people why know his real character.” * The
* Chindogys Upewisad, VII, 1, 4
“¢ Ibid. VIT, 26, 2.
3 [oid Sankara, Bhdsys, p 422,

--- Page 23 ---
RB

same. identification is found in the epic. And a modern
commentator Shri Hari Narayan Apte confirms this identi-
fication, when affirming that Sanatkwumara is supposed to be
the same as Karttikeys.“’ Now Skanda and Karttikeya,
are two different names of the son of Siva, otherwise called
Subrahmanya. Kumara. Murugan. ete.

Tt iy after all natural that the Son of God, so much
spoken of in the Vedic period. should correspond to the eon
of Siva of the epic and Puranas. For the latter do not
mention any son of Visnu. This would incline us to believe
that the doctrine of Vac and his generation from God is one
of the dogmas thet Vedic books derive from the old Dravidian
religion. In point of fact. it is only mentioned in the last
two mandalas of-the Fyveda chronolcgicatly speaking. ac-
knowledged now as influenced by Dravidian thought. and in
Jater Vedic literature.

Why is Sanatkumara given the little of “God of War”
on this occasion? Sanatkuméra’s identification with Skanda
explains this title quite well, The Puranas and the cpio
introduce a lengthy account of the war waged by Tarakasura
and Grasans apainst Siva. In this war Skanda is finally
deputed by his father to march on the enemies of God, and
he sucoceds in defeating and killing Tirakasura.“ In th.
Roveda there seema to be sn allusion to this event when Vde
says : “F bind the bow for Rudra. that his arrow may strike
and slay the hater of devotion.” This heroic feat, which
seems to take us to the first times after the creation, ® sur- :
rounded Skanda with warlike reputation, which seems to be
totally different from his original attributes.

2% Mahabhérata, Satya Parva, 2716. Cf Sirensen, Mohdbhirata Index,
p> 461.

*F Apte, Chéndogya Upantead, p. 180.

 Matsya Purine, CLIM-CKL; Mab ‘bherata, Aaucarinika Parva,
4212

2 Roweds, X, 125, 6. Cf. Heras, “The Devil in Indian Scriptures”,
J.BLBR AS, XXVIL, p. 225-226

Cf. Heras, “ The Devil in Indian Scriptures”, JB BRAS. XXVI,
(1052), pp. 237-228, .

--- Page 24 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI

Sanatkuimara is also often called in Sanskrit literature,
“the son of Brahins.”® In this transitional period God is
still at times called Brahma, as in the Upanisads. In the
Tejobindu Upanisad Siva says : “1 am Brahma,” or “I
am Brahman", * or “I am the sole Brahman”, o¢ “All
this is Brahman alone. There is none other Brahma and
that is‘I’".™ ‘The Skanda Upanisad referring to Achyuta
(the Imperishable), says : “He 1s Mahadeva (Siva). He is
Perobrahman”.~ At times He is also called Siva or Visnu,
sccording to the sectarian influence of the writer. Hence
Sanatkumiara, who is supposed to be the son cf Siva, as he is
identificd with Skanda, may also be called son of Brahman.
In fact, he is styled “ the inind’s son of Brahma, * his manasa
putra,*? which denominatioa establishes a perfect equation
between Sanatkuiuara and the son of the mind of God spoken
of in Vedic literature.

Sanatkuméara is always associated with light, for being
the son of God's inind, he is svidently the Wisdom of God ;
and wisdom is always the souree of enlightenment. In the
epic he is said to be “bright. In the Digha Nikéyo “light
and radiance ” are deacribed as appearing before Sanatkumara,
aa if they were bis heralds. Similarly in the Samjyutta
Nikaya, when once Sanstkumara appears to the Buddha
on the banks of the Snake River at Rajagha, be is described
4s “shedding radiance by his effulgent beauty.” Markan-
deya relates the epiphany of Sanatkumara to him, thus :
“T aaw....the divine Aditya (the sun) and an effulgent
being, bright as fire iteelf, and small as a finger. The sun and

©) CL Keny, “The Nogas in Megadha”, J.8.B.R A.S. XXVIII,
pp. 163, 168, 168,

#* Tejodindu Upanisad, II, p 85. (Aiyar's ed. Madras, 1614)

9 Ibid.

© seid. TH, p. 85.

© Ibid, p 96

© Skande Upanisad, p. 41.

$1 Viens Purana, II, 7.

© Madébhérate, Seuptika Parva, 636.

* Rhys Davids, Dialogues of Ye Huddha, IL pp. 243, 284.

1® Samsyutta Nikéva, 1, 62. (Kindred Sayings. 1, p. 191.)

--- Page 25 ---
14

this being together looked like twin fres, one joined to the
other." This second being manifests himself to the sage
as Sanatkumara, “shedding almost incomprehensible lustre,
like a second fire-god "4 Quite reasonably therefore did
Narada go to Sanatkumara to receive from hun enlightenment
concerning the doctrine of the Atman,

In fact among all the quaiities of Sanatkuméra, his wie-
dom is especially emphasized. He is openly celled “the
preceptor". 7 Consequently even the ancient sages are said
to go the manatkumara to consult him about their doubts.**
And Sanatkumara himself is often introduced giving instruct-
jons to different persons. Now it 1s Purdravas who is taught
by bim on different occasions ;** then Visvavasu is also
instructed by him ; ™ here Markandeya gets the solutions of
several problems from Savwatsumara ; there Govinda, the
‘steward of the kingdom of Kosala, is enlightened by Sanat-
kuméra about ¢he advantages of world renuncistion for
reaching the heaven of Brahris.™ Vrtrasura,  Sankbhyays-
na,“ Vyisa™ and the rais* also received leasons from this
foremost among gurus. Even Prajépali™ and Rudra * learn
‘te essence of religion and philosophy from Sanatkumirs.
The Chéndoya Upanisad relates that after Narada had been
cleansed of ali impurities “the holy Sanatkuméra shows to
him the opposite side (tank) of darkness”," de, the ban¥

1) Herivassa, Marwamsa Parva, XVII. (Bose’s. p. 51)
32 Ibid, XVIIL (Bose’s p 58)

74 Mahebhirate, Sabha Parva, 441

14 Joid, Aranyaksa Parva, 12700.

18 [bid, Adi Parva 3145-3147; Viens Purine, I, 16
i Mahabhérata. Santi Parva, 11784

11 Harwvamag, loc. cit, and XIX.

7* Rhys Davis, Dustogues of the Beddeg, I, pp. 272-274
1 Mahdbhirata, Sanu: Parva, 286,

® Bkogavate Purone, XII, 8, 7.

"! Wilson, op. cf, p LXXXVIIT

© Mahibhirata, Sants Para, 227

8} ibtd., 13587;

“ Ibid. Anususanina Furva, 165-169.

‘9 Chandogye Upenisad, Vil, 26.2

--- Page 26 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 15
beyond darkness. This darkness, Is, according vo Apte, the
darkness of ignorance.” From which it is clear that Sanat-
kumira has the power to dissipate the darkness of ignorance
with the ght of his wisdom ; for God's “self effulgence al-
ways dispels the darkness of ignorance”. On another oc-
casion the same Narada learns the scienve of the Atman .
(God) from Sanatkumara, a3 commemorated above,

One of the most favourite subjects taught by Sanatku-
mara is the subject of world renunciation in order to reach God.
With Vrtra he discusses the subject of emancipation.” Ona
certain occasion he tells Narada : “ Do not be ao taciturn ; be
joyful in your mind. There is means to acquire happiness
here.” And then he teaches him the secret of bhakti-jnina,
accompanied with disgust for sil material pleasures. To
Markandeya Sanatkumira conferred “ spiritual vision ", “ that
knowledge which was difficult of attaintnent even by the
devas”.™ In the Sekha-Sutta of the Majjhima Nekaya the
Buddha quotes, explains and praises a aloka of ascetical
meaning said to have been composed by Sanatkuradra,*

The epic has happily kept a lengthy discourse on eman-
cipation and asceticism, which according to tradition had been
given in ancient times by Sanatkumara himself, * Our limited
space does not allow us to quote this passage. We shall only
transcribe the summary of Sanatkumara’s doctrines as given
by Prof. R. D Ranade. “In the first place”, saya he,
“Sanatkumara seems tu teach a spiritual hedonism. Happi-
ness — and in Sanatkumiara’s hands, happiness becomes the
equivalent of spiritual happiness — is the spring of all action ;
4 Apte, Chéndogye Upanisad, pp, 179-180 (1915).

*t Bhégovate Puring, I, 1, 2.

* Mahédhdrata, Sinti Parva, 10030-10088.

39 Padma Purdna, Uttara Kasnda, CXC, 4-64.

™ Harivomsa, Harivamsa Parva, XVII.

© Chalmers, Further Dialogues of the Buddha, 1, p. 258. The following
works £0 on as written by Sunatkumara: Vdstrusdstra, Sanatkumére
Semhiti, Senatkumdra-tintra and Sanatkumara-kalpe. Cl. Sastri,
Pracine-Caritrakoss, (In Marathi). p 609.

9% Mehébhcrate, Sknti Parva, 9990-10097.

3

--- Page 27 ---
16

action is the cause of faith; faith, of belief; when a man
believes, he thinks ; when he thinks, he knows ; and when
he knows, he reaches the truth. In ihis way, happiness, action,
faith, belief, thought, knowledge and truth constitute, in
Sanatkumira's hands, a moral ladder to realisation. Secondly,
it ig Sanatkumara who tcaches the doctrine of Bhiman.
“ Bhaman ” ig that infinite happines. which arises by the vision
of the divinity all around, When anything else is seen, that is
“alpa”. Thus all possessions in the shape of cowa and
horses, elephants and gold, servants and wives, lands and
palaces, are of little consequence as contrasted with Bhiman. :
Thirdly, the realization of Bhiiman occurs when an experience
such as is implied in the expression “ Sohamdtma ” is attained.
Lastly, Sanatkumara teaches. that Afman is the source of all
things whatsoever. From Atman spring hope and memory ;
from Atman apring space, light and Waters; from Atman
everything unfolds, in Atman everything hides itself. Atman
ig the source of all power. all knowledge, all ecstasy”. *

Sanatkumara. being the rapam of God, is accordingly
held as Brahma himself. Govinda, the steward of the king-
dom of Kosala, enters into a retreat to finally receive a reve-
lation from Brahina. Yet Brahma does not appear to him.
Sanatkumara appears in his atead, and yet Govinda is as
satisfied as it the revelation had been of Brahma himeelf.*
To see Sanatkumaéra was the same as to sec Brahma. In
point of fact the Buddha calls Sanatkumara Brahma.** Again
the Mahabharata states that Siva himself among the yogins
is Sandtkumara, * thus showing in a practical way that Sanat-
kuméars is a perfect image of his father Siva.
There are some texte which speak of other sons of the
mind of Brahma, mentioning them, besides Sanatkumara,
They are five in ali and are mentioned by their respective
© Ranade, A constructive Survey of Upanisadic Philosophy, pp. 52-53.
#4 « Meha-Govinda Suttinta”: Rhys Davids, Dialogues of the Buddha,
UU, p 273.
s reid, p. 24. Cf. J.R.A.S., 1894, p. 24,
0 Mchkébhdvate, Anusisana Parva, 916.

--- Page 28 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 17
names. They are Sanands, Sanaka, Sanandana or Sanatans
and Ribhu.*’ Rather than four different brothers of Sanat-
kumira, they sem to be four different names of the aame
Sanatkumire himeelf. As regards the fifth Ribbu, this word
happens to mean “clever,” “skilful,” “inventive” and
“prudent”, which are all qualities that befit SanatKuméirs in
his special attribute of wisdom. Moreover these additional
four sone of Brahman are always spoken of as great ascetics, *
in the asme way es Sanatkumara. Besides Sarandana is said
to be 2 great eage,”, and is described as being in profound
meditation, and always living in Janaloka ™ ; which details
fully agree with the characteristics of Sanatkumira. Also
Sanaka is said to be living in Janaloke. ** It is also of interest
to know that the Harivamea limits the primogeniture among
these five sons to Sanatkumara : “I am the first born of
Brahma,” he himself says to Markandeya. '* Sanatkuméra
is, in fact, the most spoken among the five aona of Brahma,
This seems to suggest that he was supposed to be the only
son of Brahma in ancient times, and that at a later period.
four other sons, doubles or replicas of the first were added. *

Besides the auspicion that these four names might have
originally been four different names of Sanetkumira or

Skands, which finally became four different personages (# not

#7 Wilson, Vishax Puréna, I, p 77. note 1. :
© SRA S., 1898, p. S44; 1897, pp. 585-388.
© Visnu Preréna 1. 4

10 Ibid, V.

vou bid, 4: 11, 7: Skenda Perdno, Kami Khanda, XX11, 8-9.

162 Visnu Purina, 1, 4, VI 4

108 Hertvemes, Harivamsa Parvs, XVII.

106 The Linge Prrtna. 1, 170-171 rakes Sanatkumira and Ribhu the
first bora of all. CI. Wilson, The Visnw Purtna, I, pp. 77 &. Since
Ribbu tn Sanskrit means clever, skilful, inventive, and pradent
this perbaps may suggest that Ribhu was originally en epithet
of Sanatkumira, which was finally taken as the name of another
eon of Brahman when the other three replicas were added. Thus
the five mind-born sons of Brahma may final!y be the perscaifica-
tion of the five characteristics of Sanatkumira: 1. He as @ man;
2. Be es a enge: 3. He as an axcetic ; 4 He as a prophet; 5. He as
having divine osture.

--- Page 29 ---
18

uncommon phenomenon in ancient mythology) ; there may

be, if we understand properly ancient Indian customs and

ideals, a very high reason for the introduction of these other
four sons, Number five in ancient India means ‘plenitude’
and ‘fulness’.'° The existence of five mind-born sons of

Brahma secms to suggest that it is the fulness of Brahma's

sonship, and since all five seem to be equal, that is to say, four

being equal to the first, who is Sanatkumara, one may easily
understand that Sanatkumara is the plenitude and fulness of

Brahma’s sonship ; in other words, that he is the only son

of Brahma and that there cannot be any other one. This

seems to be the august mystery hidden behind the symbolical
number of five mind sons of Brahma. '*

The epic informs us that all creatures will merge in
Sanatkumira at the time of the dissolution of the world. '*
This privilege of being the end of ail creatures is based on the
fact that he is the individualisation of Vie Hiranyagarbha.
Himself being the Golden Seed, the Archetype, after which
all the creatures were made, all will return tohim. He is the
beginning and He will be the end.

v
MURUGAN = SKANDA IS THE SON OF SIVA

The identification of the only eon of the mind of God
epoken of in sruti with Sanatkumara of the transitional period,
165 CI. Heras, “India, the Empire of the Svastiku,” Coronation Sou-

eenir, Rombay, p. 40.

16 At’a later period the number of sons of Brahma increased, Sloce
they were five great ssis, and the seven great reis were abeady
traditional in India, the mind-suos of Brahma became seven. They
are also mentioned in the Padme Purdna Cf. Wilson, op. eit. TI,
Pp. 200, nm, ‘They are also spoken of in the Mahabhdrata, Sant!
Parva, 13077-13080. Later one more is added. Sanatkumsra him-
seit says: “I have seven brothers all younger to me” (Harivamss,
Harivamaa Parva, XViI) These seven brothers united with Sanat-
kumira himself, make eight, which is a coosecrated number in
the history of Saivism. Siva is astha murté, An, bis protobistoric
counterpart, had eight forms, Cf. Herax, “The Religiua of the
Mobenjo-Daro People”, Journal of the University of Bombey, V,
pp. 1-8.

WS MahsbAdreta, Santi Parva, 12907 (Calculta ed.).

--- Page 30 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 19
leads us to identify the former once more with Skands or
Subrahmanya, son of Siva, in the puranie and epie period,
Sanatkumara beeing already acknowledged ss Skands. The
Indus Valley inscriptions also apeak of one son of An (the pro-
totype of Siva}, who receives the namcs of Anil, “the son of
An"'™, Murugan, “ the boy 110 and Vélan, “one who holds
the trident.""° The equation therefore is perfect through-
out the religivus history of the country :
ee _

Indus Valley | Tranritionat. | Purdate und eple
Srutt period ¢
n= =
Tevara AR | Brahma Sive °
Mind-born son | Ant | | Subranmenge
| . | \ Karttikeya
nm

Of all these names of the Indus Valley period the most
typical and characteristic seems to be Murugan. An'l is only
record of his divine filistion ; and Vélan a description of
his likeness. Murugan bas remained unchanged in South
Indis. The Tarmilians cal? Subrahmanya Muruga, which,
according to them means ‘the tender child’, and is represented
‘as 8 besutiful child or at most 4 youth, thus emphasizing :he
idea that he is “ the eon” of Siva. (Figure 1).

Dr Karmarkar is of opinion that Murugan is spoken of
in the Roveda under the name Murodevah."" ‘This view seems
yery probable, for he is called a “foolish god” "? one of “fools
gods” about whom tie Acyas pray to Indra : “Lat the fools’
gods with bent neck fall and perish and see no more the sun
when it ariecs”."* Sayana calls him a Rakaasa. Karmarkar's
408 Heras, op. cit, p. 29.
a0 Heras, “The Vélalas in Mobenjo-Dare", I. H. @ {Caleutta), XIV,

33
no Ina pp. $2-53
iit Karasrkar "The Vratyas in Ancient India”, Journal of the Univer”

sity of Bombay, XI (NS.) (1942) p. 89; “ Muruga or Kerthikeya ",
Journal of the Rana Varma Research Institute“, XII, pp 52-13
112 Roveda. X, 87, 2
na [bid., VIL. 104, 24.

--- Page 31 ---
20
views are not improbable for, as ecen above, the Rgvedic reise
of a latter period knew of the spiritual generation of God’s
on, * recorded his name Vdc, "'* and even commemorated bis
participation in the victory over “the hater of Brahmas,” ’**
who is referred to as Tarakasura in the epic and puranic
period. The Aitareya Brahmana unbesitatingly affirms that

“Subrahmanya is Ve”. ?”

Three definite characteristics are mentioned in relation
to Murugan :—

1. His association with Wisdom : Mythology states
that he issued from the frontal eye of Siva as six sparks of
fire," i.e. born of Siva’s head, having an extraordinary radi-
ance from the very beginning. Accordingly he always holds
the Trident, which typifies his energy of wisdom (Jndna-
sakti)."* That is the reczon why he is called Velan, from the
Proto-Indian times, and also Vélayudha, “He who carries a
vel” (Fig. 2). Subrahmanya therefore represents God as a
@uru, the tzacher of the universe.'* He is the embodiment
of Jnane-sakti, and ia as such called Kumdre-Guru-Pars, ‘the
Supreme Son Teacher’. He is said to have taught the ange
Agastya and other rsis. In order to show the excellence of hia
wisdom they affirm that he even declared truth to his own
father Siva. Some of his images, as he is being worshipped in
Palni, depict him in katoka-hasta, the gesture of communica-
tion, by which he is imparting the fruits of his wisdom to
others.

2. His uwlateral birth ; Vedic worka clearly declared
his generation from the mind of God, without the intervention
410 Cf. above. p. 70
413 Reorda, X, 125.

104 Ibid ,X, 125, € Cf Aitareya Brahmana, IIL, 4, 39; Jetminiye Upanisad
Brshonana, 1. 18, §; Jeiminiya Brshmane, 1, 60, 1-7; Heres “The
Devil in Indian Scriptures", J.B. B.R. A. S., XXVIL, pp. 225-228.

NY Aitereys Bréhmena, VI, 1, 3.

318 Somasundaram Pillai, Paini: The Sacred Hill of Musugo, p. 12,
os. .

NO 20d, p10 A.

3% Shivapadesundaram, The Saive School of Hindulsm, p. 184.

--- Page 32 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 21
of any goddess. This great dogma of God's life is reflected in
the mythological mirror in different ways. According to one
story, which we referred to above, Subrahmanys was born
from the eye on Siva's forehead. Another legend saye that
the seed discharged (akanna) by Siva, produced o svete
(white) mountain where Skanda was born. In this case Par-
vati is reported as bitterly complaining that she was denied
the pleasure of becoming 8 mother.'! Another account avers
that Siva’s secd was transferred to the six Krttikas (the
Pieiades) ; when the latter went to bathe, each of them
conceived and begot a son ; all these children were combined
in one, when Parvati embraced them all together. That is the
reason why he ig calied Kartikeya and Skanmukha or Arw-
mugan (in Tamil) (Fig. 3.) The ides of these six heads may
sleo have sprang, from the tradition of Subrahmanye’s embo-
diment of wisdom Great sages are often endowed with
big heads, Six heads must therefore be the seat of divine
wisdom. (Fig. 4)

3. His perpetwal sonship : He is ever called Kuméra
and Murugan. He is shown as e very little boy between Siva
and Parvati in the beautiful group of the Dravidian Triad
known as Sémdskanda (i.e. Soma = Siva + Uma + Skanda).
(Fig. 5) In the atone carvings the little boy is shown seated
on one of the knees’ of Parvati.’ Three of these remark-
able sculptures may be eeen at MahAbalipuram. (7th end
8th cent) (Fig. 6 and 7) In the metal images, Skanda is
shown standing otill as a Little boy. The Madras Museum
hea a moet beautiful specimen of this group. Another one
may be seen in the Museum of the Indian Historical Re-
esearch Institute. (Fig. 8) Accordingly Subrahmanya is
supposed to be a Brahmachari (celibate), and he is as such
shown as a young boy, his head being shaved, s tuft of hair
only being left, wearing only « kaupina, (small cloth), s yoj-
nopevita (sacred thread) and a mounji (gress girdle). This
statues, which are very rare, depict his left hand in Ketyava-
111 Remayona, Balakanda.

132 ‘This associstion with Pirvatl is purely sccidestal. In another article
we may develop “The case of the Mother Goddess".

--- Page 33 ---
22

lambita-hastc. We possess one in ube Indian Historical Re-
search Institute." (See Fig. 1) Mythology shows him living
a life of celibacy in Mount Krauncha, adding the dramatio
trait that this was as an effect of disappointment after the
marriage of his brother Ganapati.'** Perhaps on account of
this association with Mount Krauncha, he in the Tamil coun-
try, receives th: titles of Kurnji Andavar, “ the Lord of hill-
topa”, Kurinji Vendan, “the King of hilltopa”, Kurinji Iros-
ven, “the god of hilltops” and Kurinji-man, “the one of the
mountaing.’ Many of his temples in South India are on
the tops of hills, Palni, Tirupararkunram (Madurai), Tiruve-
vangam (Malabar), Swirmimalai (Kumbakonam), Tiruttani,
ete. The last but one canto of the Tamil poem Tirumurugér-
ruppodai is entitled Kunruthoradal and deacribes Subrahman-
ya “‘eporting on all hills”,

At a later period the purity of this tradition concerning
the celibacy of Kumara was darkened with the faked account
of bis marrige first to Devasena ; and then in South India
to the Kurava girl Valli-araman. Accordingly when he is
depicted as Sendpati he is often shown with one wife Devesena.
The Madras Museum has 6 beautiful atone epecimen in which
Senapati-ia riding the peacock, his usual vékana. In South
India he is at times shown with his two consorts Valli-ammsn
and Devayanai, of whom the former rides a lion and the latter
an elephant. Specimens of Subrahmanya with these two spu-
rious wives may be eeen at the Nageavarasv:imin temple of
Kumbakonam or at the Siva temple of Tiruvo:tiyur (Fig. 12).

4. His Leadership of the army of the Devas: Vrtra,
the opponent of Indra in the Roveda, becomes Tarak&sura
in the epic and puriinic period. When be, helped by Grasana,
arises against Siva, Indra was feard not to be a match for
them. Siva waa in need of a son to oppose the evil one. It
was then that Karttikeya -vas born. In the Mahisamardhini
34 Ct. reproduction of a popular picture in Jouveau-Dubreull, icono-

graphy of Southern India, pl. XXXIL.
134 Siva-Mahepurdna, Rudra Samhita, Kumira Khanda, ch. 20.
‘33 Somasandaram Pillai, Paint, pp. 44-45.

--- Page 34 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 23
cave of Mahabalipuram therc is a large pane! repreeenting
this scene. It has gencrally been wrongly described as :
Narayana or Sesabhagvan.'% (Fig. 9.) Tarakisua and
Granans are shown ss two colossal gusnts plotting to destroy
Siva while the latter is peacefully sleeping on Ananta (ete:-
nity). On this occasion Skanda is born. He is seen in front
rising from the varth , his thighs are still half hidden in
the grcund. He wears the yajndpavita, the maunji and the
koupins. He holds the sakti, a weapon he in going to use
against the oruras, in his right hand. He is talking to one
who is half kneeling to his left. probably Indra or Agni, while
a devi, probably Parvati, is behind him in s worshipping posi-
tion. ‘The epic narrates that when Indra heard of the birth
of Siva’s son to defeat Tarakasura “be was troubled thinking
that his kingdom was taken away from him” ; but he re-
covered his peace of mind when he heard Siva saying to his
son Skanda: ~ Thou wast born in order that thou rmightest
way Taraza and protect the realm of Indra. Therefure do ycur
duty.” Then Skanda received from Agni a weapon of extra-
ordinary efficiency, the sakti, for his combat with the asuras.
Tt possessed great lustre and seemed to blaze with light ;
when during the conflict Skanda repeatedly hurled this
blazing missile, meteors and thunderbolts dropped upon the
earth and millions of darts came out of it. Thus Skanda
reduced millions of asuzas to ashes and finally killed Taraks-
aura, their leader. 7" That is the reason why he “ was parti-
eularly heted by all the daitves ”.'** When Skanda is depicted
156 'The cave is a purely Saiva cave nor would a Vaisnave argument
have beeo depicted in such @ prominent place when Visnu himselt
js chown as a small deva, in the sine way as Brahma. in the
background of Ihe Somascanda shrine. Cf Keny, "The Image of
Nirayana,” Annais of the Bhandarkar Oriente! Pesearch Inatitute,
XXIX (1943), pp, 259-226 In the so-called Acanta-Sayana group
of the Undavali cave, near Vidysvada, the two giants Tirakagura
and Grasana are also seen at the feet of the supine god. They are
in the same inimical attitude, In fact the Mabibolipuram asuras
seem to heve been copied from these

1st Mahédharata, Aranyuka Parva, 14311-15, 14492, 14388-36 ; 1423-38 ;
14520-14627 : Salya Parva 2455-01, 2498, 2823, 690-94: Santi Parva
CCLXXXI-CCLXXXI ; Anusasina Parva, 4212-14; Méteye Purdag
CLII-CLX; Skanda Puranu, XX-XXIX: Katha Sorte Ségare,
(Tawney's ed.). Lp 5: Hp. 102.

338 VenkStakristma Rao, “The Ganapat! Cult”, @.J.M@.S, XLL p. 9,

. 4

--- Page 35 ---
24

as Tarakari-Subrah:nanys he ia shown riding on a peacock bold-

ing the vojra and the sakti. There is a remarkable specimen of

this image st Aihole, Bijapur District. [n connection with
these inilitary activities he receives the names of Mahdsena,

‘ great Captain’ and Tarakajit, ‘the slo. -r of Téraka.’

It is undoubtedly on account c. this leadership of the
hoate of heaven that Kumara is also called the feader or the
Jord of the ganas, the attendants to his father Siva. Hence the
title of Ganapati was also born by Kumara. When the ganas
were defeated by Arjuna, Skanda ie depicted addressing them
as his subjects, cnthusing them to ight courageously and not :
Secing away from his enemy like cowards.’ As leader and
protector of this army of celestials, whom he hides and shields
against the aeures, Skanda is also called Guha. *

The cult of Subrahmanya seeins to have been very old
in South India, specialiy in tac Tamil-nadu. He is very often
mentioned in Sangam literature, being called the “Red god.” 1"
He was especially worshipped in the mountainous region of
the Kuravas, whose orgies ia hie hunour are described in the
Tirwmurugérruppadai ™ and in the Pattupattu.’ His main
shrine in Palni dates from a very early period. He was not
only worshipped by jungle people but also by high class
people, as th: name of Vijaya Skandavarman, one of the,
Pallava Kings, clearly shows. These kings carved Lis image
in the sbrincs of Mahabalipuram. In an old Pallava relief
embedded in the Rajardjesvara Temple of Tanjore there is
a unigue representation of Kumara.'* The relief reproduces
Bhiravi's story of Arjuna's penance. Next to the images of
£iva and Parvati on Mount Kailiss aue sees this couple going
433 Bhiravi, Kiratirjumiye, XV. .
338 Por instance in the Kusuira Sambhava.

181 Totképpiyam, por. 5.

122 Cf, Sou:asundaram Pillai, Palui, pp. 44-47.

248” Pattupéttu, 1, 220-249.

434 | owe this Information to r-y intimate friend Sri T, N. Rema-
chandran, Joint Director Geni ral of Archeealouy, whose knowiedge
ot South Indian temples and iconography ts w.carailelled. I up-

: derstand that @ book on Arjunu’s Pesance im Indian Art dy
‘Mr. Ramachandran will soon be ):bi:shed.

--- Page 36 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 25
to the forest where Arjuna is performing his tapas. Parvati
is, on this occasion, shown holding litte Kumara on her right
arm. The same composition is repeated next to the field
where the fight between Siva and Arjuns takes place.
Parvati continues holding Kuméra, when witnessing the fight.
This attachment between Kumara and Parvati is all the roore
aignificant in the growth of Kumara’s myth, if one considers the
unilateral birth of Siva’s son, But his earliest representation
and the earliest dedication of a separate temple to Siva’s son
was at Kannanur (old Pudukkottai State), which brlongs to
the early Cola period.

Not less known was Skanda in northern India in ancient
times. Patinjalt mentins Siva and Skanda.”* Numismatic
evidence declares him as 8 populsr aeity in th. beginning of
the Christian era. Oue silver coin of the Yaudheyaa, of the
2nd century A. D., (Fig. 10) bears his six-headed image,
holding « long spear in his right hand, the left resting on the
hip. The inscription says : “OF Brahntanys (a name of
Karttikeya) the divine lord of the Yaudheyas”. Another
inscription says : “ Of Kumara, the divine Lord Brahmanye-
deva” The country of the Yaudheyas was called Rohitcke.
This country of Rohitoka ‘was said to be especially favoured
hy Karttikeya.™* A seal of Mahdraja Gautamiputra who had
conquered the Vindhyas, avers tha he “ had made over his
kingdom to the great lord Karttikeya ”. 1 ‘The Gupta family
was apparently much devoted to this son of Siva, as among
the six great imperial Guptas, three bear names of this God,
two Kumara Guptas and one Skanda Gupta. One of tbe
former in one of his inscriptions mentions 8 temple of Swami
Mahésena (another denomination of Skanda) to which s
grant had been made." Even a thief is epoken of by the
1” Soundrarajan “The Joint Development of the Early Temile”,

Journal of Indion History. XXXI (1982, p. 255,
336 Patanjeli, Ow Panini, V. 3, 99.
181 Banerjea, The Decelopment of Hindw Teonograrsy, PP. 134-168,
133 Allen, Catalogue of Coins of Amient India as, CXLIX, CL.
1 Mahabharata, Aranyaka Parva, 1442.
160 Raperjes, op. cit, p. 156.
141 Feet, Corpus Ins iptionam jadicersm, ID, pp. 13 NOAA ue
Peo
if OS aS",
Deptt te)!
13-8 36 wa
OT GF RON,

--- Page 37 ---
26

name of Sarvilska who used to invoke the blessings of Skanda

before hey:inning tie work of his profession. *? _Kuméra Gupta

I’e coins bear the image o” Kumara = ated on the peacock on

the reverse (Fig. 11) Finally the famous Afahdkavya of

Kahdasa, the Kuméra Sambhava, which poetically narrates

the birth of Skanda, and the Skanda Purana highly testify

te the veneration of this son of Siva in northern Indis.

In particular, according to Kalidasa, Guha seems to have

been the only son of Parvati (sic). certainly the first.’ A

very famous stele, owned by the Bharata Kala Bhavan of

Banaras, is a further iconcgraphiecal evidence of this vw nera-

tion. (Fig. 12) Skanda ig shown in the maharéjalila pose,

seated upon his vahana, the peacock, whose tail, spread be-
hind the god, forms a sort of prabAdvali for the figure, Skands
has the sula or javelin in his left hand, while the right one
holds a feist, which looks like a pomeg. nate. The pracock,
resting on the ground, wants to eat the sweet grains of the
fiuit. Skanda is shown wearing a low but ornate headgear,
large circular earings that come down upon his shoulders, and

a rich necklace out of which two decorative tusks and a cakru

are pending. The face of the god is youthful, peaceful and

very pleasing.

And yet it a later period all devotion of northern India
to Skanda or Kiarttikeya died out. In some places it is
surrounded with a certain superstitious fear. In the Bombay
State no woman whose husband is alive would ever vigit a
temple of Karstikeya Suvimi.*® “In Bengal it is stated that
the temple of Subrahmanya is favoured by disreputable wo-
Men On certain occasions for favour peculiar to their inte-
rest’. '* Thus Skanda is now almost exclusively a South
‘3 Sudraka, Mrecha Katika BI, 14, 1. This very thief calls al thieves

“ Skenda putras,” “the children of Skanda.” (IT, 12, 2), One
wondera why Skandi is made we patron of thieves,

4 The oldest ms of the Skenda Purine has been found in Nepel.
It ix in Gupta script of the 7th cent. CL Wintemite. History of
Sansknz Literature, +, p. 71, n. ¥.

146 Kalidasa, Kumara Sambhava, V,14.

2 Gor witha Rac, Eiements of Hindu iconography. Il, pt 2, p. 415.

18 Mahadeva, “Lord Subrahmanya: His Many Names,” The Hteds
Organ (JafM™z, Ceylon), 1937, April 13, p. 1.

--- Page 38 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 27

Indian deity. “ There is not a village, however small, which

does not possess a shrine for Subrahmanya." He is, in

fact, adored at timea as the supreme God, “ the all pervading
epirit of the Universe the Essence from which all things are
evolved. by which they are sustained and into which they are
involved. '" What a contrast with the indifference of northern
India !
VI
THE APPEARANCE AND DEVELOPMENT
OF GANAPATI

But we have now to account for another element in the
worship of the Son of God ; for in the historical period of
Tadia, both in epics and Puranas, Siva is supposed to have two
sons, Ganesa and Karttikeya. That is the great problem,
which we have to solve. Who is Ganapati and where does he
come from ?

A few very early facts of what we may call the pre-
history of Ganess may help us to find the final solution to this
problem,

Some names of Ganapsti are heard in the literary history
of India before he actual'y appcars in our great eub-continent.
It. appears for the first time in the Rgveda, Brahmanaspati
ie given the title of Ganapati, “the lord of the Ganas,”
ganandm tv ganapatim Aavémahe,** the Istter forming
the host of demigods, which were later on supposed to
be the attendants of Siva. Branma or Brahmsnaspati
jg naturally proclaimed their lord and king from very early
ut Thid,

146 Somasundaram Pillai, Patns p.32,n 2. Among the Grima-Devatas
or village deities of South India there is one called Aysnar, who
also claims to be the son of Siva and of Visnu, under the form
of Mshini Accordingly he ix called Harthoreputra, Though he
seems to be an old indigenous deity, some characteristics are
typical of Murugan. He hax a trident upon his heed slwess, He
ia supposed to be # soldier Nallasevape, but he also uses a stick
oaly used by ancetics.

149 Rgveda, I, 23, 1.

--- Page 39 ---
P22)

days.* In the same woy Indra is - 0 called “Ganapati among
the ganas.”'* Yet the title migrates o indicate Siva at a
later period, for in the ey ‘c Siva is styled Garesa and Gancs-
vana, (“the lord of the Ganas. ’).

By an extraordinary antithesis the other name is attach-
¢d to four demons by the name Vinayaka, maiignant beings
who created obstacles and difficulties, % but who were easily
propitiated.  Purinic literature of a much later period ex-
plains that the group of four Vinayakas was merged into one
definite god whom Rudra ernstituted the “Jeader of the
Ganas," Ganapati." Wag this Ganapati --- Vinayaka al-
rekdy endowed with the elephantine face as in the later scons ?
It seems so, for in the Taittirtya Aranyaka there is a mystical
prayer addressed to & god called Dantén, “ the one of the wuak, ”
who is said to possess a twist -d trunk (vakratunda) and who
houls a corn-sheaf. 8 sugar cane and a club.'* The description
is so characteristic of Ganapati, that we cannot resist to accept
his full identification with this Vedic Dantin, a name which is
also given to him in the hiatorieal period.

After this reference, a decorative frieze round the Kantake
Cetinga stipa. near Mihintale, in Ceylon (a monument which
is mentioned in inscriptions of the Ist and 2nd centuries)
depicts a double procession of dwarfish ganas, carrying gifts,
converging to a central point, wherein there is another dwarfish
figure with the face of an elephant, with his trunk turned
to the left, as 1...8t of his images of a later period are.
This undoubtedly is the Ganapati — Vinayaka having a
vakratunda, of the Taittiriya Aranyoka, In the Smrti of
Yajnavalkya, written in the 6th century, he is definitely
mentioned as a demon exalted to the rank of a deva ; but
1 Ibid, X, 112, ®,

11 Attereya Bréhmens, I, 21,
183 Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism, Sciniom endecther Minor Seets, pp. 147-8.
a33 Teid, p. 148,
184 Taittiviys Aranyake, X, 1, 6.
me Gat, Ganens A Monogreph an the Elephant-faced God, p. 25,
. 22, ©.
M6 Bhendarkar. ov. elt, p. 149,
om

--- Page 40 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 20
he is not described as elephant-beaded till the eight
century. "7

This ia a very hutnble origin of the great Ganapati, As
leader of the ganas, le was supposed to be an aspect of Siva
and he appears as distinct from Siva, endowed with divine
qualities, in the introduction to the north Indie recension of
the Mahabharata. Jn this work Siva himself is named as
Ganesdna, thus still showing his connections with our
Ganess.** Accordingly 4 the rock-cut temples of Aibole,
which are supposed to be some of the oldest of {ndia, he ia
shown as an attendant ef Siva.” This lowly origin of Ganesa
is corroborated by this statement attributed to Manu:
“Sambhu (Siva) is the god of the Brahmans, whilc Ganess
ys the god of the Sidras. ” 4 Considering all these puints Miss
Getty is led to affirm that he “seems only to have been
known to the uneducated clusses up to the aixth century”. **

But precisely in this century, during the Gupts period,
the first image of Ganesa appears in India, and thet with
very remarkable features. The image was discovered at
Bhumara, a village in the old Nagaudh State, in Madhya
Pradesh, and is now in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
Three of his hands hold the axe, his broken tusk and a medaka
{or cake), the fourth being round the sokti (his fingers ap-
pear touching her Jeft breast). The most extraordinary feature
is the sakti or devi, seated on the left thigh of Ganapati. She
offers him a bow] of ladhus (sweets), which he takes with
his trunk. The right upper corner of the stone behind the
image is broken, but on the opposite side one sees @ gana,
which image makes one think that the sculptor stil] wanted
to emphasize the fact that this god was the “Lord of
ganas”,

13? Ibid, p 179.

138 Getty, op. cif, p. 2.

130 oid, p. 28.

100 Hopkins, Religions of Indie, p. 687. .

191 Getty, op. cit, p. 2

192 Coomaraswamy, “The Origin and use of Images ia India," Inter-
ations! Studio, 1928 (May), 23%

--- Page 41 ---
30

This image discloses an extraordinary development
round Ganapsti not only in the sphere of art. but in the very
world of religious speculations. The appearance of hia eakti
on thig occasion clearly suggests the existence of other images
and texts concerning Ganesa, which have not come down to
ug up to now.

Tt was precisely at about the same time cr a little earlier ;
than the sect of the Ganapatyas arose in Northern India,
though they came into evidenc® only in the 10th century
with the appearance of the book Sankaradigvijaya, written
by one Anandatirtha, which discioses the history and tenets
of the sect. It was undoubtedly this acet that gave an extra-
ordinary impulse to she cult of Gananati in Northern India.
The Ganapatyas worshipped Ganesa, ag the “Lord of the
Universe" with the exclusion of all other gods, even Siva
himself. Such was one of their prayers :

“Praise be to’ thee, Ganapati.

“Thou art the visible Reality. Thou art the Creator,
the Preserver, the Destroyer, the Supreme Brahma, the
spirit Manifest. The universe is born from thee. The
Universe is manitest in thee : earth, water, fire, air and
ether, Thou art Brahma, thou art Viswo, thou art
Rudrs. Thou art superior to the Trimiurti. .

“Om ! Praise be to thee, Ganapati”.

The Ganapatyas worshipyed the sakti of Ganapati as
well as his inga ; some phalic images of this god connected
with his sakti, which will be mentioned later, may be the
product of thia double additional cult. Even after the division
of the sect into six sub-sects, all acknowledged Ganapati as
the [First Cause “through whose méyd, Siva and the other
gods were created.” Accordingly they worshipped him
endowed with ten pairs of arms and helding his sakti, styling
him Paramatma (Supreme Spirit) and Mahdganapati.
(Fig. 15.)

Ganesa, being thus the supreme in the Indian pantheon,
could reduce all other gods to nothingness, The Ganesa
1% Sankaradigvijaya, pp. 106 #7. (Bib). Ind, Calcutta, 1968).

14 Colebrooke, MUcelisneous Ksscys, 1, 212 (London, 1637).

--- Page 42 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 31
Purana relates that he once granted Tripurésura to conquer
the three worlds. Accordingly he conqucred Brahma and
Visnu ; when he requested Siva to descend from-Mount Kai-
lisa, he was not obcyed immediately. Instead Siva, accom-
panied by Brahma and Visnu appeared to Ganesa to save
them from utter distruction. They finally succeeded owing
to Siva’s faith in Ganesa’s power. +

It was doubtlessly the influence of this sect that intro-
duced Ganapati and his myths into the Puranas. which were
finally redacted all along this period. The Brakmavatverta
Purana contains many stories about him (Gancaa Khanda).™
The Agni Purdna speaks of his cult (Ch. 71). The Vamana
Purdng narrates the origin of the god. The Vardha Purdna
refers likewise to his birth. In some recens ona of the Srati
Khando of the Padina Purdna there is also much about the
cult of Gauesa. The Garuda Purana includes him among the
five gods whose rules of worship are deelared, viz. Visnu, Siva,
Durga, Sirya and Ganesa. Needless to say that the Ganesa
Purdna ig fully a fruit of the spirit of the Ganapatyas. Siva
is introduced in it as waiting on Ganesa with the most austere
devotion for 8 stretch of ten years and thereby winning from
him the boon of victory over the demon Trpurasura. '**

The influence of the ideas of the Ganapatyas was 90
great that thes made him, as it were, at home in every other
sect, combining him with almost all other gods, so that now
“all sects unite in claiming him as their own”.'* Thus
Saktisin adopted Ganexa as their especial deity with the
exclusion of all other gods even of Siva and Parvati,’ We
have seen how Ganesa appears with his sakti even in the
first image we have of this god. In Ellora there is a figure
18 Ct. JRAS. VIL, (1845), pp 319-323.

199 CL Wilson, Essays on Sanskrit Literature, I, po. 103-108.

181 A very good analysis of this Upspuréne may be sen in Stevenson,
© Analysis of the Ganesa Purina”, J RAS, 1846, pp 310-329,

16) Srikante Iyer, “The Popular View of Ganesa in Madras,” Indian
Aatiquary, KXX, p. 255.

1@ Cf. Getty, Canes, p. 20.

--- Page 43 ---
K-24

of Uma (Parvati), having four hands, in the upper pair
of which she balanccs a small statue of Ganesa in one and &
bnga, in the other, thus equating Siva and Ganapati.’ At
Bhera-ghat, uear Jubbulpore, there 1s a temple where there
is a female form of Ganess, a Ganesani, whuse left bent leg
1g supported by a ginal! Ganesa, half kneeling underneath, '*
This 1s the omy wage of a female counterpart of Ganesa in
the whole uf India ; but femple forms of Gancsa are known
in Tibet.

The sakti accompanying some of the images of Ganesa
is at times called Lukshmu, thus showing this god invading the
boundaries of Vaisnavusm. Such 1s the e.ght-banded Ganapati
accompanstd Ly Lakshmi, which is found in the Visvandths-
svarain temple of ‘Teukasi in the Tirunelveli District. More
clearly Vatsnava 1s still a pre-Angkorian figure of a standing
Ganesa in Cambodia, whose two upper hands hold the cakra
and the sondhe of Visnu.'?

Our little god is also much at home in Kranaism. The
Brahmavaivarta Puréna equates Ganesa with Krena himself
originally in the human form. Accordingly in the Ganesa
Khande, Radha, Krsna’s wife, is being depicted adoring
Ganesa.""* In the spirit of this identification a Ganesa Gite
was likewise produced, which is not different from the Bhaguad
Gité, the name of Ganesa being only substituted for that of
Krena."* Consequently it is not strange to find icons of Bala
Gonesa crawling in the same way as Bala Krena, ‘* or deno-
minstions as Navanita Ganeea, which has given foundation
to one of the suosecta of the Ganapatyas.

Ganapati is also being worshipped by some Jainas of
Gujera: in some rock temples. "’ The Museum of our Indian
179 Burgess, Report on the Elura Cave Temples, pl. XXX. fg. 2.

Att Getty, op. cit, p. 40.

12 fbi, p.

113 Ibid, p. 50. DL 250.

154 Cir. Wilson, Kassye vn Sensicrtt Liteveture, I, p. 117.
133 Monier Willams, Indign Wisdom, p. 139 (London, 1875).
a1¢ Getty, op. cit, p. 8 and pl 18 b.

--- Page 44 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI ie]
Historical Receerch Institute possesses a few metal images
of Ganesa which came from p.aces of Jaina worship, among
them one of Maha-Ganapati with his sokti, of which the
Museum is rightly proud. (See Fig. 15). These Jaina images
have their prabhavatis always crowned by a kalasa.

The cult of Ganesa hax especially been spread by the
Buddhists. '* Their devotion is founded upon a mystic mantra,
called the Ganapatihrdaya, (“the heart of Ganapati"). which
was supposed to have been given to Anands by the Buddha
bimee?f, but whose origin is evidently much later.'" The
mantra in question contains an invocation to be used at the
time of the dedication of a status of s dancing Ganesa,
endowed wth three eyes. Ganesa being this officially,
though surreptitiously introduced into Mahavana Buddhism, it
is not strange to find his images ornace with Buddhist charac-
teristics ; one of Champa has the wanisa or skull protuberance
(one of the mahapurusa-laksanas adopted by the Bud-
dhiets)'™ ; in another Ganesa is seated in padméasana, as
ween in statues of Gautama ;" a third one denicts him in
baumispareamudra, s0 often reproduced in the figures of the
Buddha. *

The cult of Genapati travelled on a Mahavana Buddhist
tucket to very far foreien lands. Burma, Siam. Champa. Com-
bodia, Nepal, Tibet, Chinese Turkestan. Khotan. China, Mon-
golia and Japan admitted Ganesa into their pantheon. spread
bis cult throughout and created new artistic manifestations
of his in sculpture and painting. How deeply dic Ganapati
go into the heart of the people the following legend will show.
Refore the birth of the Tibetan saintly ni‘esionary P’ags-pa,
who carried Mahavana Buddhism to Mongolia and converted
Emperor Kublai Khan to the new faith, in the 13th century,
MT Ibid, p. 29.

118 Toid., 9. 23.

178 Mitra, The Nepalese Buddhist Literature, p. 69-00: Bhattacharyya,
Indian Buddhist Iconography. pp. 157-158. (London, 1924).

19 Getty, op. cit, p. 52 wad pl. 4b.

ui Pid,

194 Pid, p. S3 and pl. 24 b.

ui Ct, 1d, pp. 37-54; 67-87 and ple, 24-39.

--- Page 45 ---
*

it is said that his father invoked the assistance of Ganesa.
The latter appeared to him, took him up with his trunk and
carried him to the top of Mount Meru and showing him the
country of Mongolia, announced to him: “Thy eon will
subjugate this whole country.” '*

This successful intrusion of Ganapati into the Buddhist
pantheon. provoked nevertheless a reaction. He was finally
shown as a demon under the feet of other deities. In Nepal
he appears trodden by Vighnantaka, the “Destroyer of
obstacles." The irony of fate ! It was Ganapati’s own
title 1 In Nepal and Tibet he is shown under the feet of
goddess Apardjita, who is consequently styled Ganapati-
samakrantd, “she who tramples on Ganapati.” Again in
Tibet he is also den‘cted under the feet of the black Manjusni,
the Tibetan god of wisdom possessing three eyes, again a
title and endowment which appertained to Ganesa himself.
Once more in Tibet he is shown under the feet of Mahakala
who crushes him “as the Hindu demon Vindvaka,” thus
finally coming back to the original state of his exiatence. This
was a crushing defeat for the little elephantine god who knew
enly of successes in his daring career.

Yet these were not the only foreign lands visited by him.
On the ships of the Hindu merchants and settlers he vovaged
to the far off islands of Indonesia, java, Borneo and Bali,
where he was also worshipped by the Buddhist. Some of
Ganesa's images of Java, both in stone and in bronze, are
among the moet ornamented icons of this god.'™.

If Ganapati has been so successful even in the realm of
other religious sects, it is no wonder that he should have
thriven within his own Saiva sect. His attempts st conquer-
1 Grinwedel, Mythologie des Buddhtemus, pp. 54-65. (Lupzig, 1900).
46S Getty, op. cit, p. 43 and pL 43 a and b.
we Ibid, pp 8 and 43.

MT Told, p. 44.
188 did, p. 42.
me Told, pp. 85-66 and pla. 29-34,

--- Page 46 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 36
ing the highest post in Saivism, by supplanting his supposed
father, are clear to the student of Hindu iconography. He
has, little by little, adopted all the characterintics of Siva
inaking them hia own. Uchchhista Ganapati is shown with
the urdhva linga, ™ as some of the images of An (the proto-
type of Siva in the Indus Valley) and some of the Bengali
images of Siva are represented." Siva’s third eye on the
forehead appears in many statues of Ganapati : UchchAista
Ganapati.* Haridra Ganapati? Laksmi Ganapati,™ Tantrio
images, ™ Nepalese images '* and a recently discovered image
at Paharpur, Bengal.'*’ We have also some in our Indian
Historical Research Institute museum. Siva is depicted with
three faces as Mahesamirti ; Ganeas is shown in India with
two faces in icons of Ganapati Jayanti ; '* and with three
faces in Japan. More comnion are, especially in Nepal, the
images of He1amba Ganapati having five heads, four facing the
four cardinal points and a fifth one on top.” This is precisely
the very way how the five heads of Sadasiva are ranged, or
at times the other way about, displaying four fates directed
to the four cardinal points on « sort of hair-knot upon the
head. Heramba Ganapati is usually riding on a lion, which
he seems to have borrowed from Parvati. (Fig. 16) Yet
very far from Nepal in Tiruvannaikkaval, Tiruchirapalli
District, a five headed Ganapati, called Pancamukhi Gonanati,
is being worshipped. He is represented without a vehicle.
We have already seen how Ganapati is very often repreeented
with his sakti in the same way as Siva. Like Siva he is at
190 Gopinatha Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, I, 1 pt p. 58. See
one in the Nagesvararwimin temple, Kumbakonam.

19 Battasali. iconography of Buddhist aud Brakmenical Sculptures,
pls XLV, XLVI, XLLX (e) end L (1).

191 Gopinaths Rao, toc. cit,

183 Getty, op. cit, p. 16

1st bid, p. 3°.

186 1did, p. 59. .

100 Ibid, p. 53.

11 Dikshit, Excavetions ot Paharpur ta eugSt (7 of the AS. 1),
No. 85, p. 40, pl. XXXII d.

1 Getty, op. cit, p. 14.

100 Ibid, pp. 14-15.

a Ibid, pp. 39-40.

--- Page 47 ---
36

times wearing a jatd-mukuta, viz. made with his own hair. **
Not a few images of Ganesa both in {ndia and abroad. in Nepal
and Tibet. display him dancing in the same way as Siva
when dancing the Tandava. He is. a8 such. styled Nrtta-
Ganapati. * (Fig. 17) The museum of the Indian Historical
Research Institute possesses five of these imaces. The
dance of Ganesa is totally different from the dance of Krsna,
in his Venugopal images. Ganapati stands on one leg as Siva
does, Outside one af the Siva rock-ent temples of Badami.
af the time of Pulikesi I. one of the earliest roek-cnt temples of
India, (Fig 18) there ie a small figure of Ganapati, shown
in a olightly dancing pase. ns if he were learning how to
dance from his supposed father. In fact the dance of Gana-
pati is Siva's dance. Finally in the same wav aa Siva is at
times represented nude (Bhairava. Bikganamiirti. linga of
Gudimallam, ete.), Canspati is also shown nude. **

As regards apparel. Ganesa is also given the jewel head-
dre of Siva, as well aa the crescent: while hie hands
held Siva's avmobols, the trident. the ankusa and the rosary.
In Nepal and Tibet. some images of Ganesa carry the cintd-
mars, or symbol of the germ of life. whose significance is
not very dissimilar from the meaning of the lino, In Java
there is a state of Ganess that holds a amall Nandi. the
wihana of Siva." His hips are in India at times covered with
a tiger skin, which is very dear to Siva in his role as 8 vogin.
Many images of Ganapati found in Java are ornamented
with skulls, which is one of the svmbols of Siva as the
Destroyer. Just as Siva usually has the Nandi, his whan,
in front of his temples, Ganapati also has temples with the
21 ibid, pp. 57.

31 Ibid, pp $8 and 45.

22 Banerii. The Hatheyas of Tripurt, (M. of the AS. I, No. 28), pL
XXXIV; Getty, op. elt, p. 19.

34 Getty, op cit, pp 38-40, 57

mt Ibid,

wm Ibid, p. 19.

at Ibid, p. $7.

we Ibid, pp. 40 and 57, pls. 90 a and 34 a and passin.

--- Page 48 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 37
rat in front of the entrance door. (Fig. 19) Mies Getty
finally affirms in this connection : “In all countzies, where he
has been worshipped, images of Ganesa have been found in
which he is identified with his father Siva." He is also
supposed to be » transformation of Bhairava.™* Like Siva,
Ganapati also is proclaimed to be the “ Protector of Cow-
herds”.?* Popular worship impersonates him in a abape-
leas stone, called suayanbhis marti, in the same way as Siva
bimeelf.

Noedlese to say that the cult of Ganeea apread parallelly
to the cult of Siva all over India. In South India, in all the
Saiva temples there is a shrine dedicated to Ganesa.?" The
largest of all these temples is at Tiruchirapalli. L€ is called
Ucchipillayar Kévil. It comprises the whole area of the
famous rock in the centre of the city, and the main shrine
dedicated to the elephant god is on the summit of the rock.
In Malsbar there arc speciai shrines where epecial sacrifices
are offered to Vinayaka for the prosperity of the country.
They are called Ganapati Homas. Occasionally much greater
celebrations are being held at a grat cost, which are called
Mahé-Genapati Homas, “ great sacrifices of Ganapati”. "*
The largest images of Ganapati are found in South India in
the neighbourhood of Hampi. They belonged to the old city
of Viysyanagara, One of them 20 feet high, called Kadalaikally
“the grain-of-gram stone” is enshrined within a beautiful
Dravidian temple of almost classical appearance. ae In ite
vicinity stands the other, also ironically called Sésivikatlu, “the
roustard-seed stone.” (Fig. 23) It isa roonolith 30 feet high,
which’ could not be enclosed within s temple. It is only covered
by 4 ecveral-plain-p.llared roandapa‘n. Both are on the saddle
of the rocky hill overhanging the Pamphpeti temple of
30 Ibi, p. 40.
a6 reid, p. 13.

211 Voge), Indian Serpent Lore, p. 253. ; Getty, op. cit, p. 32.

aus Srikanta Iyer, "The Popular view of Ganesa in Madras,” Indlen
Antquary, XXX, p. 255.

21s Travencore Stute Mannucl, II, p. St (1006).

314 Longhurst, Hampt Ruins, pp 97-98.

--- Page 49 ---
33

Hampi. Among the temples of North India we may

mention one of Banaras called Sakhi Viniyak, which is

the last temple visited by the pilgrims who go to the sacred
cuty. It was built by a Maratha in 1770. > But the moat
famous temple of Ganesa in northern India is at Chinchvad,
near Poona, where a kind of living incarnation of Ganesa
dwells, The dignity is hereditary in the fannly for the last
three hundred years." The importance of Ganapati in the

Saiva temples is evident from the fact that his images are

often carved on the dedicatory block and above it at the

entrance to the shrines of Siva, thue Ganapati becoming like
the guard at the entrance of his supposed father’s house."

(Fig. 20).

It is not only this public cult, but even the private per-
sonal devotion to this god that discloses the influence he
has exercised in modern Hindu minds, In South India he is
invoked the first of all the gods at the morning ablutions,
snd again at noon and at night before going to aleep.™*
Genesa is the god whoin the pious Hindu “invokes when
he begina sil sacrifices and religious cere:nonies,” says &
Hindu author, “ all addresses even to superior gods, all serious
compositions in writing and all worldly affairs of moment” **
“Every merchant,” says another author, “enters on his busi-
ness after first propitiating this deity. In marriages and in
418 Greaves, Kashd, the City Mhustrions, or Benares, pp. 63, 81, 84,

(Benares, 1909),

318 Poona Gazetteer, III, (1885), pp. 125-127.

347 Getty, op cit, pp. 31 and 42 Actually Ganesa is found as Dvire-
pale at the entrance of Buddhist monasteries in Nepal. Getty, op.
cit, p. 40; and above the mam entrance to Buddhist and Brahmanic
tereples in Tibet. sbid, p42, In Halebidu, Mysore, his image ts
also seen fust outside the entrance to the Hoysalesvara temple to
the left.

348 Getty, op. eit, p 23.

~ ™ Gopinatha Rao, Flements of Hinds Iconogrephy, 1, pt 1, p. 46.

--- Page 50 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 39
every kind of religious ceremonies Ganeea is the first god
whcse help is invoked”.

In the month of September the feast of Ganesa is ce-
lebrated through the country, as an offical feast even with
the honours of a ‘Bask Holiday.’ In the South, it is called
Vinayacaruti; in the north Ganesa Cathurti. Clay or mud
images of the god are installed in the houses and adored and
feasted with merriment and joy. After that the image is
immersed into the sea, tank or river. In the South the
domeatic feast lusts one day only. In Maharastra, several
daye, up to a fortnight. The preaching of the great Indian
leader Shri Bal Gangadhar Tilak made this feast very popular
in the whole of Maharaetra.

Thus now Ganesa is worshipped in company of the great
deities Visnu, Siva, Parvati and Aditya (the sun), symbol of
Brahma. His image is not uncommonly tound in the so-called
Sivepanchyataneg, little altars of adoration for the ghouse-
hold (something like the old Penates for the Romans). (Fig.
21) When Ganeea is chosen as the iain household god he
is placed in the centre of the altar, Visnu to his right, Siva
to his Jeft, Parvati to the right of, or in front of, Visnu and
Aditya to the left of, or in front, of Siva,

*Gancss has finally become “ the most popular of all the
domestic deities of India." A modern Hindu writer pro-
3 Srikanta Iyer, “The Populur view of Ganesa m Madras,” Indian

Antiquary, XXX. p. 255. This author gives @ few specimens of

the prayers addressed 10 Ganeas ‘This is one: “ Who rides on

the rat, who has a modak in his hand, whose ears are Liko fy-wisks,
who weary @ long sacred thread, who is dwarfsh in cize, who is
the son of Sive, who dispels difficulties, aslutation to bis feet”

Ibid, p. 285. This 1s another prayer of a Brahmen boy: “The

elepbant-faced xod wha is accompanied by the group of beings,

who eats excellent fruits like the kapita snd gwada, the son of

‘UmA who destroys misery, I salute the lotus of the Lord of diM-

culties” (Vindyoke). Ibid. As may be easily seen there are po

theological conceptions at all in the wording of such prayers
21 Brikanta Lyer, “The Popular view of Ganesa in Madras,” Indien
Antiquery, XXX, p. 255,
6

--- Page 51 ---
40
claims him as “the Primordial essence ; the absolute supreme
principle by which the whole universe is regulated is named
Ganapati... The supreme being who protects the collection
of all things is Ganapati. The leader of angels and other
such beings is also called Ganapati ... He who presides over
the agsemblance of the transcendental and perceptible ele-
ments is Ganapati... He who rules over all the aspects of
Brahma, whether manifest or unmanifest, is Ganapati”.
VII
SKANDA AND GANESA
‘And what were in the meantime the relations between
Ganapati and his supposed brother Kumara, Karttikeya,
Skanda or Subrahmanya? Purposely we have avoided speak-
ing of this subject in the preceding pages to study the ques-
tion here as thoroughly as possible. This second son of God
who appears in the purinie and epic period scems to be, let
us put it clearly, an intruder. How does he behave with
the reat son of God? That is the question. The study of
Saiva myth and art will disclose many interesting revelations,
Misa Alice Getty after the study of numerous images of
Ganesa, both in painting and sculpture, draws this final con-
clusion :— .
* Parvati holding the child Ganesa on her lap is practically
never found either in stone sculptures or in Kangra minia-
tures, for although Ganesa and Karttikcya were often re-
presented with Parvati, it is invariably Karttikeya who is
seated on her lap while Ganesa is playing beside her”.**
This is the relative position of the two brothers in two
Kangra paintings of the Indian Muscum, London, which are
worth a detailed study. In both Karttikeya as Shanmukha
(with six heads) is shown in Parvati’s lap.® In one which
723 Sarasvati, “Greatness of Ganapati,” Journal of the Indian Society
of Oriental Art, VIL, p. 41.
79 Getty, Ganesa, p. 24.
6 Joid,, pl. 1b.

--- Page 52 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 41
depicts Siva as the Destroyer Ganapati is ecated behind his
father, half hidden, as if he were rot daring to approach the
family circle. Further atill, one may see the rat, Ganapati’s
vehicle ; while the peacock the vehicle of Karttikeya is perched
on the branch of a tree over the cave where they are shelter-
ed.

In the other painting there is rnore movement and family
pathos. (Fig. 25) Siva ss Bhitesvara (“The lord of
Spirita”) is shown stringing a garland of ekulls which he
usually wears under this denomination. Both children help
the father. Ganesa, who looks taller than his brother, is
standing to the left holding the string streched to facilitate
the work of his father; while Shanmukha, who is shown
more developed than in the preceding picture hands over one :
of the skulls, picked up from a heap, to his father, wishing
not to be less than Ganapati. This seems to be the real
childish feeling of jealousy, for while the hand that holda
the skull is directed to his father, he is unmistakably staring
at his brother.

The same feeling of shame on the part of Ganesa seems
to be discovered in a beautiful Rajput drawing of the British
Museum. (Fig. 26) Siva nude and with matted hair as 6
yogin ig represented leaning against the trunk of a tree.
Parvati, dutifully, pours milk into hig own cup. Behind his
father, in the same family circle. Shanmukha as a boy, also
nude, is offering food to his vaAana, the peacock, which is
standing high on the trunk of the tree. In the foreground
but separated from the other three one sees Ganesn, seated
between the bull Nandi and a lioness. Imitating his brother
he seems to have brought some of his ledkus to feed the
vahanas of his parents, but owing to his clephant’s head,
or to his low origin there grems to be in him some sort of
inferiority complex which makes him sit. let us say, within
the animal kingdom rather than on the carpet occupied by
his parents and hir brother. The artist of this drawing seems
to have had a highly developed sense of humour.

33 Mies Getty, op cit, } 35, does pot seem to loterpret this drawing
property.

--- Page 53 ---
2

Unlike these specimens there are numerous representa-
tions of the two brothers wherein they appear on the same
level. Such 1s the caso of another Rajput drawing of the
Britieh Muscum, wherein Siva appears as Gangadhara, While
the sacred river flows from Siva’s hair at the request of the
sage Bhagiratha (who appears in the lower left corner of the
picture), the two boys Shaninukha and Ganapati try to collect
a few drops of the holy water in some little lotas.*** (Also
see Fig. 24).

One more painting of the collection of Miss Alice Getty,
beautifully reproduced in colours in her monograph, shows
the two brothers next to each other in adoration in front of
Siva and Parvati in s darber on Mount Kaildss, Resourceful
Ganapati, painted fully red. has taken his position in the
first row of gods next to Brahma, leaving Shanmukha in the
eccond row next to Krena and Visnu.

A marble sculpture of our Indian Historical Research
Institute, coming from northern Gujerat displays Siva and
Parvati in the centre, Siva having Ganga imuing from the
top of his jaté-mukuta. (Fig. 22) To the right of Siva there
is Ganapati reclining on the Nandi which appears between
him and his father. Shanmukha is seen to the left of Parvati,
having the lion, Parvati’s rakana, in front. Both Ganesa and
Shanmukha appear as the dutiful children of the couple, the
former looking older than the latter.

Another stone sculpture of the Dacca Museuin showe the
two brothers in the same position of equality. Parvati is
lying on her left side Laving a child on a lotus-flower in front.
That child is Siva, who, according to a purnic myth, took the
shapo of a babe when she came to the Assembly of Gods to
choose a hushand. This is clearly shown by the linga carved
on top of the imnge of the goddess. To the left of the Maga
there are two small figures of Ganesa and Karttikeya, ™
24 Getty, op, cit, pl. 108.

227 Getty, op. cit, frontispiece.
72" Hnatuasali, iconography of Buddhist and Brahmenical Sculptures,
P 138 and pl. LIII and LIV.

--- Page 54 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI rt)

The beautiful panels of the big Saivite cave of Flephanta
reproduce also the two brothers on the side of their parents,
almost in every panel, (Fig. 28) the only difference from the

* above specimens being that in these sculptures Karttikeys
always looks older than Ganapati.

Contrary to what Mies Getty saya in all groups of the
saptanuilrkas, or astamatrkds I know, for instance the one of
Elephanta, the goddesses are flanked by the two brothers,

The two brothers are also found together in the frescos
of two of the caves of Baziklik, Chinese-Turkestan, viz.
Nos. 7 and 32.2% Two images of Ganesa and Karttikeya were
also found together in a cave at Kombeng, Borneo, showing
thereby that they were combinely worshipped. ™*

Once more they ape shown together attending the part-
mirvana of the Buddha on a small fragment at Sarnath. They
are grouped with other Brahmanical deities, and Ganspati
appears riding on the rat. ™

The Hindu popular mind, secustomed to depict their
gods, nubject to the same feelings and passions that exist
among men, could not but suppose that some rivalry and
bitterness must have eprang between the two brothers. This
ia clearly revealed in two popular stories that are narrated
concerning their relations, When it was a question of their
marriage their parenta decided that he would marry first who
would go first round the world. Subrahmanya on his peacock
sportively attempted the contest; but tricky, casuistical
Ganapati went round, his parents telling them that the world
is typefied in Siva, Siva being the Creator of the world:
“What is the world but your own holy self?” Siva approved
of the statement of Ganapati, who accordingly was married
forthwith, When his brother eame back from his long journey,
239 Getty, op. cit, pp. 11 and 27.

398 Getty, op. cit, p. 41.
#1 1bid, p. 63.
233 Foucher, Iconogrephie Buddhique de Minde, I, Sg. 30.

--- Page 55 ---
4

he was furious against hia elephantine brother. and he in spite
retreated to Mount Krauncha where he lived as a brah-
maodrin for the rest of his life.

Another similar story concerning a pomegranate is also
narrated, wherein the ill feeling of Subrahmanya against
Ganesa is also clearly emphasized. In point of fact Ven-
katakrishna Rro acknowledges that “the Puraias are replete
with stories in which he (Ganesa) fought with Skanda and
emerged victorious though with the loss of his tusk. 9

The growing importance of Ganesa in the appreciation of
the people is discovered through the works of art. We have
zeen how Shanmukha is always depicted on Parvati's lap in
former days, but this place was finally given to Ganesa. Misa
Getty mentions a Northern Indian bronze in which Ganapati
ia seated on the right knee of Parvati ; while in a very rare
poreelain group the boy is seated on the left knee of Siva.
We know of s painting in a temple in Vaikom, Travancore
State, of the early 16th century. which displays the boy
Ganapati seated on the left leg of P&rvati.™

A new step in Ganapati’s successful carrier in marked by
the fact that in modern times when the two brothers are being
mentioned, Ganapati is supposed to be the elder and Skanda
the younger. The roles of both were finally exchanged. It
was but natural, for as Srikanta Iyer says about Ganapati,
“as the favourite son of Siva, he receives honours equal to
him”.*7 Mons. Jean Herbert gives a philosophical aspect of
the two brothers which may perhaps explain this preference
of the Indian people for the elephant-faced god: ‘The
younger, Skanda, generally represented as the war god, one
who loves violent activity, symbolizes the appeal to the brutal
8 Srikanta Iyer, op. cit, Indian Antiquary, XOCK, p. 255.

336 Somasundaram Pillai, Paint, p.2, 0.1. The full story will be nar-

rated in one of the following chapters. Cf. below, p. 212.

334 Venkatakrishna Rao, “The Ganapati Cult”, QJ0S. XILI, p. 04.
3 Kramrisch, Drevide and Kerala in the Ast of Travencore, pl 41.
1 Grikanta lyer, op. cit. p, 255.

--- Page 56 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 45
physical force as means to attain liberation ; he is not much
honoured by the Hindus, who are not much in favour of such
action and feel more inclined to the practice of chimas ......
The elder. Ganesa, on the other hand.... represents the ap-
peal to the spiritual force in the course of the soul towards
liberation".

The fact is that in Northern India, Skanda, Kuméra or
Karttikeya is absolutely overlooked in the religious life of
the people. For the majority of the people Siva has only one
son and that is Ganesa or Ganapati. Accordingly he receives
the titles of Sivaputra, Sambhutenya and Sambhusuta.

Two specimens of the Museum of our Indian Historical
Research Institute show Ganapati in this last stage of his
successful carecr. (Fig. 29) One is a copper image of a four-
armed Siva, coming from the southern Maratha country. It is
dated 18th century, The two upper hands of. the god hold
the trident and the damaru (drum). With the other two
hands he embraces Parvati to his left and Ganesa to hia right,
who are thus seated on his legs.

The other specimens is a very modern one. (Fig. 28) It is
@ group in ivory imitating the statues of the Hoyeala school
of sculpture representing Siva, Parvatl and Ganapati dancing.
it has been carved by Shri Anandu Manjansth Shetty, a
teacher of the Sir J. J. Jeejibhoi School of Art, Bombay,

We have been studying the sudden rise of Ganesa in the
Indian pantheon, his early humble cppearance, his daring
attempts against Skanda, his final ousting him. from popular
Hindu mind and worship. Hig whole career is ¢ great mysicry
which we shall try to unravel in the foliowing pages. Perhaps
the seeret of this mystery had to be counted amongst those
which could not be pronounced in front of Ganesa and Skanda
themselves, sa narrated in the Afahénirvéna-tantra. Parvati
238 Herbert, Genens, préctdé d'une étude eur Dieu cher les Hindus,

Dp. 23. (Lyon, 1946.)

--- Page 57 ---
46
much troubled with doubts and mind obscurity once ap-
proached Siva and said: “ Who else but thee, O Lord of
the three Worlds, is able to solve these doubts of mine ?
Thou who knowest all.” Siva then replied : “What is that
thou sayest, O Great Wise one and Beloved of my heart ?
1 will tell you anything, be it ever so bound in mystery, even
that which should not be said before Ganesa and Skands. *”

The Shanda-Purdna reveals the deep feeling of the
votaries of Skanda against the growing cult of Ganesa, when
it depicts the crowds of unworthy people, stidras and bar-
barians worshipping Siva at Somnath in order to attain to
the heavens of the devas. The minor deities headed by Indra
protested to Mahesvara, ‘The lalter then crested Vindyaka,
the “Lord of Obstacles” to impede those low people to enter
heaven.

VIE
THE STORY OF GANESA'S ORIGINS

Several theories have been advanced to explain the origin
of Ganesa, as he is the only animal-headed god in the Indian
Pantheon. *

It has been supposed that Ganesa is s Yaksa,™" de. one of
the demiguds attcnding on Kuvers,

It ig snostly admitted that the lower part of h's thick-set
body may be the bedy of a yakaa **7; but ass whole Ganess
is not & yaksa im the least : none of his names are found on
yoksa lista,?" nor is he associated with yakeas in any puranic
myth, *#*
ie Avolan, The Great Liberation, (Second Ed}, p. 6 1927.
10 The animal coeonds of Viana: Pat Tortce, Boer. Lica ere of 8

different character. They are only manifestations of God. The

vdhengs are not gods.
a Coomaraswarny, Yokse, Part 1, pp. 7-14.
» “Tho Durga Pooga: Federal i ” Caleutis

Municipal Gazzette, 1932, Ociaden Hon of Divinitiea, ” Cs
343 Getty, op. eit, p 13.

34 Ibid, p. 27.

--- Page 58 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 47

Miss Getty is inclined to believe that “he was primarily
the totem of a Dravidan tribe”.?? But there is no evidence
concerning the existence or such totem. There certainly
existed in India the tribe of the Géjes or Kasas, who very
likely had an elephant ag their ldecana, but there was never
A composite lincana partly human and partly animal, re-
sembling the figure of the elephant god.™

Similarly it has been said that he orginally belonged te

an animal cult." And Miss Getty seems to like the theory
“sinee his image is found in Hindu temples worshipped in
company with the animal avatars of Vianu".? But there is
no clear evidence of any animal worship in ancient India. The
very serpenta were never worshipped, but propitiated only.

Sone authors believe that Ganesa was originally “a
Dravidian deity worshipped by the aboriginal populations of
India ”.* We roust eay first of all that the oo-called original
populations of Indis are different from the Dravidians. There
is certainly not the least evidence of such a divinity in the
Proto-Dravidian cities of the Indus Valley ; nor have antho-
pologists ever brought forward euch an elephantine god from
any aboriginal tribe.

‘A South Indian legend describee him as a demi-god vho
threw his broken tusk to a giant demon named Gaja-
mukhasurs ; the latter forthwith became a rat which waa
taken by Ganesa as bis vdhana.** The carly etagea of the
career of Ganapati which were described above show him
23 Ibid, p. 1.

200 The rat, Ganesa’s véhana. seems to have been a totem among the
Mundas and other aboriginal tribes of Chota Nagpur. Ct. Risley,
Tribes and Castes of Bengal, UI, p. 113 (1891).

2 Crooke, The Popular Religidn and Folk-lore of Northera Indie, I,
p. 164

209 Getty, op. cit, p. 1.

2 Ibid.

140 Jouveau-Dubreutl, Areheotogie du Sud de Vinde, I, p. 4 (Paris,
1914),

--- Page 59 ---
48
indeed in this character of demi-god of the legend, but this
does not explain his origin in the least.

Nor is the opinion of those who call him a “ Dravidian
Sun-god” satisfactory Certainly the Proto Dravidians worship-
ped the Sun, but it was identified with An, the Lord, the
Proto-type of Siva. Nor had any of the eight forma of Au

, any shape similar to an elephant.

Very recently Mr. T. G. Arsvamuthan has propounded the
theory that though Ganesa as worshipped now is not found
in Vedic works he is “in spirit” in the very Rgveda, because
his powers and names are sseociated with the Marute-Rudra-
Brhaspati- Indra conceptions. “* Yet his argumentation is
faulty, because since Ganapati was admitted to the Hindu pan-
theon, he naturally was in the course of time given different
powers which were conccived a9 divine powers from very an-
cient days ; but this is on no account a proof that Ganesa is 8
very ancient Hindu deity as he affirms.

All these opinions about the origin of Gancea whieh ve
have recorded try to explain the beginnings of this puzzling
god by facts which are obscure and unknown, as the nature
of the yaksas and of the totems, and the prevalence of animal
cult in the aboriginal rites. It is not a satisfactory method.
An unknown thing must be explained by well known facts
and clear ideas. Otherwise the mystery increasea and the
problem becomes more entangled. We shall follow this
method.

Of the three names that are given to the son of An (the
proto-type of Siva) in the inscriptiona of the Indus Valley
there is one which, as seen above, doubtlessly identifies him
with Skanda = Subrahiaanya, ‘That name is Murugan, the
oldest Dravidian name of Subrahmanya. But there is another
name which ig worth studying while looking into the origins
8 Aravémuthan, “Ganesa: Clue to a Cult and # Culture” Journal

of Oriental Research, XVII (1949), pp. 228-230, 283.

--- Page 60 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 49
y
of Ganesa. Murugan is also called Amit. What is the meaning
of this name ?

Anil simply means “the Son ef An.” It is a clear con-
fession of the divine filiation of Murugan. But dne may also
mean “elephant,” and the suffix él added to 2 noun (now @
haa become in) means “of.” Thus dnei would mean “of the
elephant.” This compound word, after the usual vowel eli-
mination, becomes nil, So the name Anil besides meaning
“the con of An” may alsa mean “of the elephant.” This
double meaning of this name scems to have been the origin
of Ganapati. That this meaning was understood for some
time in connection with Ganess, the Sanskrit name of this
god Gajasya clearly shows. Gajasya means “ of the elephant.”
It ia a perfect translation of dnil.

Thie meaning given to the nome Anil was the cause of
tne production of imagea of the gon of An having an elephant’s
head. Naturally the whole figure could not be an elephant,
because the son of An was the son of God, and God was con-
ceived and represented in human form. The image therefore
was the image of a god, in human form, having the face
or head of an elephant. A series of names, both in Dravidian
and in Sanskrit shows this composite nature of this new pro-
duction. They are ali names by which Ganess is mentioned :-
Dravidian : Anatmukavar. “ One with the face of elephant”

 Nag@nona, “One having the face of elephant”
| Gajanana Ditto
Gajasya Ditto
Hostinmalla “ One who has the cheek and temples
Sanskrit : | of an elephant”
| Gajamukha “ One having the face of an elephant”
Karimukha Ditto
[ Gajavaktra Ditto
Gajavadana Ditto
This new image adorned with the face of an elephant was
not, it is understood, in the beg:nning, ® new son of An, dif-
ferent from Murugan, It was the same Murugan, the only
ton of An, with @ new appearance with a new face,

--- Page 61 ---
50

This phenomenon of face changing is hinted at in several
myths concerning Gancsa. Parvati, it is said, was in despair
for not having had offspring from Siva. After many prayers
and sacrifices che heard a voice from heaven which advised
her to betake herself to her appartments where she would
find her son, She full of joy ran to her own room where she
found a beautiful youth whom she and Siva accepted as their
son. To commemorate this great event they celebrated
feast to which they invited all the gods, All were admiring the
beautiful youth, excepting Sani (Saturn) who had his eyes
fixed persistently on the ground. Parvat! could not stand this
indifference. She bade him gaze upon her son. Hardly had
he raised his eyes when the head of the youth was converted
into ashes. Great was the consternation in that assembly of
gods ; but Visnu, mounting on Garuda. his vahana, flew to
the banks of the river Puspabhadra, where he found an
elepbant asleep. He cut off his head ; flew back to where the
gods were assembled and putting the head on the shoulders
of the beheaded youth, return him to life. **

Another story says that Siva himself cut off the youth’s
head while fighting with him not knowing that he was the
son of Parvati. Then on learning the truth he ordered the
devas to cut ca the head of the Grst being they would find
near by, which happened to be an elephant, and placing that
head on the headlesa trunk, Ganesa was produced, ™*

A third myth says that after the emanation of this son
of Siva from his mind, when Parvati saw him produced with-
ont her participation, she cursed him; as a result of this
curse, the elephant’s face appesred.™

These three atories clearly show that the gud whom we
now call Ganeva bad originally a man’s head. which was at a
later period substituted for the heal of an e!ephast,

38? Bruhmacaiverte Purana,
TA Sioa Purdaa,
=! Varéna Purdna, Cf. below, p. 267

--- Page 62 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI $1
Who made this substitution ? or in other words: Who
were the first who produced images of Murugan with the
head uf an elephant ?
Besides the so-called aboriginal tribes of India and the
Dravilians who appeared at a later period, there was in
India an ancient natiun of very high civilization, of extra-
ordinary intgilectual attainments which we have now. to
scknowledge as une of the foundations of Indian culture.
That is the Naga nation.™ The Nagas, or Serpents, were
spread all over India. A nuanber of tribes are now acknowledged
as Néga tribes: the Garudas (hawks), the Makaras (ero-
codiles) ** and the Gajas (elephanta) undoubtedly belonged
to this race. In fact the word ndga also means “elephant”
it: Sanskrit.
‘The idea of giving the head of an clepkant to Skanda,
the God of War. according to the meaning of the name Anil,
is net so extraordinary after all, “The elephant”, says Dr.
Gokhale, “is one of the most celebrated animals in the htera-
ture of ancient India. His strength, majesty and wisdom
and alsy his terrible madness are cf common reference in
literary texts." Socially the elephant was considered one
of the most useful animals in creation, and even from the
aesthetic point of view the elephant is held aaa type of beauty
down to the present.
It is not therefore strange that one day was set appart
every year in Ancient India to commemorate al] these ex-
cellent qualities of this pachyderm. The feast was called
Natti-mohd. It wea the feast of the elephant. Accordingly
288 The present writer after protacted studies in that ancient pertod is
now fully convinced that the Nigas were different from the Dravi-
diane, though they were soon romed with then, Nigu (reditions
and recollections are faithfully recorted in the Mohithcrata.

34 Mandbhdratc, Adj Parva, 1286-1303. Cf. Heras, Studies in Proto
Indy-Medtterrancaa Culture, 1, pp 361-395,

381 Gokhale, ‘Some Obscure Cul." JBBRAS, XXVL, p. 170.
Ct. Blochmann, Ain-t-Akvar, 1, p. 121

14 Commentary on the Pill Jiteka, No. 495,

--- Page 63 ---
s2
the four genii who were eupposed to support the heavens had
the shape of elephants, creatures of great strength.. These
four dig-gajas were probably et a later period identified with
the four Vindyakas, or deraons who created obstacles, about
whom we epoke above. Jn a piace called Ghatiyala 22 miles
north of Jodhpur, there is a column on whose top ‘here are
four images of Ganapati facing the four quarters of the earth.
Evidently they are the four dig-gajax. And yet the inscription
engraved on the column opens with an obecisance made to
Vindyaka.™*. The four so-called Ganapatis are therefore the
four dig-gajes and the four Viniyakas.* There was besides
the giant-demon called Gajamukhasura, “demon with the
face of an elephant,” whom Ganapati defeated. as seen
above.
All this elephant mythology way most likely the product
of the activity of the Gajas, the Naga tribe of aucient Indie.
It is our considered opinion that the first images cf Skanda
or Murugan having the face of an elephant were imagined
and produced by sculptors of this tribe. And it was after
the production of these images, when they were numerous
all round, that some stories about the origin of this elephant
god sprang among the people. This Ani! or Gajasya was the
son of an elephant to whom Pérvati had given 2 potion of
her own confection. Parvati claimed the child as her own
offspring, and Siva accepted him as a son of Parvati.™
The popular mind realized that Siva had already Murugan
asa son. He could not have another, This elephant-faced
boy’was declared to be the son of Parvati, and a queer son,
at that.
Yet this was to admit that Anil=Gajasya was different
from Murugan. There were therefore two gods, one the son
° Epigraphia Indica, IX, pp. 277 7. (Bhandarkar, Voisnaolem p. 148-9)
* Although the date of the inscription is very late, viz 862 AD,
they figures and the invocation may chrystalize an earlier idea
descended to the pecple of the Sth century by tradition.

31 Jacobi, “ Brabmanism," in Hastings, Encyclopedia of Religion end
Ethics, p. 307

--- Page 64 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 63
of Siva, the other the son of Parvati. Yet a new myth pro-
claimed the new elephant god to be the aon of both. Siva
himself is introduccil exp!aining to Ganesa why be is Gajdnana:
“T, in company with Parvati once retired to the foreet on the
slopes of the Himalaya to enjoy tach other's company, when
we saw a female elephau: inaking herself happy with a malo
elepirant. This excited cur passion and we decided to enjoy
ourselves in the form of elephants. [ became 6 male elephant
and Parvati a female elephant and we pleased ourvelves ; as
a result you were born '.ith the face of an elephant ”.9*

We may besides recullect the fact that according to the
anyth related above. when Ganapati lost his ortginai head by
the destructive infiuence of the gaze of Sani, the one who
brought the clephant head to the beheaded boy wa Visnu.
Now Visnu has in modern tines been acknowledged as a non-
Arvan god ** ; and owing to his many connections with Nagas
(Sesa-Bhagvan, Kurmavatara, Varahavatara, etc) we may
probably susign s Nags origin to him.** This is again 8 new
connection between Ganapati and the Nagas.

All this development of the figure and myth of Ganesa,
eeema to have takcn plece within the Naga nation. Traces of
this Naga participation in the early evolution of Ganspati
may be easily discovered in the later images of this god.
‘Fhe majority of these images bear one of two snakes round
the belly and round the neck of Ganess. (Fig. 23) Mins Getty
refers to “the serpent Sesa (one of the famous Nagas of epic
reputation) adopted in Nepsl for certain representations of

_ Ganesa in dancing attitude”. Besides she publishes a
drawing of a metal image of Ganapati worshipped by the
esoteric sects, that has a five-headed néga overshadowing
bis head. **

243 Gopinatha Reo, Klements of Hindu Iconogrephy, I, pt. 1, p- a

209 Cf, Hornell, “The Chenk shell Cult of India,” Assiquity, XVI, pp.
113-133 ; Praluski, “The neine of the God Vien and the Krane-
Legend,” Q. J. M.S, XXV, pp. 30-48, .

a¢ CY. Zimmer, Mythis cad Symbols in Indien Art and Ctvilizetion, pp.
59-68,

8 Getty op. clt, p 39 and yl. 18.

0 Ibid, p. 17.

--- Page 65 ---
%

In the collection of images of Ganapati, of the Museu
of our Indian Historical Research Institute, we have several
specimens (Figs. No. 31, 32) one of them very primitive, with
a Naga spreadirg its hood ever the bead cf the seon, In
another image the heads of two ndgas appear from bebinu
the elbow of the two arms of the god.

Mins Getty also notes that when the images of Ganapati
are found in the open under trees or in the fields are very often
uceotnpanied by Naga slabs. **

We may also remark here that the image of Ganapati
in associated with crocodiles both in Ellora?* and in
Burma. ‘“* The tribe of the Makaras is one of the ancient
Nags tribes.

That the Nagas were well acquainted with Ganapati is
well proved by the fact that even Naga kings were named
after him. One of the kings dethrured by Samudra Gupta
aiter returning from his southern expedition was called
Ganapatinaga.”*

1X

GANAPATI'S CONNECTIONS WITH SKANDA

Inspite of the extraordinary development of Ganapati,
bis cult and his mnyths in the course of centuries, we may stil!
trace numergus traits of his original days when he wae one
with Murugan = Skanda. Those original characteristics of
Skanda have been icherited by Ganapati and have been kept
round him with very suggestive persistency, We shall study
these traita presently.

247 Ibid, pp. 12-13.

tb Cf. Burgess, Report on the Ellora Cave Temples, pl. XXX, dg. 2.

39 Getty, op. olt,, p. 29.

* Allahabad Pillar inscription of Samudre Gupta: Flext, Gupte in-
ocrtpeic 18, p. 8.

--- Page 66 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 55
1, Namza or GANAPATI

(a) Pillayar. This is a Tamil name of Ganapati, tt
means ‘ Noble Child." Thig is exactly the recaning of the
Sanskrit word Kuméra, one of the names of Skands.

: (b) Makan. Another Dravidian name mesning “son.”
It is also the meaning of Kumara.

(c) Vinéyaka. It means “Lord of obstecles,” but the
Vémana Purina gives another meaning. vis. Vi-ndyaka, “ One
who has no Lord”.*? This is precisely the mean:ng of the
word Anisa which the Suetasvatara Upanisad gives to the
Son of God. ™*

(d) Ganapati, “the Lord of Ganas.” Karttikeya or
Skanda is supposed to be the Lord of the heavenly hosts in
his fight against the asuras.

(e) Visvekeena. This ig a title Ganapati is given in
sony; Vaisnava temples of South India. * It means “the
Lord of all” Cf. (d}.

2. Position oF GANAPATI

Generally he is shown seated but Mis« Getty remarks
that “in hia most ancient images he war more often figured
standing”. (Fig. 31) The Madras Museuin hea « beautiful
specimen of a atancing Ganapati. (See fig. 25) Such images
371 Prof. Bugchi, “Some Linguistic Notes ”, 1.4.0, IX, p. 263, says that

this is not the orimnal meanmg of the word pillaiyar. for in Pélt

the word pillake means “a young elephant.” Hence according to
him pilte originally meant “the young of the elephant” FPilaka
does not mean “the young of the elephmt™ in Palli, but “the
young one”, In the ~Vaddhakisikanajitak>" the sikanapiliake

Js mentioned, ie, “the young of the pig.” The Jataka, Ti, p 406

‘The word pilta in Palli is evidently derived from Dravidian
37) Vannana Purana Cf. Aravamuthan, “Ganesa: Clue to a Cult and a

Culture”, Journal of Oriental Research, XVII (1946), pp. 220 and

241,

318 Ct. above, p. 157.
31¢ Srikanta Iyer, op. cv, p. 255
Ts Getty, op cit, p. 19.

--- Page 67 ---
$6
are called Prasanna Gancpati, when he is shown perfectly
erect. The Museum of our Indian Historical Research Insti-
tute hag also some specimens. The images of Murugan
or Palni Kurenji Andavar, which are some of the oldest images
of Subrabmanys, show him always erec- in this posit.ca.
3. Tre anus or GANAPATI

In India it is customary to represent the gods with four
or more arms. Ganapati is often ahown with four, six, eight,
ten ari more arms; but a number of very primitive images
of Ganapati. following the type of the carving of the Man-
taka Cetinga stiipa of Ceylon, are two armed only. Miss Ge ty
publishes four of them which are very characteristic. One is
Singhalese, two are from the Nehar Collection, Calcutta, a
fourth one is in the British Museum.” The Museum of the
Indian Historical Research Institute has one image with two
arms only, which is not so early. (Fig. 34) His left hand i.
in abbaya-mudr3, We consider it to be a South Indian speci-
men dated 36th cent. It is an atavic manifestation of an
early forn. ‘The earliest images cf Skanda as Kurinji Andavar
have always two hands only. So is the stone carving from
Banaras described above. Apparently the early Ganapati
had two arms in the same way as Skanda

4. Tue Five weaps or Ganapati.

The images of Ganesa as Heramba having five heads
have already been described, four-in the four directions of
the earth, and the fifth above ; but we know one coming from
Mupshiganj District, Dacca, which has the ‘ive heads in the
eame tier, as the six heads of Shanmukha

5. Ganzga mrp

We have seen how Skanda is called “the Red God.” The
images of Ganapati are suppoeed to be painted red. In the
Rajput watercolours Ganapati is alwava painted red, at least
his face. ,

18 Getty, op. alt, pls, 2b; 13b and d; 182.

--- Page 68 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 7
6. GANAPATI THE SON OF THE MIND OF Srva

Certain Hindu sects look upon Ganeaa as born from Siva’s
mind, so as to be “the persconfication of Siva’s divine manag
or mind ”.?" One of the myths recorded in puranic literature
is a crystallization of ths ides. It is said that while Siva was
immersed in profound thought, a great radiance issued from
his forehead and there eprang into existence a wonderful youth
endowed with ali the qualities of Siva, When goddess Uma
sow this Son of Siva created without her participation he
Pronounced the following curse: ‘May thy hesd resemble
that of at elephant, and thy bedy be deformed by a huge
belly." This curse was accepted by Siva and the elephant-
faced dwarfish Ganesa 16 the result of it.

‘This inyth reflects the vedic ideas concerning the filliation
of God's son; he is mind-born without the participation of any
goddess. This son of God, moreover, endowed with all the
qualities of Siva, was “ a second himself," to use the expression
of the Satapatha Bréhmana.

7. GaNapatl THE GoD oF Wispom
We saw how Murugan or Skands, being born from the

mind of God, was suprosed to be “the Universal Guru.”
Ganapat: is valled “ the God of Wisdom ”.7"° Ho is aloo styled
Kavim Kavinam Vipratamam, “the wiseat of the wise on
He is, in fact, supposed to be a “fountain of knowledge”,
“beaming forth light and knowledge”. In many of
his gtatucs one of his hands holds the moda, s
large coke which is the symbol of Afand-Kuddhi (Supreme
Wisdom) *? In some of the Vaisnava temples of South India
HT Getty, op. cit, D. 62
200 Vardha Purine,
270 Srisanta Iyer, op ctf, p. 255, Cr. Bhandarkar, Volenavlem, Saivirm

and other Minor Sects, p. 149. Bhandarkar’s view nevertheless does

t.

coed Yonnetruhos eo, “the Ganepati Cult", QJ.MS, XLI (1949),

p. 08.
401 Joid, p, 29.
3 Getty, op cit, p. 18.

--- Page 69 ---
ES]

Ganepati is worshipped under the denomination of Tumbikkai
Alwar, which means “the Sage w:th the elephant's tooth”.
In the same way as in the case of Sanatkuimara he is also
surrounded by brilliancy and light. One of his titles in Nepal
ig Surya Ganapati.** The very bead of an elephant with
which he ia endowed is said to be an emblem of sagacity. **

Ganesa, therefore. being the god of wisdom is supposed
to be “ the Patron of letters. ** He ia, as such, invoked in the
beginning of any writing to insure literary success. 38 Almost
ali the standard works in the Sanskrit and vernacular lan-
guages begin with an invocation of the help of this God of
Wisdom ".?7 Jn fact all Hindu books generally commence
with these words : Ganesdya namah, “ Reverence to Ganesa.”
In many parts of South India and especially in Travancore
State, children on being put to echool begin their writing
Jesson with a similar invocation: Harih Shri Gunapataya
namah, “Hari, Reverence to the Holy Ganapati”. Some
of hig images represent him holding a book.

Ganapati, being the Patron of all literary, work, easily
became himself a scribe, an aa such he has been represented
writing (at times using bis own broken tusk as stylus) in
India, ** Nepal ™ and Indo-China.™ In the Mahénirvane-
tantra he is described as writing down the Tantras at the
-dictation of his father Siva. In the same way he is eaid to
have been writing the Mahabharat at the dictation of
383 Ibid. pp. 1 and 39.
°* Srikante lyer, op. cit, p. 255.

33 Getty, op. ci, p. 5.

74 Ibid, p 2

27 Srikants Lyer, op. cit. p. 285.

#8 Trevencor: Stote Manual, 12, p. $1.

30 Getty, op. cit, 4

me ibid

1 Ibid, p. 18. m Egypt, the Egypuan got Toath, the second gnd of the
triad of Thebes, himself also considured ag the God of Wisdom,

19 also depicted as u scribe ard suppored to be the inventor of

writing and patron of letters. (Cf. Getty, op. cit, pl. ta).

--- Page 70 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 59

Vyasa.? It ig narrated that while Vydaa was praying to

Brahma asking for help to write his poem Ganess appeared

te him. He offered himself to Vyasa to write the whole poem

at his dictatiun ; a task which he accomplished with ex'ra-
ordinary speed. There is a Rajput painting ehowing this
scene in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.”

His character of God of Wisdom makes nim also con-
nected with agriculture, * as the latter is the fruit of wisdom.
Hib title of Vighnesvara, “ Lord of Obstaclez”, is aleo founded
upon wisdom, for wisdom, eurpasses all difficulties, The same
is the origin of his other name Siddhidaté, “ Bestower of
Success.”

8 Ganesa a BRAHMACARIN

He was supposed to be a Brahmacdrir, according to an
ancient tradition. ** So was siso Murugan. But legead gave
him two consorts Buddhi (wisdom) and Siddhi (success).
The latter is some times called Riddhi (perfection). Such
was also the final fate of Subrahmanys,

9 GaANesA WorsHipPeD IN THE MouNTAING

Ar inscription of Champa speaks of a donation made to
Ganesa of Candanagiri (te. “the Sandal Mountain”). In
fact there exiets a tradition in India that Lia cult is practiacd
2) Al Biruni, india, (Translated by Sechau}, I, p. 134.

0 Winternitz, History of Indiat Literature, 1, p. $88, 0. 4, opines
that the possate containing this leget.d in some copies of the epk
is an interpolation. The legend doe: not seem to be earlier than
che Sth century

= Coomaraswamy, in Bulictin of the Boston Museum of Fine Arta,
XXVI. E30

3 Cf Gupte, “ Harvest festivels In honour of Gauri and Ganesh,”
Indian Antiouary, XXXV, 1908, p36.

28 Getty, ep cit, 0 $5 “Ta evuleu- Touge de eon curpe est rele que
dome aux giandes yorins la pratique in‘ense de 1. maditetion.”
Herbert, Ganesa, p 27

3 Bergaigne, Inscriptions Sanscrices de Camp, p. 362.

--- Page 71 ---
60
in mountains, a tradition which accompanied him from India
to Japan. Such is also the cult of Murugan. **
10. A New VAITANA oF GANAPATI

Though the rat is supposed to be the vahana of Ganapati
yet at times he is also represented riding on a peacock, mayiira,
the vdhana of Kutnara. On such occasions he is styled Mayi-
raganapati.** An image in the Museum of the Indian
Historical Researen Institute displays him riding on his rat,
who is likewise placed on the peacock of Kumara, The rat is
busily engaged eating a ladhu of his master, ss he is not engag-
ea in locomotion (Fig. 35).

11. THe Dicntry or Ganapati
The main dignity of Ganapati, his essential character I
should say, iy that he is the Lord and Leader of the ganas.
Even this character seems to have been usurped, for Kumara
had also been the Lord of the ganas before him. So Ganapati
seemed to have been promoted to the pesition of the leader
of the aanaz, which Skanda had held so far.

Ganesa therefore was originally the wime as Anil=Muru-
gan. The different shape his images took at an early period
was the cause of the later differentiation. Yet this secoud god
kept many characteristics of the first.

x
TRUTH ABOUT GANESA'S BIRTH

The myths of the birth of Ganesa, in the midst of much
useless felliage. discover some extrnordinary truths in their
background which are worth serious consideration owing to
ita persistency.

199 Getty, op. cit, p 4.

™ Venkatakrishna Rao. “The Ganapati Cult", QJL1S, XLY, pp.
95 and 96.

a0 Ilid, pp. 93-94. Ct. above, p. 174.

--- Page 72 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI 61
1. Ganesa MADE By PaavaTi WITHOUT THE
INTERVENTION oF Siva.

One legend saye that Parvati atter gently rubbing her
body caused a youth to be produced, who bed four arms and
the head of elephant.”

Another story relates that Parvati made Ganapati out
of the impurities of her own body giving him the face of an
elephant ; but it was only a lifeless figure. Then she sprinkled
it with the water of the Ganges, which communicated life
to it,

In a third story which we have already related Ganapati
js said to be the son of an clephant to whom Parvati gave @
notion to drink. #*

One of the carvings of Elephants scems to represent the
birth of Ganesa sx Mount Kailisa. A nurse carries the little
elephant child to Parvati who is seated on the same level as
Siva but at a certain distance from him as showing some dis-
agreement.** The artist evidently wanted to how the Siva
had nothing to do with the birth of the elephant god. The
eculpture is much damaged, but even a it is the picture is full
of feeling.

2. GANESA PROUUCED WITHOUT THE INTERVENTION

or Srva AND PaRvaTs

We have already narrated the puranic story that relates
the appearance of Ganapati as e beautiful youtb in the private
apartments of Parvatl He was finally accepted as their son
by Siva and Parvati. *
™ Skenda Purina
om Mateya Purdne
oes Ct. above, p. 202.
ma Cf. Sastri, A Guide to Elephants, pp. 46-44. .

26 Of. above, Pp. 200.

--- Page 73 ---
62

Even in far-off Nenal the advent of Gancsa was supposed
to have taken place without the intervention of Siva and
Parvati, for he, of his own accord, became visible in a ray of
sunshine. The Brahmans sayed that he appeared in this
shape as an incarnation of the son of Brahma. **

Thus puranie myths and popula legends testify to the
faleehood Javing behind the popular belief. that Ganapati is
the eon of Siva. Not only Siva cannot be called the fathe
of Ganesa, but not even Parvati herself may be called his
real mother ; for even in the two cases, which emphasize: the
non-intervention of Siva, the action of Par-ati in relation to
Ganesa is net generation in the least, but a mere externa
production.

On the contrary there is a South Indian story which is
narrated to explain the name of Palni. the main shriv-: of
Subrahmanya, which accidentally shows thet the only and real
eon of Siva was Murugan or Skauda. Once upon a time. they
eay, Siva had a beautiful fruit in his hand, pala “ fruit.”
(It happened to be a pomegr:.nate). His two sona Skanda
and Ganapati wanted the fruit each one for himself with
exclusion of the other. In order to settle the dispute Siva
told them that the fruit would be given to the first who wo 't
go round the world. Skanda ascended his mount. the peacock,
and started his long juurney. Ganesa. on his rat. cons dered
himself totally unfit to compete with the peacock of his
brother. Accordingly he went round Siva himself, saying :
“Thou art the world.” Siva much pleased with the sagacity
of Vinayaka, gave him the fruit. When after many years,
Skanda arrived he was very angry against his brother who had
won the contest owing toa trick. But Siva told him. “Do not
be angry for having lost the fruit, Thou «-t the fruit.
Pala-ni.” Skanda is therefore the rea! fruit of Siva, Ganapati
ia not h's fruit. that is hig son.

s Livi, Le Népal, Il, p. 384-8. It may be remembered that Sanat-

kumira i

be oe Ce abone gna ees to Markandeya in a ray of

--- Page 74 ---
THE PROBLEM OF GANAPATI Py
XI
CONCLUSION

Ganapati ig a deity without a foundation in the Veda.
He has supplanted his suppoeed brother and has the tendency
of supplanting his own father, Siva. In fact he was actually
sucoceded in his attempt, in sume quarters,

The very character of the development of his person,
his myth and his cult discovers the doubtful beginnings of
his existence, He puls on the apparel of other gods and prides
over the raiment borrowed from others. But in the midst of
all this confusion created by hie deeds, cne discovers a few
facte which unveil bis life of mystery :-—

1. In the period which we may call the pre-history of
Ganapati, he had not the head of an elphant. His
face was the face of a beautiful youth.

2. The appearance of the head of an elephant scems
to have been due to the action of the Nigas.

3. He keeps many charactenstica of his eupposed brother
Skanda ; one, moet important, being that he is the
son of tne mind of Siva. without any feruale inter-
vention.

4. Yet in this elephantine form he 1s clearly said not
to be the eon either of Sive or of Parvati.

5. While comparing him with Skands or Subrahmanya,
the latter is the only eon of Siva.

1S eA
iP
oN.
ti Dest ot Arte)”
TOR RY

--- Page 75 ---
| BCC i Mae :
Fee Oe ee, ho Po Fig
es ae . . Muruga, as worsipped ie Patni
Cia. a fale: Indian Uistorteut Research Institute,
Seige ee a
oP . une
ipa: Se “Ga RE
chs RA: ud. eS
eat see SI SUR See
Velan aaa canna ee
Indian Histarweat Research Tastitate, Be sbon ACERT (a ean
. a ag te

--- Page 76 ---
nos v get va
ae on :
Bey”
Fig. 3 P »- wd
Shanmotha (tals) .
Indian Historica! Research Institute, » =
ghee | « B
re we” ‘
ite oe
SO et ST
Lote Ci sae
Lop Kee oy
Reor S3 G5 er ZB
te ' , & : yas
. spore cre . Mea
: 2 ; E: Shanmukha on the Pracock
pa 8 Ti Undan Historical Reseorch lastinte,
woul i .
en

--- Page 77 ---
a ee
yg 5 a ‘
ee ee ee Gwe Ms Somaskanda, from the Mabisasura
BOS eg OE Le Mandapa, Mahabaliporam
ee es ae Copyright, Archacological Survey of India.
xe My a s t
ety 2 Bk Be a
Me: % “ ee ao. wo Th hs :.
_ SRE eS CR TS
oe BEE Eo fo
“oe. + * a
eae ~. Br
: ad aoe ,
Fic. 6 | | eee ae 3
Somaskanda, from Sea Shore Temple, MR’ Wied fa. #4
Nahabalipuram 7 Brae} oe Sore
Copyright, Archacological Survey of India, ANE ieee a
‘ae ee
ae ae .
eong ” a ar ieee

--- Page 78 ---
5 ath Oe Pa Best eto eee MS ty
. bags SE wee aks
Somaskanda, from Ege Wag aC ¢ ge
neem Ratko, 22 WORgL cr Aa eee anne 2 gh aa
Moahabalipuram eek ape APE ORR OT OR o so
Copyright, Archacological 5. 2 Aaa RR a
ey ki Sasha pera et Set
i Seo 2 Mawes cae DY Vg
‘Shc. tec farted hae
ets WL + SR By
Fi cen S ea i . ee F.  Somaskanda (Bronze)
a: SPE tncian Historical Research
oe — , tae Re Insitute, Bombay.
ae. ee SE
ares woe. + . wees 2
fy oe i

--- Page 79 ---
. hy NS
1 Mig Ee EY eae BF
a - ae % ee tga Ea \ ow
b Rao tig eet BS |
‘ sie Atte a es = a 4
tig bor oa oe 5 3
saggercesnanine C1 ON A Ny
Fic. 9
Birth of Skanda, from the Mabisasura Mandapa, Mahabslipuram
Copyright, Archaesogical Survey of India.
i .-.) ah. TONY :
Se en .
i ANS or woe
. ae ih oe a oN: .
- aberon
S - a *<
“ t © x
‘. ; a
| tata ee
Fig. 10 Fig. 1
Shanmukhz on a coia Kumara seated on the
‘af the Yaudheyas Peacock on a coin of
Kumara Gupta !
Courtesy of the Trustees of the Britich Museum, London,

--- Page 80 ---
an fo eee woe ®. as el .
ANE Wy COMES a eo
7 2 vo So “ge on oe Low
oe , x ne ef °
: ! 4 :
ee 4 de
“ : f
Fw. 12
Karttikeya seated on the Peacock and a Naga, with his
two wives (Copper Plaque}
indian Historical Research Institute, Bombay.

--- Page 81 ---
aa PMR E ee were
hea ae oe : yt
MS wee ¢ tke 7 va ay
. er wee | alae we
tt a ot tar ne eR F
ne aa On ee
in nr ae “Ee 4g. “4 wat ot
. . = whe ay PRS MY
PE EE Oe iii <c aN wt
f het _ Yl on 00%
- Fics reba Senne CST TOE
vanes Jn nal ethnlen ee BP Me " ;
” LR the ao :
FG, 13
Kiratasjuniya Paacls in the Secoad Gopuram of the
Brihadisvara Temple, Taajore
{Parvati holding Skanda io her acms is seen in the middle and
last row)
Copyright, Archarological Survey of India.

--- Page 82 ---
bie yo ae To cat
a hey rae ae
ae ee
‘ nny aie i oR 4
. hae ce GRPR pe + ‘ ; .
F LS go a a Sy es - i
\ : SSS eo: saan 4
oe: coo. 1 oat ‘ * :
a eg eo
Fig. da
Sharda on bis Peacuck
Courtesy cf the Bharata Kala Bhavan, Hanaras.

--- Page 83 ---
Oe
a Ps «ieee Cie ane oe .
beatae = is
Fr “om
Jae ith me Fig. 15
2 f= 4 Mahagasapati with his Sokti
« 7 ae ae: Indian Historical Research Institute, Bombay.
L er? 2 .
1 , .
my
et a -
t ye Se
Heramba Ganapati on the Lion eal Sea . . F eee
Facies Historical Research Institute, Bombay SEE et sy a
chet a ‘ E Bs
pat “Eo

--- Page 84 ---
2 See
‘ Aree adi old pr:
vote tee
Fw. 17 Ea a is -
Dancing Ganapati % . Poe
Cotten Bison cal Research fasiiae Beeson com © © cag tied
eae ‘
Fe ae RA
? : Ng
ar’ N Be a
at rae > =
oot
7 fl
4s a . ral Pic. 18
ral : “uf bee eN Nataraja with Ganapati fearsing
mos we be t his Father's Dance
. + a ke (Aibole, 6th cent)
. 3 > A! es Copyright, Archacolagical
2 3B a wT i ¥ Survey of Indias
Yaw aw Py:
‘s ERR ae pee
ee |

--- Page 85 ---
i ane ea we . - ee of
ee Le 2 bat | Ganapati on bis Vahana, the Rat
. sg s ) ty: | Indian Historical Research Insatule,
1S Yr ae ;
rag ty \ ' ee i
ae. eS - Sea
{JA SORE ee Ae
oT eee AS:
Ganapati upon the entrance bien fe ae “3. ANG
of Siva’s shrine, Narushaoka: aren call tL ‘J
Temple. Navik. oa San ea,
{Phete by Ble be eae Poe: {
Fr. J. Coll, Bombay} a. LL Se :
Peat ? si =
a , me ee F
wy : . Soe mM, at
i . ers ee, of ee, Sivapaochayataa with
eo : Eee. Genspath a Nase.
. ° 74 .. f Mas Anas Purea, Bala Krsoa
asf eure” ESRD © and Siva's Linge with
sf : "Te me Indian Historical
on 2 Tp MS Research Institue, Bombay
+. oS we ”~ rer”
EAR ee . ea LAs
Fee eee:

--- Page 86 ---
: 7s 1G. 27
ry “<a # : Siva aad Parvati with
: : ep. * Co Ganapati aad Shasingkha
leq: : a (Marble sculpture)
i \ “ Ina, Historical Research
by -: ’ Institute, jay.
) a Ga
. QAR mF x
* ee 9 ~ eee on
ai ae ar ie
eee tel fowg,, Fair ae,
Fic. 23 i” a fey Lt yy a Soe 3
Sasivikallu Ganesa from ae 7 sa . 4 ee
Vijayanagara, Hampi 4 % . 2 A a H
Copyright, Archatological Survey : eo i AN ws
of India, ee a v AS a
Le A %®: >

--- Page 87 ---
ee | She, ak, By o
iw - - ame a,
i a
“ i, <i>
=) A SCR
vy. “he . a gt
ye ~ id ro
ar ey oe . AGE ect
i OMT eS wey FS bs
eee Seb, We
pee OS Shae My
FiG 24
Siva’s Family in Mount Kailasa, Kangra Painting
Courtesy of the Director, Victoria & Albert Meseunm, London

--- Page 88 ---
en at .
es *. Se oe)
ad . “nap. 8
5 .. \ all xo Cade >
- mr
: Looe gs:
ee,
Fig. 25
Siva as Bhotesvata with Parvati,
Shanmukha ard Ganapati, Kangra Painting
Courtesy of the Director, Vittoria & Albert Museum,
London.

--- Page 89 ---
nn : igi
x h Fa, : . Jarrts
cage
i Sie | et
yo reg, ne ES ARS AM
geal aro
Fic %

Siva’s Family, Rajpat Drawing.

Courtesy of the Trustees of the British Muscam, Londen.

--- Page 90 ---
. . os i r .
ye See ith “3
rrr A, WF ig BQ.
ry go ok Ais are Ry 5 ee
SRA gol SR
a SU ich Coe Be 2 7 BBE
q a ¥ En Fic. 27
ay ay . pe The Tandavan at Flephanta
: “2 he. CMe wth Kacttikeva and Ganapati
, ‘1 ~ oh) ba. A. to the left
: . -) ‘a yy . 4 . Copyright,
. he on R. > . Archacologi¢al Survey of India.
aes We hie FOR 1!
. a 2, RO RE PC SOS
met
Te Fe ‘dg ab Yate ty
$
Fol on ‘ Ve / os
Siva, Parwath aud Gasapati a oy
Dancing (Ivory) L MR
Jadian Unstoricai Research Incitute GX
Be mbay, f. wl q {
id oe] -

--- Page 91 ---
Na
. eee
: nn [RR ee
eS Re
1 SOR a FG, 29
Parcs * en eras 2 Sova with Parvati and Ganapati
rue ry if Indean Historical Research Instiuute. Bomboy.
-(hyatcry  d
- os USED
a. i
Fu. 0 a ~wee
Three Byed Ganesa standing with a Naga a |
coiled round bis belly poe me !
Indien Historical Research Tnstitute Fe uo, ~ 1!
Bombay. foo .
prov 1 1
. :
“Le . +

--- Page 92 ---
ae * ' ay” LEE Primitye Ganesa protected with the
‘ ia oe hood of a Five-Headed Naga
‘ae : ay” Z fb:  dnaton Hastortcat Research Institute,
egies a bid \ ot Bombay
nN Eee Be Og
el ST RIE -, 2a - ie eof
oe SBS GU Ct? ees
Pus, 32 ENG gs oo igs Bad
Ganesa and his Sakti covered with pg? | | poy eee
the hood of a Five-Headed Noga > Se ei Gas
Indian Historical Research Insite, [A 4 _ Bre € rR a or
ot Feige aed -_ .

--- Page 93 ---
» . we
r. a Stat
~~ , % Fic 33
ne ot Standing Ganapaty
PO artesy of the Curator, Madras Museum,
Ane : ot
j mt eG
s Y
=>
Teo-Armed Seated Ganapati . ‘i ee
with bis left hand in Abhaya: Mudra ~ . Bs
Indian Historical Research inztitete, Bombay. : . ee
tae 4

--- Page 94 ---
1 Mey
{ “a
we
_ 7 4a
wy &
, Fig. 8 i
Gasapati seated ca the Rat, this being upon the Poroes,

--- Page 95 ---
PLATE XXXVE
ey . Yew ecm, Fly
BERS 7, a
chai "
: bY he Pa
i; ‘ ¥
de i
ad x
arr - '
iid SEA ad eae *- : .
a ke Gah : . ‘ws i
Bs ae x
aaa ge? Ss
gy os cre
FIG 1 URDBVARETAS GANESA AS MAHAVINAYAKA, FROM
GAKDEZ. €1R RATAN NATB DARGAB, KABUL (PHOTO D.G.A..
NEW DELHL)

--- Page 96 ---
PLATE XXXNSIb
et e ‘I
. rae ease tab, | * ae bd
Sig arom wey
ee i oun < po o4
; "ard
aa Nig, BAO
Pee |
ee - in ay rane a ae oe
FIG. 2, GANESA. FROM BRAHMOR {CHAMBA; (FROM GOETZ,
EARLY WOODEN TEMPLES, PL. V)*

--- Page 97 ---
PLATES XXXVILE
. PAgg oe
a en ci So
Teh Fs
eee
Bape A ee
{ux Ago 8 :
+ ETH . .
+ ess :
Pg
» die. Be EN +
E . RAG GR be —
#2 SEA 2 :
" in a aga!
a se 2 Ge
Sp ae tees be
- y toe OF
oR a he ors
FIG. 3, URAENARETAS GANESA, UDAYAGIRE (M.P.),
FACADE OF CAVE 6 (PHOTO D.G.A., NEW DELHI.)

--- Page 98 ---
PLALE AXAILN
yw : FgN
wy. Eo:
: 2
ee WY eal!
ow | ae
q WR
. Rebs
Sad ae ae
‘9 Nx tee ry
aya) ;
ve y Py
~ a8
: aby, t vig
vow
a
FIG. 4 URDBVAHETAS GANESA. SAKAR DUAR KABUL
HHOTO DG A, NEW DRLEHTI
VONCA Lig
uf Ze 58S"
tt, of 4
Ne cag
OVF oe pO

--- Page 99 ---
cae: PAP) (eet oho cg UPC LEAS TRSSEN Sy 2 Lo es
ees eG TRE i Fr Pei eee TT
Peete Fay Pe. EE a Sy ee ea DE ee ee ee
ese a reg ee ee Se eee ae ee
BS Ree erga PS ger | SS eee See SS Soe eB
Bae ne De a ee Dre pee See ree oe ee mea ee
SET eee a eee ee
: 2 OEIC SAS 7 ea eee
