--- Page 1 ---
The Enigma of Vainiyaki
Author(s): Balaji Mundkur
Source: Artibus Asiae, Vol. 37, No. 4 (1975), pp. 291-302
Published by: Artibus Astae Publishers
Stable URI: hups www jstor.org stable 3280234
Accessed: 18/06/2014 22:49
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates vour acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http: wwwstororg page inte about policies terms. isp
JSTOR 1s a not-for-protit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
cantentin a trusted digital archive We use information technology and tools to increase producuvity and facilitate new forms.
of scholarship For more intormation about JSTOR, please contact support q jstor.org

CH fe) Arubus Asiac Publishers is collaborating with ISTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to frtbus Astute

5 3

D

RU 20)

http: waew jstororg
Thos content downloeded frum [94 29 84 4402 Wed. Es lun 2ay4 22 49 88 PM
AL une susiect to JSTOR Ter. ard Cone.uens

--- Page 2 ---
BALAJI MUNDKUR
THE ENIGMA OF VAINAYAKI

An sculptures of the numerous goddesses of the Hindus, one of the least represented

is an elephant-headed deity whose precise identification is problematic. She is also one
of the least encountered in their religious literature. She is neither known by a consistent name
nor ate her iconographic attributes clearly specified in mythological lore. Her appearance strik-
ingly suggests a connection with the immensely popular clephant-headed god, Ganesa. For
this reason morc than any other, the very few recorded images of the goddess are currently
given names which are the feminine forms of a variety of epithets applied to Ganega. Thus
she is automatically assumed to be the lattet’s female form or sa4H, or his consort—assumptions
justifiable only on the basis of recent liturgical evolution. ‘Though the origins of this goddess
are mysterious, there is little doubt that her lineage parallels that of the many theriomorphic
divinities and godlings of Hinduism whose rvots go back to pre-Vedic times.

We shall cxamine her antecedents so as to understand the significance of one of her recently
discovered figural representations as a cult obiect.

Today the names Stri Ganega, Vainayaki, Gajinana, Vighne$vari and Ganesani would link
her explicitly with the god Ganeéa. Hence, it is proper to recall the origins of the latter. The
literature on this point has been discussed penetratingly by Getty! but that on the goddess is
neglected. Getty’s most salient conclusion, which follows views expressed carlicr by Bhandar-
kar, is that the cult of an clephant-headed GaneSa cannot be traced back earlier than the fifth
century A.D.; this date is clearly supported by atchacological evidence.

An illuminating background of his cult, and of the goddess in particular, is provided by
certain religious literature which has not previously been cited in this context. One of the ear-
liest invocatory references to ‘Ganesa’ occurs in the Sama-Veda, in the sentence opening the
entire work: “Aum! Glory to the Sima-Veda; to Lord Ganesa, Glory, Aum!” The personage
addressed is Rudra-Siva, as the leader of the gana, his celestial attendants. Siva thus acquires
the honorific Ganegvara or Ganapati. The title is later extended to several chieftains. Similarly,
the name Vinayaka is originally borne by one of Rudra-Siva’s ‘spirit? companions. Both Gapes-
varas and Vindyakas are mentioned in later texts such as the Athatvasiras-U panisad and the
Mahabharata,’ the (/indyakas particularly being regarded as yenii who, if propitiated, can expel
sin and evil. With these titles as roots for a feminine appellation, it is clearly with Siva that an
incipient goddess would have to be identified.

* Geety, A., Gagefa. Oxford, 1936/New Delhi, 1971.
2 Bhandarkar, R.G., Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious Systems, Strassburg, 1913, (p. 148).
3 Anulésanaparvan, 151, ¥.26 and v.57.
291
Thes content downloaded ton: 194 29 TSS HHS ap Wed, 1S an 2004 22 49 33 PM.
All use sublet to ISTOR Toray anel Cond thoes

--- Page 3 ---
The gradual evolution of the concept of Siva’s fakfis in early Brahmanical communities was
surely stimulated by the strength of the mother-goddess cult and imagery among the pre-
Aryan populace. Whether an anthropomorphic, clephant-headed deity, male or female, existed
at all in pre-Aryan India is the enigma. We cannot solve it in the absence of archaeological
evidence, nor dismiss the possibility of its occurrence as a minor step in the evolution of pri-
mitive religious cults splintering off from early Brahmanism itself. Huthivatikas (Hastivratikas)
ot worshippers of elephants are mentioned even in Buddhist literature ca.4oo B.C., such as
the Niddesa (Khuddaka-Nikaya). But the earliest known representation of an clephant-headed
personage occurs on a much mutilated terracotta plaque from Rairh, Rajasthan, not earlier
than about the first century B.C. to the first century A.D. (fig.1). The body is in a standing
posture, lithe and with two hands, and is considered to represent a goddess. Female breasts are
not evident, possibly owing to the damaged condition of the plaque. Hand attributes are not
discernible; the proboscis is curled to the proper right. Symbols which could associate this
figurine with Siva or other gods are completely lacking.

One may next turn to the very useful Vayu-Purana. Opinions on its age differ, some believ-
ing that it was begun as early as the fifth century B.C. and completed at the latest by 500 A.D.
The consensus is that the Vayu-Purana is the oldest of the Puranass,* and possesses the best
text. It is also the only Purana mentioned in the Mahabharata and the Harivarnéa,” and is a
more reliable source of information for reconstructions of historical events than the highly
fanciful Purinas which follow it. The recent scholarly work of Patil? should be consulted for
details.

The Vayu-Purana specifically refers to elephants, known to have been domesticated and
greatly esteemed in Vedic times, as a ya/fiya animal of ritual significance and as a pift suitable
for Brahmans for sraddha or post-funerary obsequies.* Thus factors favorable to the eventual
deification of an anthropomorphized elephant were present early in Hindu culture. Yet, this
Purana mentions a Ganesa (Ganapati, Gane$vara) who is neither elephant-headed nor a son of
Siva but merely one of Siva’s attendants. He is also known as Ksemaka and Nikumbha. It
should be noted that he is referred to as a Raksasa, a term which reveals his aboriginal, jungle
origins and opens up the possibility of the elephant as the totem of his tribe. GraneSa-Ksemaka
was commanded by Siva (perhaps a historical figure elevated to divine status, not to be con-
fused with Rudra-Siva of the much earlier Vedic period) to arrange the expulsion of King
Divodasa of Varanasi and the destruction of that city; there is the Purdnic record of a barber
named Mankana who installs at the city gates an image of Ganesa-Ksemaka, doubtless an event
presaging the euhemeristic rise of a valiant hero. For it soon becomes an object of vencration
to women desiting sons. ‘The cult of Ganapatya could have had such an early beginning, for
the Vayu-Purina mentions Siva granting the status of Gdnapatya to favored individuals, of
* Dikshitar, Some Aspects of the Vayu Purdga, (p. 46ff.).
$ Bhandarkar, R.G., Early History of the Dekkan, 1895 (p.162); ibid., op.cit. (3); Hazra, Puranic Records on Hindu Rites

and Customs, p.13, {n.9.
© Pargiter, F.1., Purdna Texts of the Dynasties of the Kali Age, pp.14, 15 and fn. 4.
7 Dikshitar, op.ct.,, p.47; The Mahabharata includes sections dating from at least the ninth century B.C., reflecting many

pre-Aryan beliefs. The Harivaimsa is of indeterminable, post-Christian origin.
* Patil, D.R., Cultural History from the Vayu- Purana, Poona, 1946 (Deccan College Pose Graduate Research Institute).
% Patil, op.cit., pp.239, 240.

292
This content dowslosded hon: 194 29-188 14S on Wed, oS Lan 2054 2249 83 PM
All use subicct te JSTOR Terns anil Conid tiers

--- Page 4 ---
whom, one, a Sadra devotee of Siva and a drunkard, is promised membership if he forsakes
drink.’ But thete is at no point any reason to suspect that the cult, if indeed it had crystallized
by then, had an elephantine deity; and there is never a mention in the Vayu: Purina of a god
named GaneSa.

The carliest mention of a female deity bearing a proper name—‘Vainayaki’—which could
confuse one into linking her with the contemporary god GaneSa (by that time known as Vina-
yaka) occurs in the Matsya-Purana, compiled ca.550 A.D. For Vainayaki, used as an adjective,
means “belonging to Ganeéa”. She is listed in this Purana amid nearly two hundred goddesses"!
ptesumably as a manifestation of one of Siva’s su&tis. Their origins vety probably lie in the
innumerable folk divinities which increasingly creep into the Purdnic literature as ‘Aryanized’
goddesses of the common people.

Since the iconographic attributes of the Vaindyaki of the Matsya-Purana are unknown, it is
difficult to identify one way or the other the few known figural representations of an elephant-
headed goddess 15. 1516 with the specific personage mentioned in this Purina. Except for
the solitary, pre-fifth century terracotta image from Raith, all of these representations date from
the tenth century of later. Only three bear an emblem— the clephant-goad, rat mount, or a bowl
of batasa sweets—which clearly links them with the elephant-headed god Ganega, whose
ascendancy coincides with the era of the Matsya-Purina and of the artistic prolificity of the
Gupta emperors and their cultural heirs.

Specific indication of the feminine divinities ritually associated with the god Ganesa occurs
in a comparatively late work, the Agni-Purana,' '® '% compiled about the tenth century A.D.
It is clear that they are to be regarded as his sektis even though, in theory, in the saksi-god
consortium it is the former who is dominant and always mentioned first, as in the examples
Laksmi-Narayana and Gauri-Sankara. This convention is relaxed in the chapter detailing the
gdnapatya ritual, where the image of the god is the initial focus of attention; the feminine divini-
ties are invoked only after preliminary prayers to the god, and their names are recited as a part
of these and of Mantra or Bija, i.c. mystic syllables forming the essential part of the worship.
‘These female divinities are conceived as seated on a lotus pericatp, in a group of eight circled
around the throne of the ninth. Vainayaki is not one of these nine divinities, who are named
Kamaripé, Jvalini, Stryesa, Nanda, Kamavartini, Uda, Vighnanaéa, Gandhamrittika and Satya.
A piyd in the same Purana refers to seven, retaining only J valini and Nanda, while introducing
Suyaéa, Tive’, Ugra, Tejovati and Vindhyavasini. Their iconographic attributes are not de-
scribed, suggesting that they were worshipped only conceptually rather than in image form.

1 Patil, op.cit., pp. 16, 38, G4, 187-188 and fn. 157.

11 A convenient list is provided by Agtawala, V.S., Ancient Indian Folk Cults, Varanasi, 197¢, (pp. 21-27).

12 Getty, op.cit., plate ac.

18 Lanius, M., Oriental Art 17: 38, 1971.

1 Sharma, B.N., Oriental Art 16; 169-170, 1970.

18 Sharma, B.N., ibid. 18: 277, 1972.

1S Parekh, V.S., Jot. Oriental Inst., (Baroda) 22: 359-36c, 1973.

17 Mitra, R. (ed.) Agni-Purina: A collection of Flindu mythology and traditions, Calcutta, vol. J, 1873; vol. 1], 1876, vol. II],
u deMatlreann, M.T., Les Enseignements Iconograpbiques de L’ Agni- Purana. Paris, 1963 (pp. 108-109, 283-286).

1% Agni-Purina, cf. chap.71 for details of the géxapatye ritual, For names of the sixty-four Yoginis ef. chap.s2, 1-8; and

chap. 146.

293
Ths content dowrlogded on: 19429 18S HS on Weal, 18 Jan 2005 2249 8 PM
Alluse subicct te INTOR Tetons ancl Cornd ties

--- Page 5 ---
In addition to these divinities, a few others are named in yet another version of the Agni-
Purana:?° Shri, Ghrini, Sirya, Nitya, Anangarupié, Madantura, Pavanavega, Bhuvanapala,
Gauri and Tripura. In the case of only the last two are descriptions given, even if incompletely.
Tripura is to be contemplated during the Ganc$a-piyd as scated on a full-blown lotus emerging
from the navel of a lifeless Siva—her four hands displaying abhaya (front right), a book (rear
right), an akJamdla (rosary, rear left) and varada (front left). ‘The mantra to Gauri pictures her
as red in complexion, het four hands displaying (in the same order): abhaya, a pala, a Sakti
(spear) and varada. ‘There is no hint anywhere in the Agni-Purana that any of the numerous
faktis mentioned are to be visualized as having an clephant’s head. The omission of Vainayaki
glaringly contrasts with the use of the appellation Vinayaka for the elephant-headed god in the
only passage in the Agni-Purana where his well-known iconic attributes are described.

It should be stressed that neither Vainayaki nor any of the numerous names of female
divinities associated with Ganesa in the Agni-Purana appear among the sixty-four Yoginis cited
in cach of its two lists.'* But both of these lists contain the name Kemi, intriguingly recalling
Ksemaka (Ganeéa), Siva’s attendant in the Vayu-Purana. On the other hand, an independent
list of the sixty-four Yoginis docs include Vainayaki.

Vainayaki is not listed in the Tantrasara, which names nine saris of Ganega much like the
Agni-Purana list, but a new name, Bhogada, displaces Siryesa. In the Tantrasamuccaya, Satya
is displaced and Maly4 introduced in her place.

Of the names mentioned so far, only Vaindyaki occurs intact among the Matsya-Purina’s
list of about two hundred folk deities; the latter include a few names (Kamarupini, Jvalamukhi,
Bhoginanda) which may be variants of the Agni-Pur4nic appellations.

In the Bengali recension of the Padma-Purana®} (600-1100 A.D.) there is a verse which
prescribes homage to Suregvari and Vighnesa. These are probably variant names for two of
the Jaktis appearing in the Agni-Purana; but Vindhyavasini, who could be interpreted either
as Siva’s Sakti or as Ganesa’s, is also mentioned.

We shall continue with these complexities only briefly. Vindhyavasini and Jvalamukhi in the
Visnu-Purana* are pithasthdnas ot sites of temples consecrated to the faktis of Siva. Legend
recounts how Siva carried the dead body of his sakti, Sati, after her sacrifice to Daksa, until the
gods conspired to tear it limb from limb and dropped the pieces at such sites. We have here a
contradiction with the Agni-Purina, which mentions Vindhyavasini and Jvalini (=? Jvala-
mukhi) expressly as Gancéa’s Jaktis. There is a similar contradiction in the Kalika-Purana which
glorifies Siva, naming Kamarupi (recall that Kamarupé is Ganesa’s Jz&si in the Agni-Purana)
as a stronghold of Siva-gaktism.ts

In the colourful accounts of the preparations for, and the actual battles against the Asuras,
2° Probably the Bengali recension, though this is not indicated by its translator ~ M.N.Dutt, A Prose E:nglish Translation

of the Agni- Puréna, Calcutta, 1904 (cf. Chap.CCCXHI, pp. 1168-1173; and Chap. LX X1).

31 Ibid, 50, 23b, 24a and 26, [Addressed as Vindyaka he is described as elephant-headed, with prominent proboscis, rotund
in belly, serpent-belted, carrying an axe and any other weapon in his right hands, and the /edduka and blue locus in his
lefe hands ; in this form he is leader of the seven mothers (saptamatrikds), all of them éaktis, but belonging to other gods.)

22 Agrawala, V.S., cp.cit., pp. 204, 205.

21 Chatterjee, A., The Padma-Purdna, A Study, Calcutta, 1967, (pp.95 fn; 163).

* Wilson, H.H., Tbe Vishnu Purana, A System of Hindu Mythology and Tradition, London, 1866 (Book V, p.261, fn.2).

35 Chatterjee, op. cif, p. 31.

294
This content dowslosded hon: 194 29-188 14S on Wed, oS Lan 2054 2249 83 PM
Alluse subicct te INTOR Tetons ancl Cornd ties

--- Page 6 ---
described in the Devi-Mahatmya of the Markandeya-Purana** (compiled ca.goo A.D.) there is
an enumeration of gods who contribute theit special energies which, on fusion, form the god-
dess Candika (Durga). She is joined by various saktis: “Whatever was the form of each god,
and whatever his ornaments and vehicle, in that very appearance his Energy advanced to fight
the Asuras.” One looks in vain through the pages of this Purina for the fa&¢ of Ganefa to
materialize, under any name?” ; indeed it is odd that the god himself—the remover of obstacles—
is nowhere mentioned by any epithet.

‘The Silparatna,? a sixteenth century work from Kerala, is unique in referring to an elephant-
headed deity with swelling breasts and feminine hips (‘the holds a golden chain in his two
hands”) as GaneSa. The sense that the deity is the lattet’s female form or a composite of Gancéa
and Jaks is clearly conveyed while leaving the semantics of both nouns unresolved.

In today’s folk religion, devotees would perhaps name Laksmi (not Sri-Laksmi) as Ganeéa’s
consort or remember that he has three wives—Siddhi, Buddhi and Pusti— whom he won from
his brother Skanda in a wager.

These bewildering situations can be enlarged, but the information we have is sufficient for
some conclusions.

From the beginning, the goddess’s entry in myths is so overshadowed by the popularity of her

consort Ganega that she is frequently ignored or known by various Purinic names. In contrast

to the immense popularity of the images of Ganega she is not often represented by an icon,
not even in human form. She is at no historical period given as much personal adoration as is
accorded to Devi as Siva’s Sakti.

Let us decide upon an acceptable name before we discuss a few icons of the elephant-
headed goddess.

Vainayaki has the advantage of the carlicst appearance (in the Matsya-Purama) to the ex-
clusion of other feminine variations of the epithets for Ganesa. But its primary value is that its
etymology yields a clue as to the goddess’s origins. In the context of these origins she may
with equal ease be seen as a fakii of Siva,?#* or of Ganeéa, or as an independent goddess wor-
shipped by Buddhists** and by Jains;2 thus the clearest advantage in retaining Vainayaki as
2 Pargiter, F.E. (trans.) Markandeya-Purdna. Calcutta, 1904 (pp.473-487; $01-599).

27 The Mdtrika:, according to a commentary of Utpala (ca. geo-gs0 A.D.) on Varahamira’s sixth century Brhatsamhita,
include ““Vainayak!”, though Vardhamira himself is silent about the names and numbers of these goddesses : [¢f. Banerjea,
J.N., The Development of Hindu Ieonography. Calcutta, 1956, p.504.] The customary sevenoreight Matrikas or faktisdefini-
tely do not include a 4e&4 of Ganega, though the latter figures as their “leader,” along with Virabhadra, an aspect of Siva.

8 Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. XCVIII, part 2, chap. 25, verse 74, quoted by Bhattacharya, D., The composite images of
Vasudara and Laksmi. four. Asiatic Soc. VIII (4), 261 266, 1966 (p. 265).

2¢@ Dr. Stella Kramrisch has kindly drawn my attention to the Bodbdyana Grhya Swira (3. 9. 3, 4, 10) which mentions
Jyesth’ as one of the aspects of the Indian Universal goddess. She is cited briefly in Dr. Kramrisch’s recent, illuminating
artide in History ef Religions 14, 2975 (p.2¢q and fn. 3) as being elephant-faced. This description is consistent with the
literal meaning of ‘Hastimukhi,’ one of Jyestha’s several epithets. However, it is almost certainly hyperbolic, for it 1s
not borne out in Sanskrit texts; these describe her merely as having a “raised nose” or “long nose,” “sagging lips,”
“flabby belly,” etc. Indeed, extant icons identified as Jyestha show her as human-faced (cf. Gopinatha Rao, op. cit., ref.
49, vol. 1, pt.2, pp. 393-399; Banerjca, J... Development of Hindu Iconography, Calcutta, 1956, p. 382-284). I should add
that Jyesthd Sgures also in the Garada Purina (chap. 23) and in the Jéanes:agurudevapaddtati (11, V, 12-14) as one of the
nine faktis of Sadasiva, but, as one of the conceptual Afandala deities, she has no apparent iconic attributes.

4° Bhattachatya, B., Buddbist Iconography, 2nd cd. p. 349 [In Buddhist literature she is referred to as Ganapatihridaya).

3° Agrawala, V.S., Prathin Bharatiya Lokadhatma (in Hindi}, pp. 148-149 [original not seen; cited by Sharma, 1970, op. cit.
p.172).

295
Ths content downloaded hon: 194 29-188 HS on Wed, 2S Jun 2055-2249 $3 PM
Albuse subiect to INTOR Torus ancl Cond tiacts

--- Page 7 ---
a generic term is that it may flexibly be applied to the image of any elephant-headed female deity
who cannot be precisely identified owing to inadequate knowledge of the image’s history and
cult associations or to discordances in iconographic features.

That ‘Vaindyaki’? has aboriginal connotations is apparent from the suffix yahi (fakkhi,
Jakkhini) the Prakrit for yaksi or _yaksini—the feminine generic term for any chthonic semi-
divinity. The etymology of the prefix is less certain. It may be traced to ‘vana’, forest. This
derivation is consistent with the fact that in Indian sculpture ywksis are almost invariably de-
picted either as humans mounted on an animal, or as partially thetiomorphic. The former are
well known from decorative elements on the railings and gateways of Buddhist stupas; examples
of these are the graceful Culakoka yasi from Bharhut, who stands on an elephant, in her role
as a fertility goddess, and a similar bracket figurine from Mathura.! Examples of theriomorphic
jaksis are less well known: a fragment from the Amarivati stupa (ca. third century, A.D.)
bears the decorative motif of a yak sa-yaksi couple depicted as gatland-bearers with human bodies
and elephant heads (fig.2}. The yaksi has prominent breasts, and though her head is partly
damaged her rotund proportions and stance complement the form of her partner. Such early
figures doubtless represent an intermediate stage in the evolution of deities from the completely
theriomorphic objects of primitive animism to the stage where they become fully anthropo-
morphic and acquire iconographic identity. Examples of such paired figures are too infrequent
to allow the construction of an evolutionary series which could indicate the dropping popularity
of a female, elephant-headed personage and the rise in that of the male partner. As we have
noted, the emergence of the god GaneSa, as we know him by his attributes today, occurs
abruptly in the fifth to sixth century A.D.

Let us turn to a recently discovered icon of Vainayaki (fig. 3), now in the art collection at
the Chitrapir Saraswat Afath at Shirali, in Western Karnataka. This remarkable icon is only
sixty-four mm. in height, establishing it as one intended for worship in the household as a
family deity. Its history is unknown except that it very likely was the gift of a devotee to the
ancillary Saraswat Brahman Math at Kadle, where it was stored away and forgotten for countless
decades. It is the first and only metal icon of the goddess yet reported. It is intact except for
minor damage to the prabhavali, which is cast integrally. he metal is ‘brassy’, but seems to
have some gold admixed.

‘The Chitrapur Vainayaki is seated in padmdsana on a circular lotus throne supported by a
simple, rectangular pitha. She has crinkled, flappy ears. The crown, face and proboscis are
smoothly continuous; their details are not cut in the metal, probably deliberately, so that the
face is convex and mask-like. The proboscis is ribbon-like, rather than rounded, and its tip
curls to the proper right, i.e. to the devotce’s left-hand side. In contrast, the naked torso is
modelled naturalistically, being full-breasted and svelte at the waist, unlike Ganeéa’s. There
ate two neck ornaments, delicately chased despite their small sizes. She wears a ya/fopavita
thread actoss the chest and left shoulder. A looped hip girdle (Aafisttra) is evident. She is
clothed below the waist. The hem of her dress is gathered into folds over her crossed legs. Her
four hands have an ‘unfinished’ appearance, but again this may be intentional as the discussion
below might suggest. The front right and left hands are clearly in abbaya (“fear not”) and
3 Coomaraswamy, A.K., Yaksas. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 80, No.6 [Plate 4 (2) and plate 22 (1)}.

32 A fuller account of the collection of icons at this Mefé will be published elsewhere by this author.
296
This content dowslogded hon: 194 29188 4S on Wed, oS Fan 2054 2249 83 PM
All use subicct to INTOR Torts ancl Cond thats

--- Page 8 ---
varada (boon-granting) mxdrds, respectively. ‘The rear right hand grasps a sword of ancient
design, its curved blade ending in an asymmetric flare. ‘The reat left hand grasps a pas, or noose.
It is doubtful that this icon is of indigenous manufacture; 1 would tentatively assign it a prov-
enance and date in north-western India—Gujarat or Rajasthan—ca. roth century A.D., on
historical suspicions to be discussed elsewhere, rather than on stylistic grounds alone.

Comparisons of the Chiteapir Vainayaki with other known sculptures of the goddess un-
fortunately are hampered by their paucity and the seriously damaged condition of most of
these stone sculptures: the specimen from Satna» is potbellied like Ganesa and not narrow in
the waist as are most other Vainayakis. Like Ganega she holds an aféuéa (elephant goad) in
the right hand. In addition, the Satna Vainayaki differs in that she is merely a minor figure in the
composition, dominated by the central figure of an unrelated goddess and hence scaled down
in size. Her anteusa contrasts with the sword carried by the Chitraptr Vaina’yaki—the latter
feature is hardly, if ever, encountered in GaneSa images.

Two tclatively undamaged specimens exist:3¢ A fine Pala Vainayaki from Giryck, Bihar,
is seated in padmdsana. She is not pot-bellied. She is four-armed, the attributes (in the usual
order) being gadd, ghafam, parasu and what appears to be a radish. The other, a Pratihara image,
is pot-bellied, standing, four-armed and carries a gadd-paraév combination, lotus bud, an in-
distinct object, and a bowl of medaka with the proboscis dipping into it. It should be noted
that in both images the proboscis is turned to the proper left and that abaya and rarada mudrds
are absent.

The sculpture from R&anipir Jhariyala, Orissa,%* once four-armed, carries in the only sur-
viving, rear left hand not a pasa, but a parasu. Ina four-armed image from Gujarat?s the only
remaining hand, also the rear left, is in adbaya mudra, whereas the Chiteapir goddess shows
this mudrd by the front right hand. A very badly damaged two-armed Vainayaki from Rajasthan2*
has no right hand but appears to have a bowl (skull?) in her partly broken left hand. A sculpture
of Vainayaki from Bhera-Ghit, Madhya Pradesh?” has all four hands severed at the elbows
but is otherwise noteworthy among the stone images because she is a seated, not standing,
figure unlike the rest. However, she is in the /alitdsana posture, ‘relaxed’ or at ‘regal ease’ with
one leg pendent and the other drawn up horizontally, in contrast to the ‘serious’ posture of the
Chitrapar Vainayaki. The proboscis in all these cases is either broken off or is apparently curled
conventionally towards the proper left side.

‘Thus though each of these damaged stone images possesses some distinctive feature, their
value in comparative iconography is limited. The excellent condition of the Chitrapir Vainayaki
offers a fortunate opportunity for evaluation of the icon. In summary: with the exception of the
padmdsana posture, found in only onc other image, all features of the Chitrapir Vainayaki are
unique—the sword and noose, the pacific front hands, the mask-like face and the unconven-
tional direction of curl of the proboscis to the proper right side.

What may have been the nomenclatural identity of the Chitrapit Vainayaki? ‘The religious
33 Sivaramamurti, C., “Parallels and Opposites in Indian Iconogeaphy.” Jour. Asiatic Sor. (Letters) Calcutta. X XI: (fig. 48).
36 Sharma, B.N., Oriental Art 16; 169-172, 1970 (figs. 2, 7); sbid, 18: 277, 1972 (fig. i).
3s Parekh, o9.¢i#., p. 360.

36 LLanius, op.sit., p. 38.
37 Getty, op.sit., plate 4o.
297
Ths content dowrlogded on: 19429 18S HS on Weal, 18 Jan 2005 2249 8 PM
Alluse subicct te INTOR Tetons ancl Cornd ties

--- Page 9 ---
literature we have surveyed does not help much, but it would not seem far-fetched to believe
that the icon represents a Tantric cult goddess, undoubtedly a fa&si venerated by one of the sects
whose popularity was high between the seventh and twelfth centuries A.D. Its small size
strongly suggests that it was worshipped privately rather than as a major temple deity, but
there is very litle known of its background to allow more than guarded surmises. One may
reasonably assume from the circumstances of its discovery that the icon was the property of
a Saraswat Brahman, a member of a Rg Vedic, Saivite, Swmdrta clan of Western Karnataka
believed to be of Northern Indian, probably Kashmiri, descent. This circumstance would
appear strongly to preclude previous use of the icon in ceremonies such as those of the Gdna-
patya, one of the six, now extinct, sects of Saivism. The strong Tantric leanings and often de-
based, erotic rites of some of these sects which regard Ganeéa as the supreme deity do not har-
monize with the traditional Saraswat Brahman emphasis on Vedic worship. Yet, the Chitrapir
Math also includes in its properties an icon of one of the sternest Gapupatya sects—a rather
tare image (height, 89 mm) of Dasabhuja Maha Ganapati, ten-armed, with his se&si, fully an-
thropomorphic, seated on his left lap (fig.4). The image, as far as ] have been able to deter-
mine, was probably an unknown devotee’s ex-voto offering which was stored and forgotten
long ayo and never publicly worshipped at the Math.

There are records at the temple of Daksina-Kedaresvara, dating 1113 A.D., which identify
a cettain Somesvara as a “distinguished Saraswat” and as a member of the now extinct Kala-
mukha sect of Saivism. And though there are several instances of temples in the Belgaum,
Dharwar and other districts of western Karnataka where mildly erotic sculptures ( sringdrana)
reflect the prevalence of ‘Iantric beliefs, “despite the testimony of Raminuja, there is little
evidence that Kalamukha worship was in any sense Tntric.”3* Thus it is difficult to imagine
the extent to which ‘[anttic practices were, in centuries past, shunned or tolerated by lay
members of the Saraswat Brahman community. But almost surely such practices, particularly
the esoteric ‘lAntric rites, must have been rejected by their Afaths.

With these qualifications in mind, we may dismiss the thought that the Chitrapir Vainayaki
was a cult object of the Ganapatyas.* As pointed out earlier their practice of contemplating the
various faktis of Ganega as mere abstractions or mental images obviates the need for icons of
the goddesses; this is the reason for the multiplicity of names and the absence of iconographic
descriptions. In the relatively infrequent iconographic representations of his Ja&si, her form,
as in fig. 4, is fully human and subordinate to Ganeéga.

What, then, do the elephant’s head and hand attributes of the Chitrapur Vaindyaki mean?
‘The pasa and head immediately suggest a link with Ganega, but it should be recalled that the
pasa is also an attribute of the god Varuna. The unconventional direction of curl of the pro-
boscis is hence the most significant clue. As Gopinatha Raot* observes, it is “generally turned
towards the left; only in rare cases do we meet with figures [of Ganeéa] with the proboscis
turned to the right.” ‘These rare images were to be approached only with utmost ceremonial
4 Lorenzen, D.N., Tbe Kapsdlikas and Kalémukbas. Two Lost Saivite Sects, New Delhi/ Berkeley, 1972 (pp. 114, 139).

49 For a concise, authoritative discussion of various Tantric practices ef. Mahadevan, ‘T.M.P., Oxélines of Hindsism, Bombay,
znd ed. 1960 (Chap.8); and Chakravarti, C., Yantras, Studies on their Religion and Literature, Calcutta, 1972; and Payne,
E.A., Tbe Séktas, Calcutta/London, 1933.

© Gopinaths Rao, T.A., Elements of Hindu Iconograpby. Madras, 1914. (Vol.t, pt-1, p49.)

298
Ths content dowrlogded on: 19429 18S HS on Weal, 18 Jan 2005 2249 8 PM
Alluse subicct te INTOR Tetons ancl Cornd ties

--- Page 10 ---
»
«<V@s Se
- yi a.
‘ 4 .:
“ ss '
. y ip
‘
* . \t N . 4
¥ ‘ il
. Gi >
& $. be
‘. ?
4 >.> ,
a ey
Yas” * 4
we? ae $i
» 3%
'%
4
'
¥ ,
hig. | Terracotta Plaque. Rairh, Rajasthan.
Ca@ rrst century BC. to tiest century AD.
- ' . S
toy eo. Gg : Cae Saw io
_o aie
. a be "O44. * . t Pa. ‘ XS
‘ . -
. . a 8 aay
‘ eget oped ‘
- eo. - Se: ~ 4 Qo:
— as ~y ’
“ : .
Cs eee were lay
Fig.2 Yaksa Yaksi coupie, Coping, Amaravati stupa, Ca. third century ALD,
This cantent downloaded trom 194 29 188 148 on Wed, IS Jun 2014 22:49:57 PM
Alluse subject to ISTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 11 ---
an Ga . a S O
{¥: '
rok ~ . . t :
ch et
“OD of see
se ihe:
“ ‘ { ae
a
Tat a
t.. \
oe y aoe es as -
{i ee ——r
Fig.3 Vainayaki, Chitrapae Saraswat Math, Shirdi
eS, AR Pa
aetenee a ¢ a t..
Ri Gf IPN.
4 a . , oe - * * . -
seh Ah - -\a®
«eS! sel:
a A OBR? { ig SoM
+ OF phe Ces: ap
oP \ -G-:
LS ace “iS , Og
< my } ae o. ».
=
og ene ~ ‘le \ g
~ eS J w S
ae ‘Qty: PW
aN Se KOS
Serna ne Up a ;
Pig. Dasabiuja-Mana Ganapati with Jedd.
(a. 15th century, Chiteapie Saraswat Mar’, Shiralt
This content downloaded trom 194 29 185 145 on Wed, IS Jun 2014 22:49:53 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

--- Page 12 ---
purity and only by privileged persons, whereas the conventional ones were open to worship
by anyone. To the devotce viewing the Chitrapir Vainayaki frontally, the curl of her proboscis
to the proper right is of course a curl towards his left hand side. Thus she was most likely
venerated by the proponents of “sdmdcdra,” or the Sdk/a cult of “left-handed practices.”

It is bevond the scope of this article to discuss details of Saktism. Certain practices of this
Tantric doctrine were indeed repugnant, cacning for it a bad reputation and obscuring its
original philosophy; the intensity of these practices varied greatly between individual devotees
as well as in different parts of India. “In Saktism, indeed, as elsewhere in Hinduism, we have
two orders of religion living side by side. They are mutually tolerant, indeed each assumes
the other to be a phase of itself; one is philosophic, the other popular; one universalistic, the
other local; one spiritual, the other magical. Too often Westerners have concentrated their
attention on the second.” * In the words of Mahadevan® Sakta philosophy “makes much sense
in the principles taught therein... [it is] non-dualistic (adraita)” agrecing in theory with the
ideas of Sankara and in this respect its teachings are “identical with those of Kaémira Saivism”
[for] “there is a very near kinship berween Saktism and Saivism, especially that form of Saivism
which is associated with Kashmir... For both, reality is Siva-Su&s,” that is, these ideas are
compatible with Chitrapar Saraswat precepts. The Sdksa cultists differed, however, in the mode
of worship, adopting rdmdedra or unconventional (“left-handed”) means to symbolize their
belief that release (aodsa) of the soul could be achieved by routes other than the ordinary or
traditional prayers and rites (dadsindedru, “tightist”’).** In addition, the actual modes of rama-
cara worship (also observed by Ganapatya and other sects) varied greatly from the most benign
use of symbols compatible with conservative Brahmanism to excessive behaviour where tradi-
tional caste barriers were dissolved and sexual licenses included. It is these excesses which have
come to typify ‘Tantrism, with its confusing array of feminine divinities drawn from the Vedas
and Puranas. Some of these, though associated with Siva, were reassigned to Ganega who was
glorified above all other gods by Gayupatya cultists. These excesses were never universally ac-
cepted by Brahmanism and have no place in the ceremonials of the Smirta, Saraswat Brahmans.

Viewed from this perspective, it may be that the Chitrapir Vainayaki was merely an iconic
expression of such Sakta beliefs as were admissible by Kaémira-Saivism and that she was wor-
shipped without the florid details of ritual antinomianism which characterized uninhibited
tamacara ‘Vantra.

Suggestive support for this view is seen in the hand-attributes of this image: Sakta-Tantra
philosophy classifies souls according to three ascending groups—pusx, vira and diva. Pasu,
the soul, akin to that of animals, in bondage, is symbolized by the pasa (noose) in her rear left
hand. ‘Fhe soul’s progression to the two higher levels by sddbana (meditational accomplishment)
takes it through the heroic, efra stage, here symbolized by the sword in her rear right hand;
and finally to the level of dizju, the divine, symbolized by the smdrds of the two front hands.

Still, why the clephant’s head, all so rare in the icon of a female? Here, we can only draw
upon Saivite myths and speculate: In one of their frequent erotic episodes, Siva and Parvati
happen to watch a pair of elephants in sexual intercourse. ‘Their desires aroused, they transform
themselves into elephants and give vent to their lusts. ‘The clephant-headed Ganega, according
41 Payne, E.A., The Séktas, Calcutta/J.ondon, 1933 (pp. 4, $)-

«1 Mahadevan, of.sif., p. 203-211; also cf, Bhandarkar (Vatgnavism, etc.,) p.129-131.
301
This content dowslogded hon: 194 29-188 14S on Wed, 7S fan 2054 2249 83 PM
All use subiect to INTOR Tetsns and Canid tiers

--- Page 13 ---
to one of the myths accounting for his birth, is the product of this union. In this connection
the padmdsana posture of the Chitrapir Vainayaki is consistent with the numerous situations
where Parvati’s sapas (intense meditation) is disturbed by Siva, crotically aroused by her beauty.«
There is of course no episode portraying an elephant-headed Parvati in fapas; we can only
count on the iconmaker’s occasional latitude in the labyrinths of Hindu mythology to improvise
and produce an image serving the needs of philosophy as well !

We return briefly to the ceremonial worship of Vinayaka, the appellation used in this con-
nection in the Agni-Purana for the elephant-headed Ganeéa, to consider the possible relationship
of Vainayaki as his Susi. Let us recall the exceptional instance in one recension of this Purana?
where the attributes of one of his conceptual saktis, Gauri, are described. Note that these attri-
butes are completely at variance with those prescribed for Gauri, one of the forms of Parvati,
as the consort of Rudra-Siva.** Now, the Gauri of the Agni-Purana lacks an elephant-head but
displays in her four hands all the attributes possessed by the Chitrapir Vainayaki, except that
instead of the sword, Gauri is imagined as holding a spear and the hands holding this and the
fdia are interchanged. In a final twist of irony the Afantra invoking Gauri, 4@&ti of Ganeéga,
concludes with a long list of mystic syllables ending with an obcisance to “Gauri, beloved
wife of Rudra... Hing, Fut, Obcisance !”
© O'Flaherty, W.D., Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Siva, Oxtord, 1975 (pp.152-455)-

4* Gopinatha Rao, op.cit., Vol.1, pt.2, p. 360. [Siva’s Gautl carties the akjamald, padma and kamandalu in three of her hands,
while the fourth is in abbaye mudra.)
302
This content dowrloaded hon: 194 29-188 14S on Wed, 7S fan 2054 2249 83 PM
All use subject to INTOR Tete andl Cord thas
