--- Page 1 ---
yee ° e
Understanding Ganapati
14 pe Lo . L. ; GJ
Ly
\g .
‘ » if . @ f e ~ [
HASIGOUS ito tye Dynamics of a Cult
ts i ‘
f . =
| Ua EEO fl
| aa ~ a |
i ‘ y _ ae ©
ho) eae
foe” Oe ee
' ee f wl? “” ~ f i ~ . = +t =, felt Pace N hae —
v4 aren.) > SX at ‘ vote oo: ON SES x wh °
ay ik cs Sarr 7 (ae Zz] r
wo aes TM ate ooo! = &
. ) ° “~
ANITA RAINA THAPAN-_<: .*
we a . na os.”

--- Page 2 ---
UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Insights into the Dynamics of a Cult
ANITA RAINA THAPAN

MANOHAR

1997

--- Page 3 ---
First published 1997

© Anita Raina Thapan 1997

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without prior permission of the author and the publisher
ISBN 81-7304-195-4

Published by

Ajay Kumar Jain for

Manohar Publishers & Distributors

2/6 Ansari Road, Daryaganj

New Delhi 110 002

Lasertypeset by

A J Software Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd.

305 Durga Chambers

1333 D.B. Gupta Road

Karol Bagh, New Delhi 110 005

Pnnted at

Rajkamal Electric Press

B-35/9, G.T. Karnal Road Indl. Area

Delhi 110033

--- Page 4 ---
For Arjun, Gaurav and Madhav

--- Page 5 ---
Contents
Acknowledgements 7
Abbreviations 10
List of Maps and Plates 11
Transliteration of Sanskrit Letters 12
1. Introduction 13
2. The Elephant 42
3. Vinayakas and Ganapatis 84
4. A Brahmanical Deity 11]
5. Lord of Trade 146
6. The Ganapatyas 176
7. Legacy of the Ganapatyas 214
8. Conclusion 246
Bibliography 262
Index 282

--- Page 6 ---
Acknowledgements
This book is based on my Ph.D dissertation completed in 1993 at the
University of Delhi. There are many who have shared in my endeavour
from the conception of the idea in 1988 to the writing of the thesis
and to its subsequent appearance as a book. I am happy to be able to
finally express my appreciation to them for having helped make this
such a rich learning experience.

The many thought-provoking interventions of my supervisor,
Professor K.M. Shrimali, helped sustain the excitement and
enthusiasm with which this work was undertaken. I am deeply
grateful to him for his considerable patience and intellectual
generosity. The comments of my examiners enabled me to refine
many ideas and acquire fresh insights into the subject. Professor
Francois Grimal generously provided me every facility I needed at
the French Institute of Pondicherry and the help of his staff at the
Sanskrit Department. To Dr. Surya Narayan Bhatt I am especially
grateful for the many hours he spent with me going through
transcripts and esoteric texts. His fluency in spoken Sanskrit was
sheer delight. Shereen Ratnagar has, at various stages, provided
encouragement and assistance with her criticial and incisive
comments as also with her useful suggestions in matters related to
archaeology. Only I know how much I have benefited from our
meetings. Professor N.N. Bhattacharya was good enough toread and
commenton some of my final drafts. Several lengthy discussions with
Dr. Marta Vannucci, as also her scientific and logical approach to all
study, have been a stimulating influence.

To Studies in History I am grateful for permission to use
material in Chapter III from my article which was originally published
in their journal (Vol. X, No. 1, 1994, pp. 1-22) and to Social Science
Probings, too, for permission to give a new avatarain Chapter I to my
article originally published by them (Vol. 9, Nos. 1-4, Mar.-Dec. 1992,
pp. 31-41). Raveendranath Rajan was generous in his assistance with

--- Page 7 ---
8 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

the maps. More recently, I have appreciated the punctuality and
efficiency with which my publishers, Messrs Ramesh and Ajay Jain,
have processed every stage in the bringing out of this book.

Many friends have provided support of various kinds. Amita
Satyal has, on several occasions, checked things out for me in the
libraries in Delhi and sent me material I needed at short notice. Viru
and Gita Acharya offered me their home as a base for my field work
in Karnataka and, on occasion, also acted as interpreters when the
only language the pujari could speak was Kannada. Snimer Sahniand
K. Srinivas helped with the logistics of field-work in Maharashtra.
Jyotsna Sekhar provided me the base for my visits in and around
Madras and Kerala and has, through the years, shared in the joys and
frustrations of my work.

The most rewarding experience has been the interaction
with the numerous pujarisat the several temples that I visited. It is not
possible to name them all. However, special mention must be made
of some who were generous with their ime: Shri V. Gururaja Dikshit,
the pradhan arcak of the Mahaganapati Temple, Mallesvaram Circle,
Bangalore; Shri Moreshwar Dinkar Pendse, the mukhya pujari of the
Ganapati temple at Theur; Shri Tryambaka Narain Joshi, head
trustee and pujariat the temple at Titwala; Shri Narayana Upadhyaya
and Shri Gopala Mahadev of the main temple at Gokarna. I am also
grateful to Vani and Purnima the two daughters of Shri Gopala
Mahadev. They were my very able guides to all the lesser known
shrinesin and around Gokarna. Shrimati Vighnahari Deo at Cincvad
(whose husband is the eleventh descendant of Moraya Gosavi,
believed to be the first ofa dynasty of eight incarnations of Ganapati)
and her daughter Shrimati Bhakti Bhate provided me with some
insights into the life ofa family which has constituted the core of the
Ganapatya tradition in Maharashtra over so many generations. Shri
Rajabhau Deodhar and several artisan families at Pen, Maharashtra,
welcomed me into their homesand patiently answered my numerous
queries.

Invaluable assistance was provided by my mother who
cheerfully took over many of my domestic responsibilities enabling
me to spend long hours at work. My sons, Gaurav and Madhav, were
little boys when I began working on the thesis. Their numerous
questions along the years provided both motivation and inspiration.
Now, as adolescents, they have offered useful advice on the finer
points of wordprocessing. I hope that when they read this book they

--- Page 8 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 9
will appreciate the study that engaged their mother’s mind during
their formative years.

Finally, I am indebted to my husband, Arjun, for his con-
stant support and understanding through the ups and downs of this
work. He has been subjected to numerous discussions, readings and
interpretations and has, involuntarily and despite any inclination,
become quite knowledgeable about Ganapau. I have specially valued
his sense of humour and editorial comments.

Manila, Philippines ANITA RAINA THAPAN
Apnil 1996

--- Page 9 ---
Abbreviations
ABORI Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute
ASIAR Archaeological Survey of India Annual Report
ASI Archaeological Survey of India
BBMPG Bulletin of the Baroda Museum and Picture Gallery
BHU Banaras Hindu University
BMFA Bulletin of the Museum of Fine Arts (Boston)
CII Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum
EA Epigraphia Andhrica
EC Epigraphia Carnatica
E] Epigraphia Indica
EW East and West
FIP French Institute of Pondicherry
[HQ Indian Historical Quarterly
IO Inscriptions of Orissa
JBBRAS Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society
JBORS Journal of the Bihar and Onssa Research Society
JBRS Journal of the Bihar Research Society
JESHO Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Onent
JGJhARI Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Research Institute
JOIB Journal of the Onental Institute of Baroda
JRAS Journal of the Royal Astatic Society of Great Britain and
Ireland
JUPHS Journal of the UP Historical Society
PIHC Proceedings of the Indian History Congress
SAA South Asian Archaeology
SH South Indian Inscriptions

--- Page 10 ---
List of Maps and Plates

Map 1. Areas Associated with the Elephant 83
(Pre-Harappan Period up to ec. ap 200)

Map 2. The Cult of Ganapati (c. ap 400-800) 145

Map 3. The Geographical Distribution of the
Ganapatya Sects 213

Plate 1. The principal image of Ganapati at the Sri Maha- 256
ganapati temple at Idagunji, Karnataka. Photo
courtesy: the trustees.

Plate 2. Simha Ganapati in the Utsava Hall of the Sri Siddhi- 257
Buddhi Vinayaka Mandir, New Delhi. Auhtor’s photo.

Plate 3. Vaisnava Ganapati, Utsava Hall of the Sri Siddhi- 258
Buddhi Vinayaka Mandir, New Delhi. Author's photo.

Plate 4. Adianta Prabha showing a syncretism between 259
Ganapati and Hanuman. Madhya Kailash Temple
Complex, Adyar, Madras. Author's photo.

Plate 5. GaneSa, c. seventh-eighth century. Vijayawada, 260
Andhra Pradesh. Madras Museum No. 89/38. Photo
courtesy: American Institute of Indian Studies,
Varanasi.

Plate 6. Painting of HerambaGanapati, c.eighteenthcentury. 26]
Allahabad Museum. Photo courtesy: American
Institute of Indian Studies, Varanasi.

--- Page 11 ---
Transliteration of Sanskrit Letters

a at g

a a i

z 3 a

i u u

R R r-.)

r r l

u v att

e ai oO

au am ah

Anusvara ~ m
Visarga :h

F a 7 y S
ka kha ga gha n
a B a a a
ca cha ja jha na
ro 3 Ss @ "vf
la tha d dha na
a gy z 5 aq
ta tha da dha na
q be q q q
pa pha ba bha ma
q z a q Wl
ya ra la va sa
q aq iJ 8]
sa Sa ha ksa

--- Page 12 ---
CHAPTER I
Introduction

Ganapati is best understood when situated in a broad historical
context. From his obscure origins in antiquity he gradually rose to
find a permanent place in the pantheons of the three major
religious systems of ancient India—Brahmanism, Buddhism and
Jainism. Over time, he came to be associated with various castes
and occupational groups in towns and villages and acquired
manifold powers and functions. This evolution culminated in his
becoming one of the most popular and well-loved deities in India.

The purpose of this study is to map the dynamic process
of the development of the cult of Ganapati and analyse the
compulsions behind it. Since society is constantly evolving, so also
are religious needs and attitudes and, thereby, the perception of
deities. In fact, the whole body of living and practised beliefs of
the Hindus are essentially dynamic, adaptable and transformable
to suit the needs of men and the times. This is not, however, how
Brahmanism views itself. In fact, there is a tendency in the
Brahmanical texts to obliterate historical time and facts. It is
considered that historical accounts are misleading, since they
reduce the eternal to the temporal and that gods and their powers
are universal and, therefore, do not belong to the profane which
is limited in time and space and which alone can be understood
by modern academic disciplines. At several old Ganapati temples
which I visited, whenever I asked how old the temple or the site
was, I was informed by the priest that it belonged to another yuga.
According to Hinduism, there are four yugas or ages called Krta,
Treta, Dvapara and Kali. To quote Basham ‘their lengths are
respectively 4,800, 3,600, 2,400 and 1,200 “years of gods” each of
which equals 360 human years. Each yuga represents a progressive
decline in piety, morality, strength, stature, longevity and happiness.
We are at present in the Kali yuga which began, according to
tradition, in 3120 Bc, believed to be the year of the Mahabharata

--- Page 13 ---
l4 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

war.’! These four yugas form part of each of the seventy-one maha-
yugas or aeons which in turn form part of each of the fourteen
manvantaras or secondary cvcles. Finally, these manvantaras are
part of the basic cycle, the kalpa, which constitutes a day of Brahma
or 4,320 million earthly years. Brahma’s nights are of equal length
while his total life span is of 100 years, or 311,040,000 million
earthly years, after which the whole universe returns to the ineffable
world spirit until another creator god is evolved.* With such a
concept it is easy to understand how insignificant man’s life is in
the Brahmanical perception and how great the gulf is between
the time frame of the sacred and that of the profane. The historic
world is unreal, because, in comparison with the cosmic rythm it
lasts only for an instant and is, therefore, maya or illusion. From
this knowledge stems the desire to renounce this world and seek
the Brahman (Absolute Reality) which alone enables one to pierce
the veil of maya. Buddhism and Jainism also accept the same
doctrine of cyclic time, in its general outlines.

However, even if man’s existence on this earth is
insignificant in terms of time, while he is alive his needs are very
material and most of the religious texts describe rituals, fasts,
pilgrimages and prayers to be performed for material benefits. As
material conditions change so do human needs and, consequently,
certain gods rise or decline in importance. A study of changing
material conditions and their effects on the religious life of people
necessitates a vast time frame. Religious phenomena have to be
viewed over an extended duration of time since religious evolution
and transformation is slow both in the case of religious habits and
the vision of the world. Social changes cause men to develop new
ideas and aspirations and this results in the gradual modification
of various aspects of the religious system. Today, when the
discoveries and inventions in the realm of science and technology
appear to be unlimited, many people feel that miracles and
religious phenomena can be explained scientifically and that there
is an insurmountable contradiction between religious faith and
scientific thought. It is also in the developed societies where
religious fervour appears to have declined the most. The religious
senuments of individuals or particular castes or sub-castes are also
determined by their position within a society. As individuals or
groups rise higher or descend lower in the social hierarchy their
mentalities undergo a change. Similarly, social changes can lead
one group to demand the religious rights and privileges of other

--- Page 14 ---
INTRODUCTION 15
groups. Emancipation of women in western society has led them
to demand admission to the clergy, traditionally reserved only for
men.

In this modern day at least one new goddess, Santosi Ma,
has emerged in India. She has certain characteristics that are
lacking in the goddesses of the Sanskritic tradition or the folk
tradition. She is specifically suited to the needs of the urban woman
in the lower and middle class income groups. At the same time,
with the development of medicine and faith in doctors, particularly
in the urban areas, many traditional goddesses of various diseases
have lost their popularity. One such example is Sitala, the smallpox
goddess, who has declined in importance in several regions with
the eradication of small pox or in the absence of epidemics since
many years. Therefore, the functions deities are believed to perform
correspond to the needs of their worshippers and since these are
constantly evolving so are the deities that fulfill them.

My intention is to examine, within a chronological frame-
work, the process by which Ganapati evolves and why he is gradually
accommodated in different religious contexts; how he is
Brahmanized; how the syncretic religious texts, the Puranas,
evolving out of a necessity to create a wider social base and reach
out to a greater number of people in the face of competition
from Buddhism, Jainism and other religious sects, manipulate this
deity; how the cult of the Puranic Ganapati spreading from the
madhyadesa region (Indo-Gangetic divide and the Ganga-Yamuna
Doab and its environs) reaches the peripheral areas, comes in
contact with local beliefs and associations and further undergoes
a change; when and why Ganapati becomes associated with the
trading community; why the Ganapatya sects come into being and
the significance Ganapati acquires within different religious
groups—Buddhist, Saivas and Smartas; and, finally, which of these
several layers of Ganapatya tradition continue to be relevant and
what are the modern facets of Ganapati worship which are not
mentioned in ancient texts.

Such an analysis highlights both the regional variations in
beliefs and practices as also those elements that retain a common
symbolism nation wide. Similarly, it also permits an understanding
of those aspects of the deity that remain constant over a prolonged
period of time and those that have evolved or are in the process

of evolving. These differences and similarities are best understood
when the canvas on which they are unfolding is large. While |

--- Page 15 ---
16 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

accept the importance and necessity of regional studies because
of the deep insights they provide into the workings of local
processes, I have deliberately chosen, instead, to undertake a more
broad-based analysis in order to fully appreciate the dynamics of a
cult over a large area, much of which constitutes modern India. It
is in India that the deity represents a continuing tradition and
where he enjoys an important position in the religious life of
millions. My thrust, therefore, is on the evolution of an Indian
god with all the regional diversities that it implies. The most
significant developments in the forms and roles of Ganapati occur
in the peripheral regions. It is in western India that he first becomes
the deity of traders. In the south he acquires a variety of forms
each recommended for installation in a specific category of town
or village. Similarly, it is mainly in the south and in the Deccan
area that the various sects of the Ganapatyas emerge. Even the
ambiguities in his personality, or in his relationships with other
deities, may vary between regions. In fact, the ambivalence of
many aspects of his personality and role may be understood as
being the result of the coalescence of the Sanskritic and non-
Sanskritic traditions which results in a character that is full of
dichotomies.

Against this background, it is possible to rationalize to
some extent the modern trends in the beliefs associated with
Ganapati. A recent dimension to the personality of Ganapati is
that of paternity of the newly invented goddess Santosi Ma. Until
then, Ganapati’s relationship with the goddess was that of son,
husband, brother and consort. What is significant in this
development of his acquiring a daughter is not just the fact that
he is associated with a new goddess, thereby asserting his own
popularity in the modern context, but of his constant and manifold
relationship with the goddess in general. The film Jai Santoshi Ma
is responsible for popularizing the cult of this goddess. The story
is based on a Hindi Katha with some modifications. The Katha, for
example, does not mention that Santosi Ma is the daughter of
Ganapati. Santosi Ma is essentially a north Indian goddess who
has not found a place in the Ganapati temples south of the
Vindhyas, at least not in the several temples that I visited. This fact
is best understood against a background of the varying perceptions
of Ganapati’s marital status in the northern and southern regions.

Recently, Ganapati images accepting milk from devotees

--- Page 16 ---
INTRODUCTION 17
all over the world has generated considerable awe and excitement.
Although this phenomenon is associated with Nandi, Siva’s vahana
(vehicle) and the Goddess as well, Ganapati is believed to have
accepted the greatest quantity of milk and from the largest number
of people. Whatever be the interpretations of this event, the sacred
texts have not prescribed milk as a favourite food of the deity.
Henceforth, however, I have no doubt that it will be included in
the daily offerings, for who knows when Ganapati will decide to
accept it again.

Several scholars have contributed to an understanding of
this deity. Some consider him to have been derived from the
totem of a Dravidian tribe’, or, at least, from some pre-Aryan
tradition.‘ Others consider that it was the early Aryan settlers
themselves who, out of fear or desire to acquire the strength of
the elephant, began to worship the animal. The latter, gradually
came to be looked upon as a guardian deity.° There are scholars
who maintain that Ganapati evolved from within the Brahmanical
fold, being present in concept in the Vedas.° According to some,
Ganapati, both in concept and form, is the product of popular
imagination and certainly not of Vedic origin.’ Przyluski believes
that Siva and Ganapati were originally one and the same god.®
Others, like Heras, consider that Skanda and Ganapati were
originally synonymous.? Whereas these scholars discuss the diverse
possible sources of his origin as also the stages that mark his
development, none describes the actual process by which this deity
emerges.

Some of the important studies on Ganapati analyse the
cult not only in India but in several parts of Asia. Getty’s pioneering
work, first published in 1936, focuses on an analysis of the deity as
described and depicted in literature, iconography, sculpture and
painting in Hinduism and Buddhism in India, Nepal, Chinese
Turkestan, and Tibet, and of the introduction of his image and
worship in Java, Bali, Borneo, China and Japan. The most recent,
comprehensive study of Ganapati is the one edited by Robert L.
Brown” which contains articles on wide-ranging aspects of Ganapati
in Asia by several scholars. Some of these are based on literary
texts that have recently been translated and on fresh sculptural
data. This book provides some original insights into the cult of
Ganapati in several countries.

A.K. Narain’s article in the book edited by Brown discusses

--- Page 17 ---
18 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

the protohistory of the idea and icon of Ganapati.'’ His detailed
and informative analysis still leaves some questions unanswered.
Who were the people who worshipped the sacred elephant and
with which specific regions were they associated? Why is the
elephant associated with mountains and with snakes? Is there any
connection between Airavata, Indra’s elephant mount, and
Ganapati? Why are the evil spirits, that had been ritually placated
from the earliest of times, suddenly referred to as Vinayakas: Why
do the Vinayakas and the elephant deity find mention in only a
limited number of Brahmanical texts and, essenually, within one
particular school of the Vedas, namely, the Arsna Yajur Veda? What
is the process by which the syncretism between them takes place,
by whom is it brought about and in which region? I have attempted
to answer some of these questions as they help provide a deeper
insight into Ganapati’s origins.

Ganapati’s role and significance within the Brahmanical
framework is reflected essentially in the Mahapuranas. Courtright
has given a detailed analysis of the Puranic myths pertaining to
Ganapati, as also his ritual and worship based on these texts. '?
The myths explain neither his origin nor his nature, for ue Puranas
depict only an aspect of his personality. Nor do they throw light
on the reasons for the contradictions and the many facets that
exist in his Puranic personality and which are not quite apparent
in the Buddhist, Jaina or Tantric contexts. Often, psychoanalytic
readings of the myths of Ganapati obscure as much as they reveal.
The role of the Puranic Ganapati is better understood when
compared to that of other secondary deities of Puranic pantheon.

Ganapati is the favourite deity of traders and merchants
in contemporary India. His image, along with that of Laksmi,
adorns even the humblest of shops and market places. Both are
worshipped for prosperity. Yet, Laksmi is the consort of Visnu and
is not really associated with Ganapati in Puranic mythology. A
study of the Brahmanical texts alone does not allow an
understanding of how and why this happens. From at least one or
two centuries before the Christian era, Kubera was accepted as
the lord of wealth and Manibhadra was popular with traders in
the region of the upper and middle Ganga plain. This study
highlights how and why Ganapati comes to be associated with
these two deities and eventually takes over their role and
significance. It shows how Ganapati’s growing importance with

--- Page 18 ---
INTRODUCTION 19
the trading community initially begins with non-Brahmanical
communities in those very regions where trade continues to flourish
inspite of a general decline in trading activity over most of the
country in the post-Gupta period. This association spreads to other
regions where trade picks up from about the tenth century onwards
and where non-Brahmanical communities are also present.
Gradually, the Brahmanical Ganapati is also identified with this
activity which was, initially, looked down upon in the Puranas.
This aspect of Ganapati has not been analysed in previous studies
of the deity. Situating the deity in the context of a specific category
of society can reveal some lesser known facets of his personality
and role.

There have been a few regional studies of the Ganapati
cult but they are essentially focussed on Maharashtra. Preston
discusses the sites sacred to Ganapati in Maharashtra from about
AD 1300 to the nineteenth century.’* Courtright devotes part of his
book to an analysis of Ganapati worship and the celebration of
the GaneSa caturthi festival by a particular community of brahmanas
in Maharashtra. Richard Cashman discusses the political
recruitment of Ganapati by Bal Gangadhar Tilak in Maharashtra
in order to forge a united Hindu front during the freedom struggle
at the end of the nineteenth century and in the early years of the
twentieth century. Perhaps, one reason for a paucity of regional
data is because a detailed historical study of the deity in the
subcontinent as a whole has been lacking. Since I associate different
stages in the development of the cult with specific geographical
areas, this study may offer a background of information on various
regions and could provide some clue to the areas which offer
scope for a detailed study. An analysis of the regional variations of
the cult could then be related to the trans-regional cult as a whole.

The Ganapatyas remain a little known sect. Although
mentioned by nearly all the scholars who have worked on Ganapati,
we know little about who they were, where and when they emerged
and what the differences between the various sub-sects were. The
development of this sect represents the culmination of a process
which had been developing during several preceding centuries. I
have associated the various sub-sects with different geographical
locations and have attempted to understand the differences
between them. Since Ganapati is part of a living tradition, a
historical enquiry of this nature would remain incomplete if it did

--- Page 19 ---
20 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

not make some attempt to relate historical data to the existing
trends in regions where these sects flourished. An understanding
of the contemporary perceptions of Ganapati brings out the
elements of continuity as well as disjunctions in the tradition of
Ganapati worship. While my analysis is far from exhaustive,
considering the size of India and the existence of innumerable
temples and traditions, it does permit some pertinent conclusions.

My assessment of the influence of the Ganapatya sects in
the regions with which they were associated is based on field-work.
Visits to about forty Ganapati temples in these regions permitted
me to gain a deeper insight into some aspects of contemporary
religious beliefs. Understanding the present, puts much of the
past in perspective. Texts alone are insufficient for the under-
standing of a culture where the oral tradition has always remained
very rich and important. Texts only provide us with what has been
considered worth recording by the literate classes. The actual
practice of religion in India is a mixture of both the oral and
written traditions. Each region has a variety of traditions and what
is striking is the extreme plasticity of religious beliefs and practices.
The data that I collected, based on field-work, enabled me to gain
a deeper insight into some of the religious phenomena that I
have described in Chapter VI. Details of my field-work are given in
the next section devoted to sources.

I should explain why I refer to this deity as Ganapati,
rather than as GaneSa. Both Alice Getty and Courtright chose to
refer to him as Ganesa. Haridas Mitra and Heras prefer the epithet
Ganapau. From the sources that I have consulted, it is apparent
that this deity is referred to most frequently as Ganapati. In the
Buddhist Tantras he is either Vinayaka or Ganapati. Other epithets
are less often used. In the Puranas, he is referred to as Gana,
Vinayaka or by other epithets, of which Gane§Sa is only rarely used.
As Mahaganapati, he figures as a deity in his own right, worthy of
worship. Likewise, in inscriptions, or in the Agamas and Tantras,
he is not referred to as GaneSa very often. The sect which chose
him as the supreme deity is named after Ganapati. Even the eight
famous Ganapati temples, the astavindyakas in Maharashtra, are
named Sri Mayuresvara, Sri Siddhi Vinayaka, Sri Ballalesvara, Sri
Varada Vinayaka, Sri Cintamani, Sri Girijatmaja, Sri Vighneévara
and Sri Mahaganapau. It, therefore, seems appropriate to refer to
him as Ganapati. The epithet Ganesa appears to have been
popularized by the Ganesa Purana which is associated with the

--- Page 20 ---
INTRODUCTION 2]
region of modern Maharashtra, Varanasi, Karnataka and perhaps
some parts of Andhra Pradesh. Possibly, the sectarian devotees of
the deity sought to give him a distinct name. Today the epithet
Ganapati is popular in the south while Ganesa is more frequently
used in Maharashtra and the north.

It is also necessary to clarify some of the terms that I have
used in the text. These terms are used more for the sake of
convenience and do not represent any definite and unanimously
accepted categories or distinctions. By Vedic religion is meant the
religion based on the Vedas, the Brahmanas which are looked on
as appendices to the Vedas, and the mystical Aranyakas and
Upanisads which are, in turn, appendices to the Brahmanas. Of
the four Vedas, the Rg Veda is the oldest religious text in the world
which is still looked upon as sacred and it was probably composed
between 1500-1000 Bc. The Yajur, Sama and Atharva Vedas are later
than the Rg Veda, about 1000-800 sc, although the Atharva Veda
may be even a little later. The Brdhmanas are situated between
c. 800-600 sc and while some of the Upanisads overlap with the
latest Brahmanas, some are certainly of a later date. By Brahmanism
I mean the religion based on the Dharma Sutras or the Sacred
Books of Law, the Grhya Sutras or the manuals for simple everyday
domestic ceremonies and rituals, the epics (the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata), and the Puranas. The Dharma Sutras and Grhya Sutras
have originated from one or other of the four Vedic schools but,
unlike the Vedas, they are not considered as divine revelation or
Sruti. They are considered to be Smrti, a term which literally means
‘memory’ and which constitutes Tradition, as opposed to Srut or
Revelation. Smrti also includes the two epics and the Puranas.

The epics and Puranas were available to all castes, yet
they were the product of bréhmanas and portrayed the world-view
of Brahmanical society with its insistence on varna (caste) and
asrama (the four stages of life). Most Brahmanical literature, in its
present form, belongs to the Christian era although some of the
law-books and domestic manuals as also the core of the epics,
existed in the two or three centuries before the Christian era. The
principal Brahmanical deities are Siva, Visnu and the Goddess
who were all relatively minor figures in the Vedic pantheon. There
are also many other deities who are not mentioned in the Vedic
texts. However, the authority and sanctity of the Vedas is upheld
by Brahmanism even though many new beliefs and attitudes,
sometimes contrary to the Vedas, are reflected by it. By Hinduism

--- Page 21 ---
292 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

I mean the sum-total of the waditions mentioned above, i.e. Vedic
texts, Brahmanical texts and, in addition, the Tanuras and Agamas
and various texts of the Bhakti tradition both from the south and
the north many of them in the vernaculars and sometimes
composed by non-brahmanas; various Sthala Puranas (collection of
myths about specific sites or places) many of which are post
fifteenth century; Mahatmyas (texts glorifying a particular place or
deity); poems such as the Gita Govinda; and many folk rituals
which have become a part of contemporary religious practice and
which, in some cases, found their way into the older texts, and, in
other cases, remained part of the oral tradition.

Various sects existed within the framework of Brahmanism
and some continue to exist in modern Hinduism. The three well-
known sects are the Saivas, the Smartas and the Vaisnavas. The
Saivas and the Vaisnavas have, traditionally, been divided into
various subsects many of which do not exist todav. The Saivas
believe only in one god, Siva, who is self-existent. The Smartas
worship the five deities of the pancayatana, i.e. Siva, Visnu, the
Sun, Ganapati and the Goddess. They may choose any one of
these as their personal and principal god but that does not exclude
the worship of the four others. They consider all five as
manifestations of the supreme spirit and who, in the end, are to
be absorbed into the infinite sprit. The word Smarta derives from
the term Smrti or Tradition on which this group bases its beliefs
and rituals. The Vaisnavas, in general, are followers of either of
the three Vaisnava reformers, Caitanya (in Bengal), Ramanuja
(Tamil Nadu) and Madhava (Karnataka). They consider Visnu to
be the chief god. Similarly, the Saktas worship Sakti or the goddess
as the principal deity. Other well known sects in the past were the
Ganapatyas and the Sauras who looked upon Ganapati and the
Sun, respectively, as their supreme deities. Many modern Hindus
are not part of any sect and worship all or any of the deities. At
other umes, even when they are part of a sect they feel free to
worship other deities as well.

SOURCES
The time frame of this study is wide. The sources, therefore, are
numerous and varied. Since most aspects of Ganapati’s personality,
as we know it, emerge by about the fifteenth century, a large part

--- Page 22 ---
INTRODUCTION 23
of sources used cover the period from the time of the Harappan
civilization until about ap 1500. Where required, I have used sources
of a later date because Ganapati is part of a continuing tradition.
The final chapter is based on field work in those regions where
the Ganapatya sects evolved and established a tradition of their
own. It analyses the relevance of that tradition in the modern
context.

Whereas the archaeological, numismatic, epigraphical and
iconographical sources do not pose a problem, the same cannot
be said for the literary sources. These are often hard to date.
Scholars attribute different dates to the same text. Besides, there
are so many texts that I have had to be selective because it is not
possible to cover all of them. Certain texts such as the eighteen
Mahapuranas and the Ganapatya Upapuranas are indispensable
for a discussion on Ganapati. The Tantric texts have been selected
because they reflect some regional diversities, being from Kashmir,
Bengal and the south. The Agamas are essentially those that have
been published or that were available in transcript form in the
library of the French Institute of Pondichery (FIP). The inscriptions
number several thousand and, besides those in Sanskrit, there is a
vast collection in the many regional languages. To examine them
all is beyond the scope of most scholars as it implies a knowledge
of several languages. Therefore, I have restricted myself to those
published in the EZ, Cl and to those inscriptions from Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Bengal, Orissa, and south India that have
been translated into English.

Since some texts have been crucial for determining the
chronological framework, a preliminary discussion on them appears
essential. Among the early Buddhist texts that I have relied on to
reconstruct certain traditions and beliefs in the lifetime of, or
shortly after the death of the Buddha, are the Niddesa Commentary
of the Suttanipata and the Jatakas. According to Winternitz, some
of the poetical Suttas of the Suttanipata reach back to the time of
the beginning of Buddhism. Many would have probably originated,
at least, in the circles of the first disciples of the Buddha, not long
after his death." It is significant that this text mentions the elephant
among several animal deities worthy of worship, since Buddhist
iconography of the second century BC depicts these animals as the
Buddha in his previous life, or as symbols representing some aspect
of the Buddha’s life. This suggests that this part of the Suttanipata,

--- Page 23 ---
24 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
which refers to the animal cults, is perhaps older than the third-
second century Bc, when in the early stages of Buddhism, the
Buddha was not deified and did not have a mythology. The Niddesa
Commentary upon these verses of the Suttanipdta is fairly old,
since it is included in the canon." It is possibly earlier than the
time of the third council during the reign of ASoka (269/268 Bc-
232 pc), and some of the explanations given in it go back to the
time of the Buddha and were perhaps compiled by his disciple
Sariputta.’®

The Jatakas, a collection of about 550 stories about the
Buddha’s former births, constitute an important part of the
Buddhist tradition. These stories, which are difficult to date, grew
over several hundred years until the sixth century AD or so when
they acquired the form that we know today. It is generally accepted
that the core of the narratives was widely known by the third
century Bc. Several Jatakas carry echoes of a pre-Buddhist period
even though they may have been compiled a few centuries after
the Buddha’s birth. Some probably acquired their present form in
the early centuries of the Christian era. Rhys Davids considers that
some of the Jatakas, when they were first incorporated into the
Buddhist tradition, were already old.'’ By about the middle of the
third century AD some of them had been translated into Chinese. '®
Representations of a few Jataka stories are found on reliefs of the
Bharhut stupa showing that they had already become popular by
the second century sc.'? The scene of Buddha entering the womb
of his mother in the form of a six-tusked elephant is depicted on a
relief at the stupa at Bharhut. However, in the Alfinacitta Jataka,”°
the Susima Jataka,”' or the Kurudhamma Jataka,” for example, there
are references to a sacred elephant or the elephant festival in
which the elephant is quite distinct to the Buddha. These were
probably older stories for eventually the ‘good’ elephant became
the symbol of the Buddha's conception or the Buddha in a previous
incarnation. Although the Sustma Jataka refers to the elephant
festival it gives no description of the event. Yet the fact that such a
ritual did exist is confirmed by the Hastydyurveda, a text which also
describes this festival. This brings us to the problem of dating the
Hastyayurveda* and the Matangalila.**

Both the Matangalila and the Hastyayurveda are texts that
are not very well known. Winternitz, Macdonell and Sukumari

--- Page 24 ---
INTRODUCTION 25
Bhattacharji make no reference to them. Keith erroneously gives
the author of the Matangalila as Narayana instead of Nilakantha.
Apart from the fact that he regards it as more modern than the
Hastyayurveda, he gives no other information on these two texts.”
The manuscript of the Matangalilé gives no indication of its date.
Nothing is known of Nilkantha who is mentioned as its author.
The editor, Ganapati Sastri, states that the three manuscripts he
used are about three hundred years old. He suggests that the
author was from Kerala since the work was well known there.
An analysis of the contents of these two texts, however,
makes it possible to get an idea of the age of the rituals and
mythology they reflect, as also their place of origin. The
Hastyayurveda refers to an annual festival where the elephant was
worshipped. There are some parallels between this ritual and that
of the asvamedha (horse sacrifice), which suggest an early date for
the ritual of the elephant festival. There is another text called the
Hasti Ratna Dhanamyeti Upadesa (The Instructions for Acquiring
Wealth through the Precious Elephant), preserved in the Tibetan
Buddhist canon” which refers to a more evolved version of this
ritual. The author is stated to be Arya Nagarjuna of Nalanda
(seventh or eighth century ap). Wilkinson states that there is no
certainty that Nagarjuna was indeed the real author. It may well
be a later text legitimized with the name of an earlier famous
author. However, the essential point is that such a tradition came
from India, since elephants were not native to Tibet.”* Most of the
Indian texts in the Tibetan Buddhist canon were brought into
Tibet or translated into Tibetan between the seventh and the
eleventh centuries ap.” Since the ritual described in this text
appears to be more recent than the version described in the
Hastyayurveda, the latter is evidently considerably older. The
Matangalila and the Hastyayurveda probably originated in the
madhyadesa where evidence of the cult of a sacred elephant exists
from an early period. Even if the texts were compiled at a later
period, the traditions they describe appear to belong to the pre-
Christian era.

The Hastyayurveda essentially contains two kinds of
information, the mythology of the elephant and the management
and treatment of elephants ( gaja Sastra).* Whereas it is not known
how old the mythology is, the tradition of gaja sastra goes back, at

--- Page 25 ---
296 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
least, to the time of the Arthasastra.*' Although the more recent
texts may contain some new material or variations on old themes
the ancient tradition of gaya Sdastra itself has persisted through the
centuries until modern times. Take the example of the rite known
as the Gajyasampadana described in the Prapancasara Tantra (ninth/
tenth centuries aD).*? It is a ritual performed for capturing a large
number of wild elephants to replenish the King’s stables. The
Gajasampadana described in the Pranatosini,* a nineteenth century
text, is virtually a replica of that described in the Prapancasdara
Tantra. Therefore, the problem relating to literary sources is two-
fold: on the one hand the date of the text itself, and on the other
hand, the date of the rituals reflected in the text. A ritual text
does not necessarily reflect existing practices. Often a manuscript
may be nothing more than the faithful copy of a much older work
preserved because of the sanctity it once enjoyed. It may or may
not have relevance during the period when it was recopied. Newer
developments are merely added to the text. Large scale revisions
of the older sections rarely take place. This is evident in the
Puranas, for instance, where much of the contradictory material
in a text can be explained as being associated with differences in
time and space.

Chapter III of this study is based on the Manava Grhya
Sutra which can only be tentatively dated. Kane assigns the Grhya
Sutras to a period prior to 600-300 Bc and considers that they had
attained a position of supreme authority in the second century
Bc." Sukumari Bhattacharji situates them generally in the period
between 600-200 pc and Macdonell between 500-200 Bc.°°> Gonda
does not commit himself to a date but states that “the structure of
the Grhya Sutras presented no difficulties to the individual compilers
when they wished to insert or omit certain ceremonies even in
those cases in which these were obviously of ‘popular’ or ‘non-
Vedic’ origin or belonged to the waditions of particular religious
communities”.“” Whatever be the date of this text, | am more
specifically concerned with the dating of the section pertaining to
the Vinayaka rites.

The Vinayakas first find mention in the Mdnava Grhya
Sutra where they appear as four demonic creatures. Among the
list of beings associated with them, figure three of the four Buddhist
lokapalas (guardians of the quarters), as also Mahadeva and
Mahasena. This implies that not only was Buddhism viewed

--- Page 26 ---
INTRODUCTION 27
inimically by the brahmana authors of this text (since it is indirectly
associated with the demons), but so were Mahadeva and Mahasena.
The Buddhist lokapdlas seem to have been an established part of
Buddhist mythology in the second century Bc since they are
depicted at the Bharhut stupa at Amaravati. They are also
mentioned in texts such as the Mahavagga portion of the Digha
Nikaya, the Mahavastu and the Lalitavistara. Whereas the Digha
Nikaya contains some very old material, probably older then the
schism between the two sects (fourth century BC), it is a compilation
of material from different sources and the lokapalas are, perhaps,
amongst the later additions. The Mahavastu has certain Mahayanic
features which point to the early centuries of the Christian era.
But the nucleus of the work is old and had originated already in
the second century sc.” The Lalitavistara is mainly assigned to
about ap 200.* This would imply that the concept of lokapdlas
evolved along with other aspects of Buddhist mythology and
probably came into being sometime before the second century Bc
when they are depicted at Bharhut.

Mahadeva and Mahasena were popular gods during the
Asokan period, as brought out by the Arthasastra. They had not
yet acquired a high status within the Brahmanical framework. It is
also in ASoka’s time that a strong impetus was given tu Puddhism
and its propagation, which must have posed a threat to adherents
of the Vedic tradition. A detailed analysis of the Vinayakas in
Chapter III, leads me to believe that this is the period reflected in
the Vinayaka section of the Manava Grhya Sutra, i.e. between the
end of the third and early second century Bc.

The Vinayakas also find mention as evil beings in the
Santi Parva of the Mahabharata where they are mentioned along
with bhitas and pisacas. This portion of the Santi Parva is likely to
correspond to a period shortly after that of the composition of
the Vinayaka section in the Manava Grhya Sutra. The Mahabharata
as we know it was probably compiled between approximately the
second century Bc and the second century aD although the kernel
of the text is much older, and interpolations must have been
made until-about the fourth century or so. In the AnuSasana Parva
the Ganesvara-Vinayakas are described as being worshipped along
with the Rudragana. No longer are they depicted as evil beings.
This portion certainly belongs to the first one or two centuries of
the Christian era. To this period would also belong the passage in

--- Page 27 ---
28 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

the Sabha Parva which mentions Danti. The latter appears to be
synonymous with the Mahakaya (one having a huge body) who is
named along with the Ganesavara-Vinayakas as part of the
entourage of Siva in the AnuSasana Parva. The didactic portions
of Visnu and Mahadeva in the AnuSsasana and Santi Parvas
correspond to a still later stage (third or fourth centuries AD)
when these two deities were in the process of becoming the major
gods of the Puranic pantheon.

In addition to the critical edition of the Mahabharata, |
have consulted the Geeta Press edition, and the volumes translated
by Van Buitenen. Unless specifically stated, the references are to
the critical edition alone. Material relevant to this discussion is
found in the Aranyaka, the Sabha, the Santi and the AnuSasana
Parvas. It is significant that almost all references to the Vinayakas,
their related beings and to the elephant deity, do not figure in the
main body of the critical edition but are only mentioned in the
Appendices. They do, however, form part of the Geeta Press
edition. This shows that the tradition associated with the Vinayakas
and the elephant deity was limited to a few versions which must
have been associated only with specific regions.

The Yajnavalkya Smrti is another important text for my
discussion. Kane places it between ap 100-300.*° Macdonell
considers AD 350 as a reasonable date*® and Winternitz situates it
not earlier than the third or fourth centuries of the Christian
era.‘' I am concerned with the section on Vinayaka worship, and
the end of the second century/early third century aD appears to
be the most reasonable period for this portion of the text. Here,
the four Vinayakas of the Manava Grhya Sutra have evolved into
one single Vinayaka with four names. His worship is associated
with that of Ambika, Siva and Skanda. Yet he is neither Siva’s son
nor his gana. Hence this portion is earlier than the Puranas.

The Taittirya Aranyaka and the Maitrayani Samhita contain
gayains (sacred verses) to the elephant deity named Danti and to
several other Puranic deities such as Narasimha and Durga. In the
case of the Taittiriya Aranyaka the two gayatris belong to the
Narayanopanisad which is an appendix of the Taittiriya Aranyaka
and belongs to a later date than the main body of the text.
Although both these texts belong to the pre-Christian era, many
of these gayatris were obviously added to it in the early centuries
of the Christian era. Farquhar situates the Narayanopanisad in the

--- Page 28 ---
INTRODUCTION 29
period between ap 550 and 900% but it is possible that some
portions were interpolated earlier than that. Narasimha and Durga
were acknowledged by the Brahmanical religion from about the
Gupta period (fourth to sixth century AD) onwards. The Narasimha
avatara of Visnu had became popular in the Gupta period when it
is alluded to in some coin legends of Kumara Gupta.** However,
the different gayatris were not necessarily interpolated at the same
time and by the same person. The portions of these two texts,
relating to Danti, belong to approximately the second century of
the Christian era, since Danti is also mentioned in those portions
of the Mahabharata which appear to belong to the second century
AD. After the fourth century when the elephant headed deity begins
to evolve within the framework of the Puranas the epithet Danti is
hardly ever used.

The eighteen Mahapuranas have formed an integral part
of this study. The Puranas (literally meaning ‘ancient’) are a
compendia of legends and religious instructions. They are supposed
to deal with five themes: creation, re-creation, genealogies of the
gods, ages of Manus and the genealogies and histories of royal
lineages. In fact, they often do not strictly adhere to these criteria.
The Puranas are complex and multi-layered works and this makes
it difficult to establish any precise chronology in their development
or to relate them to specific geographical regions. Even if a text is
generally considered to belong to a certain epoch, elements of it
are borrowed from older traditions, and interpolations continue
to be added up to a later date. Broadly, the Puranas were compiled
from approximately the third century until about the fourteenth
century of the Christian era. Accepting that wide umeframe, I
have discussed how the mythology of Ganapati develops and how
he comes to acquire a particular kind of personality in the Puranic
Saiva pantheon. I am concerned with the evolution of concepts. It
is in the Puranas that Ganapati acquires a mythology, a role in the
Saiva pantheon and eventually in the pantheons of Visnu and the
Goddess as well. However, because the Puranas cannot be situated
in a definite geographical or chronological context, souces such
as sculpture and epigraphy become indispensable for establishing
the approximate dates at which Puranic beliefs pertaining to
Ganapati are accepted in different parts of the country. These
sources permit an assessment of the extent of the deity’s popularity;
the period when he acquires temples of his own; his association

--- Page 29 ---
30 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

with other deities; the common features of his cult in different
parts of the sub-continent and the regional particularities.
Sculptures and inscriptions also make it possible to ascertain
whether certain myths are more popular in some regions than
others.

The Mudgala Purana and the Ganesa Purana are two
sectarian Upapuranas central to my discussion on the Ganapatyas.
The Upapuranas are also eighteen in number and are written in
the same style as the Mahapuranas. However, they deal with local
cults and sects and are, by and large, later than most of the
Mahapuranas. There is no unanimous agreement about the names
of the eighteen Upapuranas especially since there are a large
number of texts, many of them fairly recent, which claim to be
Puranas or Upapuranas. The Mudgala Purana has been published
by the Sri Mudgala Prakashan Mandalam, Bombay, and the Ganesa
Purana by the Sri Yogindra Matha at Moregaon, Maharashtra (the
site of one of the astavindyaka temples). The edition of the
Mudgala Purana is claimed to be based on a handwritten copy of a
text which, in turn, was based on the version of the Purana revealed
to Sri Yogindra at Moregaon in the sixteenth century. This sixteenth
century version, according to the matha, was ‘revealed’ to Sri
Yogindra since an earlier version of the Purana had been lost.*
Granoff refers to an edition that was published with an anonymous
commentary in 1822 Sarvari from Kurundavada.* As far as I know,
the Mudgala is otherwise available only in manuscript form.

Various authorities date the Mudgala Purana before or
after the Ganesa Purana. Hazra situates this text somewhere between
AD 1100 and 1400 and considers that it is earlier than the Ganesa
Purana.” Farquhar, too, considers the Mudgala Purana to be earlier
than the Ganesa Purana.” Preston simply states that the date of
the Mudgala Purana is unknown.“ Kane considers that the dates
of these two Puranas are uncertain.“ Courtright places the Mudgala
Purana between the fourteenth and sixteenth century.*' Granoff
believes that, on the basis of internal evidence alone, it is difficult
to arrive at an absolute date for the text. According to her it is
possible to suggest a relative chronology of Ganeéa texts and she
places the Mudgala Purana as the last of the philosophical works
that treat of Ganapati.®? She bases her conclusion on the fact that
the Mudgala refers to the Ganesa Purana; that there is a degree of
convergence in their contents, particularly in their stories; and

--- Page 30 ---
INTRODUCTION 31
that the Mudgala repeatedly mentions the Sri Atharvasiras, a text
which is accepted as being a late composition.** Courtright suggests
the sixteenth and seventeenth century for the Sri Atharvsiras, which,
incidentally, has also been translated by him.”

It is true that there are portions of the Mudgala Purana
that are late. However, on the basis of these late portions alone
can one consider the entire text to be a late one? Does textual
comparison alone make it possible to come to a definite conclusion
as to the date of a particular work? Considering that some
Ganapatya sects had evolved by about the tenth century and that
Ganapati was already a pan-Indian deity it is probable that texts
relating to him existed by at least the eleventh/twelfth centuries.
The Mudgala Purana, like other Puranas, is a multi-layered work
and the kernel of the text must be old. It must have continued to
receive interpolations until the seventeenth/eighteenth centuries
as the worship of Ganapati became more important in certain
regions. Important additions pertaining to the philosophical aspect
of the Ganapatyas must have been made when, under the Peshwas,
Ganapati became a family deity of a royal house and the practice
of making pilgrimage to the astavindyaka shrines was popularised
because of royal patronage. Probably the tone of the Purana also
underwent some change during that period because of the
audience for which it was being compiled. The portions dealing
with the myths, for instance, are certainly older and appear to be
directed at a more popular audience. Many of these myths are
nothing but a modified version of older Puranic myths, with
Ganapati in the place of Siva, Visnu or Durga. Some of these
myths must have been well known and making Ganapati the chief
protagonist in the place of some other deity must have thrilled
devotees in villages and at the same time created a more fervent
clientele for a particular category of temple priests.

The edition of the Mudgala Purana that I have consultea
makes reference to the Ganesa Purana.” Likewise, the latter also
refers to Mudgala’s Purana.*® Hence both these recensions are
based on two older versions of these texts. There are other reasons
for supposing that some parts of these two texts belong to the
twelfth century or so. Jhanesvar praises Ganapati as the Supreme
God, synonymous with Brahman in the thirteenth century. During
this period there is evidence of Ganapati having temples devoted
to him and whole portions describing his ritual and worship in

--- Page 31 ---
32, UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
some of the sacred texts such as the Agamas. The deity was evidently
popular with certain categories of society. He is invoked
systematically before other deities in the inscriptions of some ruling
houses such as the Silaharas or the Kalachuris. The Mudgala Purana
talks of an ardhanarisvara (half-man half-woman) form of Ganapati.
There is inscriptional evidence of such a form in the eleventh
century. A verse in the Halayudhastotra inscribed in aD 1063 on the
Amresvara temple at Mandhata in the East Nimar District, Madhya
Pradesh, refers to this form of Ganapati as well.5”? The Sammoha
Tantra (c. fourteenth century) also makes reference to the literature
of the Ganapatyas and specifically mentions two Puranas as being
part of it. Probably there were versions of these two texts, which
were lost or remained an oral tradition and were set in writing
around the sixteenth century at one of the sacred sites of Ganapati
in Maharashtra. The deity is constantly referred to with Siddhi
and Buddhi. These goddesses are mentioned alongwith Ganapati
in inscriptions from the twelfth century. Like the Mudgala Purana,
there is another text, the Devi Rahasya, which I discuss further on.
It contains references which definitely date to the eighteenth
century or so and yet, the entire text cannot be said to be of such
late origin.

The Ganesa Purana has been published three times (Poona
1876, Bombay 1876, and Bombay 1892) before the edition of the
Sri Yogindra matha. I have not been able to compare the text I
have used, with these older publications. However, R.C. Hazra in
his article on the Ganesa Purana™ states that he has based his
analysis on the edition published by Gopal Narayana and Co.,
Bombay, 1892. His various descriptions, quotations and references
are found easily in the version that I have consulted and it is
possible, therefore, that they are based on a common source.

Lawrence W. Preston, who has made a study of the sub-
regional religious centres associated with Ganapati in Maharashtra,
considers that the period ap 1100-1400 would appear to be the
most reasonable date for the Ganesa Purana since this period agrees
with the apparent age of the sacred sites mentioned by it. Hazra
places the Ganesa Purana between ap 1000-1400 and Farquhar
between Ab 900-1350.°' It appears likely that the core of the text
came into existence around the twelfth/thirteenth centuries for
the same reasons that I have mentioned in the case of the Mudgala
Purana. This text, too, has been subject to interpolations during

--- Page 32 ---
INTRODUCTION 33
the succeeding ages. The Ganesa Purana was translated into Tamil
in the eighteenth century® and the Tamil version is referred to as
the Vinayaka Purana.™

The Saiva Agamas and Upagamas constitute another
important part of the literary sources. The Agamas are a set of
sacred texts believed to have been dictated by Siva himself. The
term Agama literally means ‘tradition’. Of the texts that I have
consulted, the Mrgendragama, Rauravottaragama and Ajitagama have
been critically edited and published by the FIP. The sections on
Vinayaka that I consulted from the Svayambhuvagama and the
Diptagama are in transcript form. The latter has since been
published. In addition, there are some texts, such as the
Vindyakavratakalpadi which are collections of material on Ganapati
drawn from a series of Agamas, essentially the Karana, Kamika and
the Svayambhuva. This, again, is in the form of a transcript.”

According to Gopinatha Rao, the majority of the Saiva
Agamas have to be looked upon as being later than the ninth
century. They are mainly situated between the ninth and twelfth
centuries ap.© But the descriptions of the images as contained in
them may, nevertheless, be based on an older tradition. He gives
the example of Varahamihira (sixth century AD) whose descripuon
of certain images is not in any way different from those found in
later Agamas.®’ Gonda considers the oldest Agamas to have been
composed in the period between ap 400 and 800. According to
him, Saiva Agamic literature had been widely recognized before
the tenth century aD. The earliest manuscript of an Agama—the
Kirana—is dated ap 924. However, it is difficult to ascertain the
dates of individual Agamas.®

The Agamas, unlike the Puranas, contain little or no
mythology of Ganapati. They provide details of the rituals and
festivals associated with the deity and of the numerous possibilities
for his iconogrphy. They are, therefore, later than the early
Puranas, and contemporary to some of the later ones. It is certain
that the sections on Vinayaka in the Agamas that I have consulted
are, by and large, post tenth century. They often describe sixteen
or more forms of Ganapati and discuss the very elaborate rituals
and festivals in his honour. In contrast, the Mayamata, a text of
Tamil sculpture and architecture, which is accepted as being older
than the Agamas—the Kamikagama reproduces entire passages of
it—only describes one form of the deity. The Mayamata also

--- Page 33 ---
34 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

provides instructions for making the image of the Buddha and
the Jina.” It is, therefore, probably a text of the seventh or eighth
century when Buddhism and Jainism were still in a flourishing
condition even though Sivaism was becoming increasingly popular.
It is in the Agamas that Ganapati acquires a variety of forms but
these are limited to south India. Most of these forms are never
mentioned in the Puranas.

I have consulted certain ritual manuals such as the
Somasambhupaddhati and the Isanasivagurudevapaddhati. They draw
much of their material from the Agamas.”! The former appears to
have been written in aD 1073 or 1096. It draws mainly on the
(Uttara) Kamikagama.” The Isdnasivagurudevapaddhati has been
edited by T. Ganapati Sastri. Scholars are unanimous in accepting
its date to be sometime in the twelfth century ap.” In the ‘Preface’
to the second volume, Ganapati Sastri quotes Haraprasad Sastri’s
views on the date and identity of Isanagiva. He considers Isanasgiva
to have belonged to Mithila or somewhere in the north and that
even though manuscripts of the work were obtained from Kerala,
the work itself is not a contribution of Kerala.“! Other scholars,
however, hold that there is enough evidence in the text itself to
show that Iganasiva must have been from Kerala.”

Ganapati Sastri states that Isanansiva's book embodies the
teachings of a long line of Saiva Yogis who were verv influential all
over India between the ninth and eleventh centuries. The Ajita,
Kirana and Svayambhuva Agamas are quoted by name.” It also
states that one of the Ganapati mantras, that of Prapancaganapat,
is told and explained in Lalttagama, Makutagama and Vatulagama.
The Makutagama and Lalitagama have not been published. As for
the Vatulagama which is the twenth-eighth Agama, only its sub-
Agamas exist of which only one has been published.” The
Kanasivagurudevapaddhati is, therefore, a useful text since it throws
light on some texts that one is not able to consult.

Among the Tantras consulted, the Prapancasara Tantra
has an important section on Ganapati. It is evidently older than
Isanagiva's work since the latter quotes from it. The authorship of
this text is atuributed to Sankaracarya,” although it is certain that
some writings which pass under the name of Sankara are not
really his. This has been the case in some of the hymns edited and
published by Avalon, which have been credited to Sankara and
then have been found in another manuscript ascribed to other

--- Page 34 ---
INTRODUCTION 35
works and authors.” It is difficult to reconcile Sankara’s teaching
with the rituals of Tantric puja as described in this text. They
present a contrast to his strict monistic teachings. The tone is also
quite different to Sankara’s works like the Vivekachudamani or the
Bhaja Govindam.

The Devi Rahasya is traditionally supposed to form part of
a bigger compilation called the Rudrayamala Tantra. The text is
evidently composed by a writer from Kashmir because it refers to
the goddesses Jvalamukhi, Sarika Maharajni, Sarada, Bhida and
Bala all of whom are popular and have shrines in the Kashmir
Valley.*” The reprint that I have consulted is based on an edition
prepared by Pandit Ramachandra Kak and Hara Bhatta Shastri
and published by the Government of Kashmir in 1941. However,
the text in its present form, or at least parts of it, appear to be a
late composition because of the appearance of the words safak
and phirangaha which the editor feels refer to the the Moham-
medans and Europeans.®! Nonetheless, much of the section on
Ganapati appears similar to that of other Tantric texts associated
with the period between the tenth and fourteenth centuries.

Anandagiri's Sankaravijaya is another work which has been
accorded varying dates. Farquhar situates it betweeen the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries.®? Courtright considers it to belong to
about the tenth century or so.** Lorenzen states that most modern
authorities agree that the author of the text was not Sankara’s
disciple Anandagiri but an obscure author of about the fifteenth
century.” The text refers to six sects of Ganapati—those of Maha-
ganapat,, Heramba Ganapati, Ucchista Ganapau, Handra, Navanita,
Svarna and Samtana Ganapati who are condemned by the Saiva
philosopher, Sankaracarya, because they do not accept his
philosophy of Advaita Vedanta. Some of these forms are mentioned
in the Isanasivagurudevapaddhati, or in some of the Agamas. If this
text does belong to the fifteenth century, it is surprising that it
makes no reference to the Smarta Ganapatyas. The core texts of
the Smarta Ganapatyas are the Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas and
the influence of this sect appears to have been far more widespread
than those of the sects mentioned in the Sankaravijaya. The Smarta
Ganapatyas are, evidently, associated with the period subsequent
to the Sankaravijaya. The teachings of the Agamas, the Yamalas
and the Tantras, in which the forms of Ganapati described in the
Sankaravijaya appear since long before the twelfth century, are in

--- Page 35 ---
36 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

many ways contrary to Sankara’s views and teachings.® The
Ganapatya sects described in the Sankaravijaya must have come
into existence by the tenth century. There are inscriptions and
literary references to Ganapati temples in the period prior to the
twelfth century. Therefore, the Sankaravijaya, or at least the portion
relating to the Ganapatyas, appears to belong to the period between
the tenth and the eleventh century. During this period, various
forms of Ganapati were known and these must have been the
focus of worship of a number of people.

Some of the texts I have consulted are more recent. They
often quote from older sources which are not available and so the
information they provide is very useful. The Tantrasara compiled
by Krsnananda Agamavagisa with his own commentary is one such
text. Pratapaditya Pal considers that the Tantrasara was compiled
around ap 1590, although some scholars situate the author some
decades earlier and make him a contemporary of Caitanya.*° The
author cites from the Séradatilaka Tantra, some Yamalas and some
Puranas. Among the more obscure texts cited by him is the
Ganesavimarsini.

The Sri Ucchista Ganapati Stottra Satanamavah is a collection
of prayers, rituals, myths and other details pertaining to the worship
of Ganapati drawn from all available sources. It has been compiled
and published by Sri Sundaresa Sarma in Tanjore in 1959. What
makes it relevant is the fact that a list of the traditional literature
on which this work is based is stated in the beginning of the work
itself and the text is used for the contemporary worship of Ganapati.
The Pranatosini is also a relatively recent work. It was compiled by
Ramatosana Vidyalankara in 1743 SE (ap 1821) at the instance of
Prankrsna Biswas, a landlord of Khardaha near Calcutta.®’ It has
some sections which are faithful copies of earlier texts such as the
rite of Gajasampadana. It is exactly like the one described in the
Prapancasara Tantra which is a good thousand years older, if not
more.

Data on the current worship of Ganapati is based on what
I observed in about forty Ganapati temples in: Maharashtra
(Bombay, Pen, Pune, Cincvad, Titwala and the astavindyaka (eight
Vinayakas) temples at Moregaon, Ranjangaon, Theur, Sidhtek,
Mahad, Pali, Ojhar and Lenyadri); Karnataka (Bangalore,
Kurudumale in Kolar District, Gokarna, Amdalli and Idagunji in
the Uttara Kannada District, Kumbhasi in the Dakshin Kannada

--- Page 36 ---
INTRODUCTION 37
District; Tamil Nadu (Madras and the surrounding region); Kerala
(Cochin, Ernakulam, Trichur and Guruvayoor); and Varanasi. I
visited temples in small villages, in towns and in cities. Some of
these are old firthas whereas others are recently built. Some are
modest shrines in the city frequented only by members of a locality.
Others are large well-known temples receiving important
patronage. In each temple I had discussions with the pujan(s) and,
where the temple was served by several priests, I found it worthwhile
talking, in addition, to the younger generation of the priesthood.
There were always members of the laity from a cross section of
society present to offer their points of view. In many places I met
members of the Trust as well. In addition, I was fortunate to be
able to meet several erudite persons in these various regions who
shared my interest in Ganapati and who helped deepen my
understanding of some of the current regional perceptions of the
deity. Their knowledge of sacred texts was far greater than that of
most temple priests. I talked at length to numerous friends,
acquaintances and people from different walks of life in these
regions to understand how they perceived Ganapati. In additon, I
visited several manufacturers of Ganapati statues to see things
from the artisans’ point of view and how they catered to their
varied clientele.
There are numerous Ganapati temples in the regions that
I covered and it is not possible to visit them all. Although in
Kerala there has been no evidence of Ganapatyas, I considered it
worthwhile to include it in my intinerary in order to be able to
contrast it with the other three regions because of its proximity to
them and because in recent times, this is the only region, besides
Maharashtra, where one of the royal families, that of the Rajas of
Edapilli, worshipped Ganapati as their family deity. I based my
selection of temples on the following considerauons: those temples
that are central to the Ganapatya tradition such as the astavinayaka
shrines and some temples associated with the Peshwas who
patronized this deity; some old tirthas which are well known such
as Idagunji and Gokarna but which have not been mentioned by
scholars working on Ganapati; several small temples in cities
because they cater to a large cross-section of society; temples within
the same region such as Kumbhasi and Kurudumale in Karnataka,
for example, where the officiants belong to different religious
sects; finally, some virtually unknown and rarely frequented temples

--- Page 37 ---
38 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
like the one in Panangad, Kerala, where Ganapati is the principal
deity and where efforts are underway by some members of the
local population to maintain a temple and prevent a tradition
from disappearing because of paucity of funds.

NOTES

1. A.L. Basham, The Wonder That Was India, p. 321.

2. Ibid.

3. Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya, Lokdyata, p.248. Chapter Three of
this book is devoted to a discussion on Ganapati ; M.C.P. Srivastava,
‘Ganesa and Jyestha: A Comparative Study’, /BRS, Vol. 58 (1-4),
1972, pp. 165-70.

4. Alice Getty, Ganesa. See ‘Introduction’ by Foucher; J.R. Riviere,
‘Problem of Ganapati in the Puranas’, Purana IV, 1962, pp. 96
102.

5. H. Mitra, Ganapati, p. 19.

6. T.G. Aravamuthan, ‘Ganesa: Clue to a Cult and a Culture’, in
Journal of Oriental Research, Madras, 1949, Vol. 18, pp. 224-43.

7. A, Coomaraswamy, ‘Ganesa’ in BMFA (Boston), 1928, pp. 30-1.

8. Alice Getty, op. cit., p. 2.

9. H. Heras, The Problem of Ganapati, p. 54.

10. Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Astan God.

1]. A.K. Narain, ‘Ganesa: A Protohistory of the Idea and the Icon’, in
Robert L. Brown, ed., op. cit., pp. 19-48.

12. Paul B. Courtright, Ganesa : Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings.

13. Laurence W. Preston, ‘Subregional Religious Centres in the History
of Maharashtra: The Sites Sacred to Ganesa’, in N.K. Wagle, ed.,
Images of Maharashtra. A Regional Profile of India, pp. 102-28.

14. M. Winternitz, History of Indian Literature, Vol. U, p. 93.

15. K.R. Norman, Pali Literature, pp. 84-5. (Vol. VII, of J. Gonda, ed.,
A History of Indian Literature).

16. Ibid.

17. B.C. Law, A History of Palt Literature, Vol. 1, p. 275.

18. Uma Chakravart, ‘Women, men and beasts: The Jataka as popular
tradition’, Studies in History, Vol. 9, No. 1, NS, Jan.Jun. 1993,
pp. 43-70.

19. Ibid., pp. 79-80.

20. E.B. Cowell, The Jataka, Bk. I], No. 156, pp. 13-17.

21. Ibid., No. 163, pp. 31-4.

22. Ibid., Book III, No. 276, pp. 251-60.

23. Ihave quoted relevant passages of this text from Heinrich Zimmer's
Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilisation.

--- Page 38 ---
INTRODUCTION 39

24. See Franklin Edgerton, The Elephant Lore of the Hindus: The Elephant
Sport (Matangalila) of Nilakantha. This is the English translation of
the only Sanskrit text available, edited by Ganapati Sastri.

25. Ibid., see p. 1 of ‘Introduction’, fn. 1. Edgerton does not accept
Keith’s view of the Mdtangafila being more modern than the
Hastyayurveda since there is no evidence on the matter.

26. Ibid., p. vii of the ‘Preface’.

27. Christopher Wilkinson, ‘The Tantric GaneSga: Texts Preserved in
the Tibetan Canon’, in Robert L. Brown, ed., op. cit., pp. 235-75.

28. Since elephants are not native to Tibet, this ritual is centered
around the image of an elephant made from sacred substances.
But the purpose of the ritual remains the same.

24. A.K. Warder, Indian Buddhism, p. 489. See also Christopher
Wilkinson, op. cit., pp. 238-41.

30. Franklin Edgerton, op. cit., p. viii of ‘Preface’. The Matangahila
also describes the mythology of the elephant.

31. R.P. Kangle, The Kautilya Arthasastra, Part II, chaps. 31-2. The
Arthasastra is a treatise on statecraft believed to be the work of
Kautilya, the famous minister of Chandragupta Maurya (fourth
century BC). However, the work as we know it is generally accepted
as being a later text of the first or second century AD.

32. Prapancasara Tantra, XVII. 32-42.

33. Pranatosini, p. 604.

34. P.V. Kane, History of Dharmasastra, Vol. 1, Pt. 1, pp. 1415.

35. Arthur A. Macdonell, A History of Sansknit Literature, p. 208.

36. J. Gonda, The Ritual Sutras, p. 582.

37. Maurice Winternitz, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 238.

38. Ibid., p. 245; A.B. Keith, A History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 492.

39. P.V. Kane, op. cit., Vol. I, Pt. I, p.443.

40. Arthur A. Macdonell, op. cit., p. 365.

41. M. Winternitz, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 598.

42. J.N. Farquhar, Outline of the Religious Literature of India, p. 188.

43. Suvira Jaiswal, The Ongin and Development of Vaisnavism , pp. 178
and 220.

44. The Mudgala Purana was published in October 1976. The Ganesa
Purana, Upasana Khanda, was published in 1979, and the Krida
Khanda in 1985.

45. Mudgala Purana, see ‘Introduction’.

46. Phyllis Granoff, “Ganesa as Metaphor: The Mudgala Purana’, in
Robert L. Brown, ed., op. cit., pp. 85-99.

47. R.C. Hazra, ‘The Ganega Purana’, /G/hRI, Vol. 9, 1951, pp. 79-99.

48. Ibid., p. 96. See also J.N. Farquhar, op. cit., p. 270.

49. Lawrence W. Preston, op. cit., p. 104.

--- Page 39 ---
40 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

50. P.V. Kane, op. cit., Vol. II, Pt. II, p. 725.

51. Paul B Courtright, op. cit., p. 214. ;

52. There are three Upanisads devoted to Ganapati. Of these the Sr
Ganapati Atharvasirsa is well known. It was probably composed
during the sixteenth or seventeenth century. The other two are
the Heramba Upanisad (See Unpublished Upanisads, eds., Pandits of
Adyar Library, pp. 390-1) and the Ganapati Upanisad (See G.
Srinivasa Murti, ed., Saiva Upanisads, pp. 76-85). Although the
date of these two texts are not known, they are certainly later
than the fourteenth century and were probably the product of
the Smarta Ganapatyas.

53. Phyllis Granoff, op. cit.

54. Paul B.Courtright, op. cit., pp. 2524.

55. Mudgala Purana, 11.34.20, 11.34.38.

56. Ganesa Purana, 11.51.35 and 11.50.1.

57. Samaresh Bandyopadhyay, ‘A Note on Ganapau’, in JOJB, Vol. 21,
1971-2, pp. 328-30.

58. R.C. Hazra, ‘The Ganesa Purana’, op. cit., see fn. 1 on p. 79.

59. Lawrence W. Preston, op. cit., p. 103.

60. R.C. Hazra, ‘The Ganesa-Purana’, op. cit., p. 97.

61. J.N. Farquhar, An Outline of the Religious Literature of India, pp. 226
and 270.

62. Lawrence W. Preston, op. cit., see note no. 14 on p. 123.

63. T.S. Sundaresa Sharma, Sri Ucchista Ganapati Stottra Satandmavak ,
p. 63.

64. Because of many Agamas being in the Grantha script, or in private
possession, or in a poor state of preservation, one of the tasks of
the Sanskrit Department of the FIP, is to transcribe the texts into
Devanagiri. This faithful copy of the text is catalogued as a
transcript. Eventually, it is hoped, that these several transcripts
will be critically edited and published. Chap. 58 of the
Svayambhuvagama that I have referred to is from Transcript no. 39
of the FIP. It is based on a manuscript belonging to Kilvelur,
Tamil Nadu, which is in private possession. The Diptégama |
consulted was in transcript form (Nos. 15 and 16). It was copied
from manuscripts in private possession at Kilvelur and Madurai. It
has been critically edited by Dr. S.N. Bhatt and published by the
FIP.

65. Transcript No. 1001 copied from Manuscript No. 43428 of the
FIP.

66. T.A. Gopinatha Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, Vol. I, Pt. I,
p. 56.

67. Ibid., p. 58.

68. J. Gonda, Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit, pp. 164-5.

--- Page 40 ---
INTRODUCTION 41

69. Bruno Dagens, ed. and trans., Mayamata (Traité Sanskrit
d’Architecture), Vol. II, p. 410.

70. Ibid., Vol. II, pp. 410 and 466.

71. J. Gonda, op. cit, p. 213.

72. J. Gonda, op. cit., p. 214.

73. N.N. Bhattacharya, History of the Tantric Religion, p. 51. See also
introductory remarks by T. Ganapati Sastri, ed., Isanasiva-
gurudevapaddhati,

74. T. Ganapati Sastri, ed., Isénasivagurudevapaddhati, see p. 11 of
‘Introduction’.

75. Ibid., p. 12.

76. Ibid., p. 15.

77. Ibid., Vol. I, p. 13, v. 236.

78. Arthur Avalon, ed., Prapancasara Tantra, see ‘Introduction’, p. 1.

79. Ibid., ‘Introduction’, p. 2.

80. Pandit Ramachandra Kak and Hara Bhatta Shastri, eds., Devi
Rahasya urth Pansistas, Introduction, p. 3.

81. See pp. 307 and 317 of text as also p. 3 of ‘Introduction’.

82. J.N. Farquhar, op. cit., p. 270.

83. Paul B. Courtright, op. cit., p. 218.

84. David N. Lorenzen, The Kapalikas and Kalamukhas, p. 31.

85. J. Gonda, Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit, p. 4.

86. Ibid., p. 3.

87. N.N. Bhattacharya, op. cit., p. 71.

--- Page 41 ---
CHAPTER 2

The Elephant
The most striking feature of Ganapati is his elephant head. The
Brahmanical deities Siva, Parvati or Visnu could resurrect the dead,
provide heads for the headless and perform numerous other
miracles. Yet none could give Ganapati a human head. Clearly,
the reason why he had to have an elephant head was because
without it he would have lost his identity and, thereby, his raison
d‘étre. The elephant head links him to some ancient cult or concept
of a sacred elephant. This concept must have existed prior to the
Brahmanical texts in which Ganapati makes his debut, for, the
references in these texts throw little light on his past. Even his
images appear suddenly in the early centuries of the Christian
era. The motif of the elephant, however, appears from as early as
the Harappan period. Enquiries into the significance of the
elephant must, therefore, begin at this stage.

THE ELEPHANT IN HARAPPAN CULTURE
There are many common symbols and moufs in the civilizations
of the ancient world, all with more or less the same connotations.
Some of these such as the bull, the snake, the tree of life, mountain
and water formulae and the wheel representing the sun are
common in the Sumerian, Hittite, Assyrian, Mycenean, Cretan,
Trojan, Lydian, Phoenician, Achaemenid, Scythian and Indian
cultures.' The motif of the elephant, however, is restricted to the
Indian context. It first appears in the Harappan civilization
although it is not present in the earliest stages of this culture.

The Early Indus Period (late fourth and early third
millennia BC) is associated with the hill valleys of Baluchistan, the
Gomal Valley and the plain of Bannu in the north-west, the Potwar
plateau, the Indus Valley and the Saraswati system to the east.?
The most common painted designs from numerous sites of this

--- Page 42 ---
THE ELEPHANT 43
period such as Kot Diji, Burzahom, Gumla, Rahman Dheri, Sarai
Khola and Lewan are those representing heads wearing the horns
of a buffalo,’ female figurines of the ‘Mother Goddess’ type‘ and
the motifs of birds, the humped bull, snake, eagle, goat, pig and
ram. Fish and aquatic plants are also quite common. Some of the
horned heads, like the one from Sarai Khola, have a plant growing
between the horns.* The elephant did exist in this region because
the faunal remains of a single specimen of the animal have been
found at one of the pre-Harappan sites, namely, Mehrgarh in
Kachi District, Baluchistan [c. 6300-5300 (calibrated) Bc]®. However,
the animal does not seem to be represented in any art form during
this period.

The elephant motif appears during the Mature Indus
period (2550-2050 sc)’ when it is rendered in terracotta art and
represented on seals and amulets at sites such as Harappa,
Mohenjo-daro and Chanhu-daro. A single seal with the elephant
mouf has also been found at Allahdino.® Elephant bones have
been found at Harappa, Mohenjo-daro, Lothal, Kalibangan, Rupar
and Bara." The area associated with this period is much larger. It
includes parts of modern Rajasthan, Gujarat, Kutch, Punjab,
Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh. During this period the motifs
of the unicorn, the tiger and rhinoceros also make an appearance. '
The introduction of these motifs appears to coincide with a series
of developments in this period, notably the expansion of existing
settlements and the founding of new ones; growth of cities such as
Mohenjo-daro; the first development of a full system of writing;
manufacture of inscribed seals; an ‘unprecedented extension of
internal trade in all manner of raw materials and commodities
and a distribution of the specialist craft and products of the cities’. !!
This is also the period when, for the first time, class stratification
appears in society with evidence of a ruling elite and the ruled.

On the basis of the evidence available, the elephant motif
on seals appears to be restricted to Sind and to one site in the
Punjab. Elephant terracotta figurines are rare though a few have
been reported from Chanhu-daro and Harappa.'!? The motif of
the unicorn is by far the most widespread and the most frequently
represented. It appears at nine sites both on seals and in the form
of terracotta figurines.'* The rhinoceros is represented at six sites
including the four associated with the elephant. At Chanhu-daro,
however, it does not figure on seals but in the form of a few

--- Page 43 ---
44 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

terracotta figurines." It is also found at Banawali (Haryana) in the
form of terracotta figurines and at Shortughai (Afghanistan) where
it is depicted on the only seal available from the Mature Harappan
level. The tiger appears at a total of five sites of which three
(Harappa, Mohenjo-daro and Chanhu-daro) are associated with
the elephant motif. The other places where it was found are
Kalibangan (Rajasthan) and Banawali. The motif of the bull is
another popular motif but is not found at sites in Gujarat and
Rajasthan. This shows that none of these animal symbols were
ubiquitous and the only sites at. which they all appear to have
been represented were Mohenjo-daro and Harappa. At these two
sites the unicorn is the most frequently represented animal followed
by the short-horned bull and the elephant. The uger, rhinoceros
and gharial (crocodile) also appear to be among the more popular
symbols.

These animals are sometimes represented by themselves,
while at other times they appear as syncretic creatures. One copper
tablet contains the image of a composite animal which is partly
bull, partly elephant.’® This signifies the combination of old and
new symbols since the bull motif exists at the early Indus sites
whereas the elephant makes an appearance only during the Mature
Indus period. Another seal depicts an animal which is a composite
of the bull, elephant and tiger.’® A third seal depicts a creature
with a man’s face, the trunk or tusk of an elephant, horns of a
bull, forepart of a ram and the hindquarters of a tiger.’’ Here,
again, the ram is an old symbol which is combined with newer
ones. This suggests the development of a richer and more complex
set of beliefs and symbols which appear to be associated with the
supernatural or with divinity. Many of these seals must have had a
secular function. Others, however, are perforated and must have
had a string passed through them to be worn as amulets. It is
generally accepted that the motifs depicted on them were derived
from religion and mythology. The division between the secular
and the religious was not distinct in the ancient world. Sacred
symbols represented, and possibly ensured, auspiciousness even in
secular functions.

The appearance of these particular animal motifs coincides
with the geographical spread of Harappan culture which implies
the inclusion of new people. The development of new cities implies
a new polity and a new elite. Ratnagar suggests that the seal symbols

--- Page 44 ---
THE ELEPHANT 45
were the emblems of Harappan descent groups and were, quite
possibly, old totemic symbols which distinguished various kin
groups from the rest of the population.'® In that case their
appearance at this juncture would suggest the ascendance of new
and powerful families or different segments of a kin group. The
animal motifs on the Harappan seals can be compared to those of
the early punch-marked coins of the second half of the first
millennium sc. In Koala, for example, when the Matanga
(elephant) dynasty comes to power, the motif of the elephant, so
far absent on KoSalan coinage, makes an appearance.'* Similarly,
the symbol of the peacock on arches on one Magadhan coin
originates from the totem of the peacock associated with the
Mauryas (morya meaning ‘of the peacock’).” Even when totemism
ceases to exist the old totemic symbols can continue with a renewed
significance. An example of the process of modification of ancient
totems is that of the gotras of the brahmanas. Many of these gotras
which exist even in present times are, by and large, the names of
animals, fish or birds which must have been the totems of the
early Indo-Aryan clans or tribes. Examples include the Kasyapa
(tortoise) gotra, the Vatsa (calf), Sunaka (dog), Rksa (bear),
Mudgala (a species of fish), Bharadvaja (a species of birds), Gotama
(cow) and the Manduka (frog).?! There even is a gotra called Ane
(elephant) among the Shivalli brahmanas of Karnataka.

It is hard to imagine that an animal as powerful and
majestic as the elephant would not play a significant role in the
psyche of people who had adopted it as a symbol. Since the
elephant was indigenous to the Indian subcontinent, its symbol in
the ancient world is restricted to the Indian context. For that
reason, there is no possibility of making any cross-cultural
comparisons with other ancient civilizations as far as this symbol is
concerned. Yet in Africa where the elephant is indigenous and
where the social structure is in many cases a tribal one, myths
associated with the animal do exist. In the myths of some
contemporary African tribes, the elephant is closely associated
with the origin of the tribe. The Nandi and the Maasai believe
that three things existed on earth prior to all other creation—
thunder, a mythical ancestor and the elephant. Another tribe, the
Yao, believes that the first human being emerged from the primeval
wilderness bearing an elephant on his shoulders. This first human
being was, of course, a hunter and it is the elephant that taught

--- Page 45 ---
46 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

him to hunt and survive. This first man also found his wife in the
land of elephants.”” This myth implies that the tribe is descended
from both elephant and man, or that the elephant and man were
originally one and the same. In southern Africa, it is widely believed
that elephants can transform themselves into human beings and
vice versa.”* These myths portray the psyche of a hunting people.
Because of its might and size, the elephant inspires awe, fear and
reverence. The wild elephant is potentially the most destructive
animal and the African tribesmen identified themselves with it
and made it their equal, their companion and ancestor, thereby
legitimizing within themselves the very same characteristics so
essential for survival among the jungles of Africa. There are,
besides, other similarities between the elephant and man such as
similar life-expectancy and social habits.

In the Indian context, too, similar myths associated with
the elephant exist and at least one such myth dates to the second
half of the first millenium sc. King Prasenajit of Kosala, a
contemporary of the Buddha, is described in Buddhist literature
as matanga cyuti upapannam (born of elephant semen).** He
belonged to the Matanga dynasty and in this case descent is claimed
from a male elephant. This myth evidently harks back to a period
of totemism. According to the Matangalila, the founding of
scientific elephantology is attributed to a mythical sage, Palakapya
(keeper of elephants) who was born to an elephant cow after she
had drunk the seed of a man called Samagayana.” Here, as in the
case of one of the African myths, descent is from a human male
and an elephant cow. I am not suggesting that these very myths
existed in the Harappan period. However, if the elephant did
represent a descent group then it is possible that it was associated
with some such origin myths and that these myths were gradually
adapted during the Mature Indus period to fit into the religious
system of an urban civilisation.

The possibility that some of the animals depicted on
Harappan seals did indeed represent certain groups is all the
more plausible since there is evidence in the early historical period
(post 600 Bc) of people and dynasties named after these very
animals. Those named after the elephant were associated with a
fairly widespread area in the carly historical period. The Vayu
Purana gives a detailed description of Ketumala which corresponds
to the region of old Bactria.”* It mentions the Gajabhtimika (land

--- Page 46 ---
THE ELEPHANT 47
of the elephant) among the many places and people associated
with the region.?? The Mahisa (buffalo) is also included as a
people* inhabiting the region. Further evidence of a people named
after the elephant comes from Gandhara with its two capitals of
Taxila and Puskalavati. Greek historians, while describing
Alexander's campaign from Kapisa to the Indus through Gandhara,
mention the Astakinoi” as one of three important warlike people.
Panini refers to them as the Hastinayana (descended from hastin
which signifies ‘elephant’) who had their capital at Puskalavati.*°
Much of the area in the north-west such as Kapiéa (modern Begram
which lies about 80 km. north of Kabul) and Gandhara, where
there is evidence of people named after the elephant, lies within
the zone of the Harappan civilization. The Late Harappan and
Post Harappan phases witnessed a push eastwards towards the
Ganga basin and southwards towards the Deccan. In the Ganga
Basin there is reference to the Matanga dynasty of Koéala during
the lifetime of the Buddha. The Khadgas (rhinoceroses) too,
appear as a dynasty of kings in east Bengal in the seventh century
A.D“! Tempting though these parallels are, I would be untrue to
historical processes if I were to suggest that they represent a
continuous tradition from Harappan times. What is more likely is
that during the course of the several centuries that separate the
Harappan culture from the early historical period, different groups
of people named themselves after these animals but the exact
nature of the symbolism of these animals varied according to the
material milieu in which the people lived.

One of the most quoted seals in the context of Harappan
religion is the one of the horned deity seated in what has commonly
been described as a ‘yogic pose’*’ and surrounded by four animals;
an elephant and tiger on its right, a rhinoceros and buffalo on its
left.* I am not aware of any similar pose in yoga although it has
variously been referred to as padmasana,™ kirmasana,*’ siddhasana
or baddhakonasana.* The central figure wears what some scholars
consider to be the mask of a wild water buffalo with a head-dress
of buffalo horns.*’ while others consider it to be the mask of a
horned tiger.* The figure is also described as being ithyphallic.
Marshall’s explanation of this image being the proto-type of Siva-
Pasupati has been contested by those who prefer to associate it
with a prototype of Mahisa, the buffalo-demon (who in Puranic
myths is slain by Durga in her form as Mahisasuramardini), the

--- Page 47 ---
48 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

later pan-Indian deity, Yama (God of Death whose vahana is the
buffalo), as also of certain regional figures such as the south Indian
Potu Raju (‘Buffalo King’) and the Maharashtrian Mhasoba/
Mhaskoba (Marathi for Mahisa).*? Some like Atre have considered
this figure to be the Great Goddess of animals and vegetation, *°
the animals around her being symbolic of her divine strength.
Volchok considers the surrounding animals to be representative
of the four cardinal points.’ This is the only seal of its kind.
Although the central figure is depicted on some other seals and
‘sealing amulets’ it is not depicted with the four animals. The seal,
may therefore, be commemorative of a particular event or a ritual
performed on rare occasions associated with what may have been
the principal kin groups that constituted the ruling elite of
Mohenjo-daro.

The central figure is seated in what looks like a dance
pose. It is significant that none of the Brahmanical, Buddhist or
Jaina deities in the later Indian pantheons are ever depicted in
this position. The head-dress of the central figure simulating the
tiger/buffalo head, the bangles on his arms, his pose and the
animals around him may well be suggestive of some shamanistic
ritual. Shamanism, to put it very simply, is ‘a technique of ecstasy’
or, as Nevill Drury defines it, ‘an ancient practice of utilising altered
states of consciousness to contact the gods and spirits of the natural
world’.*#? The shaman acts as an intermediary between the dead,
demons, gods and nature spirits and the more familiar realm of
everyday domestic affairs. He has the ability of entering a trance
state during which his soul is believed to leave his body and ascend
to the sky or descend to the underworld. By communicating with
the world beyond, he is able to find the cure for diseases, avert
evil influences and misfortune, and ensure the well being of his
community. Shamanism has existed in several primitive societies
and continues to be practised today in many parts of the world.
Indologists have not engaged with this concept in any major way.
However, the studies of ethnologists on existing shamanistic beliefs
and practices have created a greater awareness of the details of
this practice and it is possible to discern certain elements in the
Harappan motifs which are suggestive of shamanism.

In the seal referred to above, the elephant, the buffalo
and the rhinoceros appear in a static pose which is in contrast to
the tiger which has its front paws raised as though it is about to

--- Page 48 ---
THE ELEPHANT 49
spring on the seated figure. The seal thus appears to suggest the
presence of opposing forces—the one dynamic, the other static.
Further, if one compares the four animals, it is evident that the
elephant, the rhinoceros and the buffalo are similar in that they
all symbolise masculine strength and virility. They are also
herbivorous. The tiger, in contrast, is carnivorous. It is a natural
enemy of the other three animals. Several other seals depict the
tiger in what appears to be an aggressive posture. There are seals
which depict the so-called ‘contest’ motif where a man is seen
attacking a tiger, or those with the ‘Gilgamesh’ motif showing a
figure standing between two rampant tigers.** An elephant is
depicted in the lower register of one such seal.** It is as if the
elephant represents a counterbalance to the tiger(s). At other
times the tiger is depicted with a manger on both sides which
makes it appear to be more pacific. This would suggest that the
wild animal signifying dissent or discord could be conquered or
subdued (by the shaman?). It must be borne in mind that the
Indus populace most probably consisted of several ethnic groups.”
This presupposes the existence of tensions and rivalries. Probably
the four animals on the seal in question represent, at one level,
the benign and malignant spirits which constitute the world of the
supernatural and which have a parallel in the material world.
They also represent the ancestors or spirits of certain powerful
groups of people who could be communicated with through the
shaman. The disguise of the creature to be propitiated is a
prominent feature of shamanism in many cultures.” If the mask
of the ‘shaman’ on the seal in question is indeed a tiger mask,
probably the tiger represented the evil spirit that had to be
propitiated before the shaman could have access to the other
three animals. Here the tiger’s pose suggests that it needs to be
controlled. It possibly represents a dissenting group, evil forces
and obstacles. Only after propitiating it can the shaman gain access
to divine and ancestral wisdom so necessary for rulers, from the
animals representing their mythological ancestors.

In the contemporary context of Indian shamanism, the
benign spirits are those of pitrs or ancestors. The malignant ones
are those of beings who died an unnatural death or who were
mad, dissolute or violent-tempered and who are not allowed into
the world of ancestral spirits and, therefore, cause harm to the
living.*” If the elephant in the Harappan context was the symbol

--- Page 49 ---
50 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

of a kin group it is likely that it also represented the spirit of the
mythical ancestor of the group and was an object of veneration
for that particular group, a form of ancestor worship.

The elephant’s association with some other animals throws
further light on its possible symbolism in the Harappan context.
The bull is more or less unanimously accepted as being an object
of worship or a symbol of the sacred in Harappan culture, * largely
because of the fact that it is the most frequently represented animal
and because it was worshipped or considered sacred in several
other ancient civilizations. Since some Harappan seals depict a
composite creature which is a combination of the elephant and
the bull, we can assume that the elephant was also gradually given
a divine status or, at least, associated with the divine. There are
three seals and one pottery plaque depicting a representation
which combines two bulls, an elephant and a feline animal with a
central figure of a crocodile with open jaw.* Another seal depicts
an animal having the fore-quarters of a iger and the hind-quarters
of a bull or similar animal.* What is striking is that the composite
creatures are always made up of a few specific animals such as the
bull, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the uger, crocodile, antelope
or unicorn and appear to have some special significance. Animals
like the monkey, pig, dog or turde do not appear on seals and do
not constitute the composite creatures. Often the composite
creatures are half beast half human. Although there are human
forms with bovine horns, legs and tail,*! or with the hindquarters
and middle of a uger, no mouf depicting a creature that is half
human and half elephant has been found.

Of all these animals, the unicorn is the only one which is
a mythical creature. Are considers that the composition of the
unicorn is dominated by the symbolism of male virility because of
the emphasis on its male member and the single horn. She
associates the creauion of this animal by the Harappans with the
transitional phase towards agriculture.” If the unicorn represents
male virility, then it has a somewhat similar symbolism to that of
the bull. There is a seal from Chanhu-daro which shows a bull
bison with erect penis, standing over and fecundating a supine
human figure from whose head emerges a sprouting plant.** This
image is suggestive of ritual intercourse. It could very well be
symbolic of the Earth Goddess being fecundated by her consort in
his bull form. Related to the concept of the Earth Mother is that

--- Page 50 ---
THE ELEPHANT 51
of the male principle responsible for her fecundation. This role
would appear to have been played by the bull and possibly also by
the unicorn, elephant and rhinoceros. There is a seal from
Mohenjo-daro where the rhinoceros is depicted with the ‘sacred
brazier’ which is mainly associated with the unicorn. This ‘sacred
brazier’ is, in rare cases, also depicted with the short-horned bull,
the antelope” and in one case with the elephant (at Allahdino).°®
Perhaps this shows an attempt to give the elephant the status of
the unicorn, but it may have remained a restricted belief, at least
in the earlier stages.

The single horn of the unicorn has its parallel in the
single horn of the rhinoceros and the long trunk of the elephant.
The single horn of various animals has a special significance in
the later Indian religions and how and why this idea came about
is not clear. The Arhants, the Sravaks and other enlightened persons
within the framework of Buddhism are referred to as khadgavisana
(having the horn of a rhinoceros).°’ Ganapati has only a single
tusk and no Puranic myth adequately explains why that had to be
so. Nandi, Siva’s bull, is referred to as ‘the bull who has a single
iNuminated horn’. Sometimes Siva himself is invoked as ‘the
long-horned, single-horned, humped bull.’** The matsya incarna-
tion of Visnu is described as ‘a golden fish with one horn’.©
Similarly, the boar form of Visnu is described as having one tusk. ®
The bull, the boar and the elephant are all animals that naturally
have two horns or tusks. The fish has no horns. The single horn
evidently distinguished these particular animals from the ordinary
animal and symbolised divinity or superhuman strength and
qualities.

According to Eliade, the single horn has traditionally been
associated with the moon and fertility. The two horns of oxen,
which are used to characterize the great divinities of fecundity,
are an emblem of the divine Magna Mater. Wherever they are
found in Neolithic cultures, either in iconography or as part of
idols in the form of oxen, they denote the presence of the Great
Goddess of Fertility. The two horns are the symbol of two crescents,
the full moon, the womb, the whole. The single horn, in contrast,
is symbolic of the new moon. It is, likewise, also symbolic of the
plough, of the male organ, the fertiliser, the initiator. In Indian
mythology, the makara (crocodile) is also sometimes represented
with horns. It symbolizes not just the waters but the fertilizing

--- Page 51 ---
52 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

aspect of water, the principle of life. Matsya, the fish-incarnation
of Visnu, by saving the life of Manu and others was, in fact, the
giver of new life. The bull and boar, likewise, are also representative
of male fertility. The Varaha incarnation of Visnu is associated
with the myth of rescuing the Earth Goddess from the primal
waters. He is depicted iconographically as a boar or a boar-headed
human bearing the Goddess on his shoulder. In Greek mythology,
contact with the bull’s horn enabled the sacred king to fertilize
the land in the name of the Moon Goddess by making rain. The
Greek God Dionysus holds a cornucopia, torn from a bull, and
because of this is called Plutodotes or ‘wealth-giver’. Heracles offers
to Oeneus the horn snapped off from the bull-headed Achelous
as a bridal gift.“ The horn’s association with fertility is implicit in
this gesture. These comparisons with Greek mythology are not
out of place because in several ancient civilizations there are
common symbols. This does not necessarily imply borrowing or
influencing by one or the other but signifies the common ideas
and expressions of people in different regions. It is such com-
parisons which have led scholars to believe that the bull does, in
all probability, represent the sacred or that it may have been an
object of worship in the Harrapan context. In the same manner,
the horn is associated with the creation of life and with prosperity
in both the Greek and Brahmanical contexts. It is quite likely that
it represented something similar in the Harappan context.

It would appear that the elephant, like the unicorn, bull
and rhinoceros symbolised not just virility but, in a broader sense,
prosperity and well-being. The unicorn, by reason of its distinction
as a mythical creature and by its importance, was possibly some
sort of cultic figure. However, the other animals, if they were
originally totems which had become symbols of descent groups,
and if they were associated with origin myths of these groups,
probably came to be considered as the symbols of mythical
ancestors and were attributed with special powers. As animal spirits
they probably complimented what appear to be tree spirits
represented on seals by a human figure standing in a tree.© In the
context of the development of a more complex mythology and
ritual, these animal symbols were gradually associated with the
broad spectrum of fertility symbolism.

The seals depicting the so-called ‘yogic figure’ do not
appear at any site other than Mohenjo-daro where the greatest

--- Page 52 ---
THE ELEPHANT 53
variety of seal symbols have been found. Probably the shamanistic
rites suggested by one of these seals were restricted to this centre
and more specifically with its elite. There are various reasons why
I consider that the elephant was associated with the elite. The
numerous small terracotta masks which have been found do not
represent this animal. Of the numerous terracotta figurines that
have been found, those of the elephant are rare. Only few have
been found at Chanhu-daro and Harappa. Most of these figurines
are believed to have served as votive offerings rather than as cult
images. At Mohenjo-daro they have been found, smashed, in large
numbers mainly from the habitational areas of the settlement.
None were found in an area which could be considered as a
shrine or temple.© This would suggest that by and large the
elephant was not associated with the masses. The elephant motif
only emerges in the Mature Harappan period and it probably
represents one group of people who rose to a position of power
during that period.

The image of the elephant has also been found in sites
which are recognised as being Late Harappan or Post Harappan.
One such site, Daimabad in the Ahmednagar District of
Maharashtra, has yielded some copper images which include those
of a rhinoceros, a buffalo, an elephant and that of a chariot driven
by two bulls with a male figure at the rein.” According to Allchin,
these copper images date to between c. 1500 and 1050 sc.” Other
scholars date them to c. 1800-1600 sc.” Some, like Ratnagar, warn
that Daimabad has no stratigraphic context and, for that reason,
it is difficult to assess the date of these images. Dhavalikar has
suggested that these statues may have been imported into the
Deccan from Harappa.” The statues are fairly large. That of the
elephant stands 25 cm. high on a platform that is 27 centimetres
long. The images of the rhinoceros and the buffalo are on wheels.
The elephant statue is on a platform which has four brackets
beneath, pierced to take axles.”! This suggests that the images may
have been used for processions. They are too heavy to have been
toys. The elephant statue weighs over 60 kg. According to
Dhavalikar, copper was extremely scarce in the Deccan and these
bronzes may have been created on the order of the ‘ruling chief/
priest’ of Daimabad.” The images mounted on wheels, suggestive
of ritual processions, have a long history in the Harappan context.
The earliest evidence of bull figurines designed to be mounted on

--- Page 53 ---
54 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
wheels comes from Mehrgarh Period VII (first half of the third
millennium Bc) just before the Indus Civilization makes its
appearance.’> Ratnagar has discussed how processions constituted
an important public activity revealed by the architectural provisions
in the Harappan and Kalibangan Citadels.’* She suggests that the
hole or hollow on the back of some animal figurines from Mature
Harappan sites may indicate that animal emblems could have been
fixed to walls with the use of nails or else attached to the tops of
poles to be carried in processions. The elephant does not figure
as one of these emblems. Possibly the animals on wheels, such as
the elephant, were associated with fewer and the more important
occasions and, consequently, were made bigger and supplied with
wheels.

THE ELEPHANT FROM c. 600 Bc-ap 200
Between the Post Harappan period and about the sixth century
Bc, there is a blank in the availability of data relating to the
elephant. In the post 600 Bc period there is evidence of people
and places named after the animal. The motif appears on coins
and sculpture. It is striking that, once again, the appearance of
the elephant motif coincides with the rise of new urban centres
and the formation of States in and around the Gangetic plain.
The elephant symbol is adopted by certain kings and there is
reference in literature to rituals associated with the animal. It is
also associated with early Buddhist, Brahmanical and Jaina
mythology. All this is very valuable evidence. When carefully
collected and organized, it provides an interesting picture of the
regions where the elephant was associated with royalty and divinity,
of people who claimed descent from it and the nature of its
symbolism.

PEOPLE AND PLACES NAMED AFTER THE ELEPHANT
There are two broad zones associated with the elephant. One
includes areas that lie in modern India such as the Doab and part
of the Ganga basin, as also some areas in modern Orissa and
Gujarat. The second zone includes the north-west of the sub-
continent and covers areas which today form part of Afghanistan
and Pakistan.

--- Page 54 ---
THE ELEPHANT 55

Hastinapura (Aasti signifies elephant) is an example of a
place named after the elephant. It is situated on the river Ganga
in the present Meerut district of Uttar Pradesh. According to the
Mahabharata, the city was named after its founder, King Hastin of
the Paurava dynasty.” However, this same text refers to the town
more frequently as Gajapura,’” Gajasahvaya,” Gajahvaya™ and
Nagahvaya” than as Hastinapura.®° Even according to the
Mahamayiuri, the town was known as Hastinapura, Gajasahvaya,
Hastisahvaya and Nagasahvaya."' The words gaja, hasti and naga
are synonyms for ‘elephant’. These various names with the same
meaning suggest that the town was associated with the elephant
rather than with one king of the family of Kuru, long before the
compilation of the Mahabharata. Since places are often named
after their inhabitants, Hastinapura was probably associated at some
time with a people named after the elephant. King Hastin himself
was probably named after the elephant for what it symbolised at
that time. He may have been responsible only for having made
the city famous or for having enlarged it. Excavations at Hastinapur
have revealed a large number of elephant terracotta images and
the motif appears to have been the favourite animal theme in the
context of the Northern Black Polished Ware culture dated at this
site between the early part of the sixth and the end of the third
centuries Bc." This presents a contrast to the earlier and subsequent
periods when bulls were more popular.”

In Magadha, in the early medieval period, the names of
places such as Hastipada and Hastigrama occur several times in
the records of the period between ap 475-1030."' On the basis of
these records it is not possible to know when or why these places
acquired their names. It is quite likely that these places had been
associated with people who were named after the elephant or for
whom the elephant had a special significance. Magadha was
associated with the Matanga (elephant) dynasty of Kosala when
Bimbisara, king of Magadha, married a princess of that royal house.
The Buddhist text, Lalitavistara Sutra, describes a debate amongst
the gods when a family has to be chosen for the Buddha to take
birth in. The ruling family of Kosala is considered unsuitable since
it is descended from the Matangas and, therefore, neither the
father’s nor the mother’s line is considered pure. The text describes
the family as ‘ignoble’ and states that it patronized base people.”
Bimbisara married the sister of Prasenajit of Kosala, a contemporary

--- Page 55 ---
56 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
of the Buddha. His son, Ajatasatru, subsequently absorbed Kosala
in the Magadhan empire. Although there is no reference to the
Matangas worshipping the elephant, the fact that they are named
after it would show that they attached some significance to the
symbol.

The term Matanga is synonymous with Candala and Kirata.
The Candalas are a particularly despised caste in early Brahmanical
and Buddhist literature. They appear to have been a large and
widely dispersed caste. Jha considers them to be aboriginal tribes
who, as a caste, had probably evolved long before the close of the
Vedic period.” The Kiratas were a moutain tribe who lived by
hunting. Since Prasenajit of Kosala was a contemporary of the
Buddha, it is evident that the Matanga lineage was older than
Buddhism. It was looked down upon by the brahmanas and
Buddhists because the beliefs and practices of its members did
not conform to Vedic and Buddhist norms. Ultimately. however,
Buddhist and Brahmanical literature developed a new perspective
towards these people or, at least, a category of them. Prasenajit of
Kosala was converted to Buddhism and this probably led to a
gradual change in Buddhist attitude towards the Matangas. The
Matanga Jataka refers to a Candala by the name of Matanga, the
Elephant, who attained wisdom and became an enlightened soul.
This Candala was associated with Kasi, outside which he is said to
have been born. The Lalitavistara Sutra refers to a pratyekabuddha
named Matanga who lived on the mountain Gotangulaparivartana
in Rajagrha. A pratyekabuddha literally means ‘isolated buddha’
or ‘private buddha’ meaning one who has attained enlightenment
on his own in the forest, without being taught by a buddha, and
who also does not venture to teach anyone else after his
enlightenment.” This portion of the Lalitavistara Sutra is evidently
later than the portion which refers to the ruling family of Kosala
in a derogatory manner. Even the Brahmanical texts eventually
speak of a certain noble Matanga. The Mahabharata refers to him
as ‘the law-abiding royal seer Matanga, having become a hunter,
at a time of disaster’. Iam tempted to believe that this refers to a
conversion to the Buddhist and Brahmanical faiths by some
eminent members of the Matanga lineage along with their
followers. Since royal patronage was equally important to both the
Buddhists and the brahmanas, the new patrons were often given
fabricated gencologies and fitted within the framework of the

--- Page 56 ---
THE ELEPHANT 57
growing mythologies of the two religions. The reference in the
Mahabharata to Matanga having become a hunter at a time of
disaster appears to be an attempt to Justify and explain the existence
of such a past.

Asoka (third century sc) made use of various animal
symbols and it is pertinent to enquire why the elephant symbol
appears where it does. The figure of an elephant is drawn on the
north face of a rock bearing edicts at Kalsi (Uttar Pradesh). Below
the drawing is the Brahmi label gajatame, ‘the best of elephants’.
A pillar at Sankisa (Uttar Pradesh) is said to have originally had a
single elephant capital.” Although the capital is lost, it has been
described by Fa-Hien in the fourth century ap. Below the XIII
Girnar rock-edict (Kathiawar, Gujarat) is engraved, ‘the entirely
white elephant bringing indeed happiness to the whole world’.®!
This probably served as the label of the figure of an elephant that
Asoka caused to be carved and that has now disappeared. Finally,
the Dhauli rock edicts (Bhubaneshwar, Orissa) are surmounted
by the fore-part of an elephant, four feet high, hewn out of solid
rock. At the end of the sixth Dhauli rock-edict is engraved the
word seto, ‘the white one’, evidently referring to the figure of the
elephant.”

The reference to the elephant as ‘the white one’ has led
many scholars to believe that it represents the Buddha.*? According
to Buddhist mythology, Maya Devi, the Buddha’s mother, dreamed
of a white elephant entering inside her when the Buddha was
conceived. Yet, none of the places where the motif appears is
particularly sacred to the Buddhists. It is also uncertain whether
the elephant had been adopted as the symbol! of the Buddha’s
conception in Asoka’s lifetime.

In early Buddhist art (fourth-third centuries Bc), the
symbols representing the four principal episodes in the Buddha's
life were: the Bodhi tree, symbol of his enlightenment, the wheel
representing the Wheel of Law; the lotus, symbol of his divine
birth and the stupa representing his parinirvana.™ Other episodes
of the Buddha's life such as the departure from home is represented
by a riderless horse and his presence by that of an empty throne.
In the Jatakas, the white elephant sometimes represents the
Bodhisattva in a previous life and at other times it is distinct from
him. In all cases it is associated with auspiciousness and well-being.
Those stories where the white elephant is distinct to the Bodhisattva

--- Page 57 ---
58 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

probably belong to the earlier layer of the Jatakas. According to
them, the white elephant is sometimes a noble animal who bears
the precious relics of the Buddha to the stupa where they are
finally deposited;® or, as described in the Alinacitta Jataka, it is an
auspicious animal acquired by the king of Kasi, thanks to which
his posthumous son (the Bodhisattva) is able to ward off the attack
of the king of KoSala and live in prosperity.*° In the Dummedha,
Silavanaga and Chaddanta Jatakas the Bodhisattva himself is born
as an elephant. These Jatakas give the impression that there did
exist some tradition of a white elephant which was gradually
associated with Buddhist mythology. Whether this had already
happened in the lifetime of Asoka is doubtful.

While on his deathbed, the Buddha is believed to have
prescribed four places as being sacred: Kapilavastu, where he was
born; Bodh-Gaya, where he received enlightenment; Sarnath where
for the first time he preached his doctrine; and Kusinagara where
he entered parinirvdna.”’ Asoka erected a pillar at Lumbini
(Kapilavastu) stating that this was the birth place of the Blessed
One.” Surely, this would have been an appropriate place to
establish the figure of the elephant, if indeed during this period it
was the symbol of his conception. Yet, nowhere near the region of
his birth is there any evidence of the elephant in sculpture or
inscription.

The Sarnath pillar of Asoka is surmounted by four lions
bearing a great wheel over which are represented an elephant, a
bull, a horse and a lion.” All these animals were eventually
associated with the Buddha; the lion became his epithet as Sakya-
Simha (lion among the Sakyas); the horse, representative of his
departure from home; the bull, the symbol of the constellation of
his birth and the elephant, the symbol of his conception. Yet, the
Asokan lions have come down to us without any association with
Buddhism. Probably these were symbols which were important
before Asoka’s time and even before the birth of Buddhism. Those
of the elephant and bull obviously signified something even in
Harappan umes. They were probably adopted by different religious
groups and kings down the ages and modified for their own
purposes.

I have suggested earlier that the elephant appears to have
been associated with divinity and with royalty, before the birth of
Buddhism. Possibly, the Asokan elephant was meant to symbolise

--- Page 58 ---
THE ELEPHANT 59

ASoka himself. If the motif was used in only a few specific areas, it
was probably because those were the very regions where such a
tradition existed. Asoka availed of existing local symbols of divinity
and kingship to proclaim his suzerainty over a vast empire.

Kalsi and Sankisa, like Hastinapura, lie in the Doab region.
From that area, and from places around it, coins dating from the
third to the first centuries Bc from various janapadas (Republics)
bear the elephant motif quite consistently. Those of the
Arjunayanas (approximately 100 Bc, provenance from the triangle
of Delhi-Jaipur-Agra),'° for example, have one variety which
depicts, on the obverse, an elephant with uplifted trunk before a
tree in railing. The reverse has a bull before a linga. The coins of
the Audumbaras (about 100 Bc, provenance from the Kangra
District, north of the Doab) have one variety which depicts, on
the obverse, a tree in enclosure with the forepart of an elephant
to the right.’"' Some Kada coins (approximately latter half of third
century or early second century BC, provenance from the Punjab)
have, on one side, an elephant and on the other a snake, taurine
symbol and legend.'” There are some coins from around Varanasi
(approximately third/second centuries Bc) having an elephant/
taurine with the svastika symbol on the obverse.'* Among the
coins of the Yaudheyas, there is a variety having on the reverse an
elephant with a nandipada above it. The obverse has a bull before
a sacrificial post or what appears to be one. The tree, linga and
bull had, and continue to have, a religious significance. If they are
represented with the elephant on these early coins it is certain
that the latter was also associated with the sacred.

There is evidence of the elephant being associated with
rain and fertility in ancient Kalinga where the Dhauli rock edicts
are situated. The Kurudhamma Jataka'™ refers to a belief in Kalinga
according to which the presence of a certain auspicious elephant
warded off drought. According to this Jataka the Boddhisattva was
born as the son of the King of Indapatta (Indraprastha) city in the
Kuru kingdom. During this time there was drought in the city of
Dantapura in Kalinga. The people converged on the king of
Kalinga and told him about the state elephant in the city of
Indraprastha called Anjana-vasabho whose mere presence
guaranteed rain. The elephant was acquired from the King of
Indraprastha; still it did not rain in Kalinga. Finally, only when the
king practiced the five virtues of the Kurus did it rain. Of course,

--- Page 59 ---
60 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

the purpose of the Jataka is to show the futility of existing
superstitions and beliefs and the necessity of following the teachings
of the Buddha in order to avert calamity. The Jataka, however,
confirms the existence of such a belief both in Kalinga and
Indraprastha. The latter lies in the Doab area, not far from
Hastinapura.

The name Dantapura suggests some association with the
elephant. Danta signifies ‘tooth’ and Dantin means ‘elephant’.
Dantapura is the ancient name of Puri (Orissa) and according to
legend it is believed to have been named after the shrine for the
Buddha's left canine tooth.'® The Buddhist legends of preserving
the tooth of the Buddha appear to be derived from some older
tradition. It is striking that the tooth relics of the Buddha, in all
cases, appear to be associated with the elephant and with places
where the elephant motif appears or where there are stories of
the elephant in some supernatural role. There is a legend
according to which a Kashmir monk acquires a tooth relic of the
Buddha from a herd of elephants.'*’ Hsuan Tsang refers to a milk
tooth of the Buddha in Kapisa.'® Another tooth relic is associated
with Gandhara and a third with Kalinga while a fourth is
traditionally believed to be honoured by the nagas (serpents) in
their abode.'” The term naga signifies both elephant and serpent
and its exact meaning in literature is often ambiguous. The
measurements of these relics indicates that they are not those of
human teeth. The one from Kalinga which is preserved in Kandy
(Sri Lanka) is described as being five cenumeters long and two
and a half centimeters wide.' In another case the tooth of a
pratyekabuddha is described as being twelve and a half cm. long
and ten cm. wide. Obviously, it is not of human origin.'"! Possibly,
the tradition of preserving tooth relics was earlier associated either
with serpents or elephants, or both.'”

There does not appear to be any evidence of an elephant
cult in the region of Junagarh. This is understandable considering
that much of the available evidence comes from Buddhist sources
and that this area was relatively far away from the middle Ganga
basin where Buddhism was born and where it initially developed.
It is also far away from the north-west where Buddhism spread
and gaincd an early foothold. However, if the elephant is referred
to alongside an edict in Junagarh it is likely that it enjoyed some
local significance in the region in Asokan times.

--- Page 60 ---
THE ELEPHANT 61
There is reference to an elephant deity in some Buddhist
texts. In the Niddesa commentary of the Suttanipata there is
mention of Haithivatika (worshippers of the elephant), besides
the Assavatika, Govatika, Supannavatika (worshippers of the horse,
the cow and bird), Punnabhaddavatika, Manibhaddavatika,
(worshippers of Purnabhadra and Manibhadra), etc.'!* This text,
in all probability, refers to cults in and around the middle Ganga
plain where Buddhism flourished from the earliest times. The
reference to Manibhadra and Puarnabhadra confirms this, since
these two yaksas were particularly associated with Rajagrha and
Gwalior.'"4
There is literary and numismatic evidence which points to
the existence of an elephant deity in the north-west of the sub-
continent as well (modern Afghanistan and Pakistan). The motif
of the elephant appears on one coin of Antimachus Theos who
belongs to the early group of Greek kings of Bactria.''> Demetrius —
II (180-165 Bc) who probably succeeded him, wears the elephant
scalp as his helmet.''® The elephant was not native to Greece nor
does it figure in Greek mythology. It was evidently appropriated
by the Greeks because of its relevance in the region where they
setued and where it was, perhaps, a symbol of royalty and divinity.
I have mentioned earlier how the Vayu Purana refers to the
Gajabhumika (land of the elephant) as one of the many people
associated with the region of Ketumala which corresponds to old
Bactria. Gajabhumika may refer to a people or to a sub-region.
Kapisa also appears to have been associated with some
cult of the elephant. Kapz itself signifies ‘elephant’ and the word
Kapisa signifies ‘Elephant Lord’.'’’ There are some coins, attributed
to Eucratides, which bear on the reverse the image of a female
deity and the superscription Kavistye nagaradevata (the city-deity of
Kapisi). It is accompanied by two symbols, a mountain and the
head of an elephant.'® The deity bears a palm-branch in her
hand.''* Kapisa’s city goddess was associated with a mountain and
with the elephant. J.N. Banerjea considers that this elephant
represents Indra. Other scholars associate it with Buddhism. '” In
all likelihood, it is connected with neither. At no point is Indrani
more important than Indra. Therefore, the representation of the
elephant along with the goddess of Kapisa can hardly be symbolic
of Indra. Besides, Indra is never represented by the elephant. The
latter remained his mount and was never synonymous with him as

--- Page 61 ---
62 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

the bull sometimes was with Siva. As regards Buddhism, from
Hsuan Tsang’s description of the elephant deity of Kapisa, it is
clear that it was distinct from the Buddha. This Chinese Buddhist
pilgrim who visited India in the seventh century speaks of a
mountain which lay to the south-west of Kapiga. The deity of this
mountain had the form of an elephant. Hsuan Tsang goes on to
state that the Buddha was once invited by this god to the mountain.
Asoka, subsequently, built a stupa on this mountain over the
Buddha’s relics. In this manner, Buddhism was associated with
older places of pilgrimage. The mountain in Kapisa is referred to
by Hsuan Tsang as Pi-lo-sho-lo. The Chinese translation of this
term is ‘elephant solid’. Julien refers to it as Pilusara.'?! In fact pilu
signifies ‘elephant’ and sdra means ‘the best’, ‘the highest’. The
term also signifies ‘strength’ and ‘vigour’.'”? The name Pilusara
appears to be related to ‘Pillaiyar’ which is the Dravidian name
for Ganapati. ‘Pillaiyar’ is derived from the Dravidian words pallu
or pella both signifying ‘tooth’, i.e. ‘tusk of elephant’. In the present
form of the word, however, there is no meaning of tusk. Pillaiyar
means ‘noble child’. However, since the Pali word pillaka has the
significance of ‘a young elephant’ it is possible that pille originally
meant the young of the elephant.'?* Kapisa’s elephant deity was
evidently older than Buddhism and Brahmanism.

According to Philostratus, it was a custom in Taxila in
the first century AD to keep a sacred elephant in the Sun Temple. '!
He describes how an elephant that had once belonged to Porus
was dedicated in the same temple by Alexander and named Aias.
People used to anoint it with myrrh and adorn it with fillets. '*
Further reference to rituals of a religious nature associated with
the clephant comes from the Sustma Jataka'® which specifically
menuons the elephant festivals of Taxila. It describes how the
Bodhisattva in a previous life, as the son of the priest of the King
of Kasi, goes to Taxila to learn from a reputed teacher the
ceremonies associated with the elephant festival. These references
from two independent sources confirm that such a practice did
exist in Taxila. The Jataka also confirms that this ritual was known
in Kasi.

The elephant appears on the coins of Agathocles (180-
165 sc), the first Indo-Greek king who had some hold over Taxila.
His coins bear the elephant with a plant before it on the obverse
and a star above the horse on the reverse.'?? Sometimes the

--- Page 62 ---
THE ELEPHANT 63
elephant and bull are depicted together as on a coin of Heliocles
IT (120-115 Bc). This combination appears again in the money
of Maues, Axes and Axilises. On one of the coins of Maues (who
probably occupied Taxila about 85 Bc) the bust of the king is
depicted on the obverse and the elephant on the reverse.
Menander also occupied Gandhara with its two capitals.' Some
of his coins have a standing elephant on the obverse, with a goad
on the reverse.'*°

The elephant scalp appears again on a coin of Lysias (120-
110 Bc) where the latter wears it as a headgear. The reverse depicts
the naked Heracles crowning himself.'*' The king is closely
associated with the elephant. On another coin the obverse has the
bust of Heracles and the reverses depicts an elephant.'*? Narain
describes a silver drachma of Hermaeus which he believes depicts,
on the reverse, a male deity with elephant’s head, trunk to his left,
tusks invisible, holding a sceptre palm in left hand.'** He considers
this to be an incipient Ganapati and the first evidence of a deity
having a human form and an elephant-head. This suggestion has
been refuted by Cribb and Bopearachchi who consider that what
Narain takes for the trunk of the elephant is, in fact, ‘a badly
copied Zeus-Mithra nose, beard and a fold in the gown’. Besides,
as Bopearachchi points out, the coin in question was not issued by
Hermaeus but is an imitation issued by nomads who occupied the
Kabul Valley after the death of the Greek king. '*

The elephant is not the most frequently depicted symbol
on Taxila coins.'* By the close of the first millenium sc, other
religious forces had come to exert a considerable influence in the
region. Therefore, newer religious beliefs and rituals may have
begun to undermine the influence and importance of the elephant
deity. Moreover, the animal had, by this time, begun to acquire a
new significance within the fold of the Brahmanical and Buddhist
religions.

RITUALS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ELEPHANT
Earlier, I referred to a tradition of keeping a sacred elephant at
the Sun Temple at Taxila and to elephant festivals at Taxila and
Kasi mentioned in the Susima jataka. These references come
without any description of what the elephant festival was actually
about and what it involved. Fortunately, the Hastyayurveda provides

--- Page 63 ---
64 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

such a description and one can surmise that all elephant festivals
involved certain similar rites. These festivals are not associated in
any way with the elephant-headed Ganapati and appear to be an
ancient practice, linked to the concept of the elephant as a symbol
of the sacred from very early times. According to the Hastyayurveda
the elephant festival was an annual event where the elephant was
worshipped. This ritual was performed for rainfall and the
associated fertility of crops, fecundity of cattle and man, and the
general prosperity of the kingdom. An elephant painted white
with sandal paste was led in solemn procession through the capital.
The ritual involved the wearing of women’s attire by the male
attendants and the utterance of licentious remarks aimed at
stimulating the dormant sexual energy of the living power. Finally,
the elephant was worshipped by the high officials of the realm,
both civil and military.'*

According to the Hastayurveda, the white elephant, if
worshipped as a divinity, bestowed on man all those earthy blessings
which the goddess, Sri-Laksmi, Fortune and Prosperity, the Mother
Earth, fertile and abundant with water and riches, has in store. !*’
The elephant was the fertilising agent and because of it, the Earth
Goddess brought forth crops, animals and human beings. In fact,
Gajalaksmi represents this very concept: the fertilizing of a female
being, representing the earth or the fields, by rain-clouds. It is
significant that the term kumbhin means ‘elephant’ and the
feminine form of the word, kumbhini means the ‘earth’.

The elephant festival, as described in the Hastyayurveda,
has certain common elements with another famous ritual, that of
the asvamedha (horse sacrifice) associated with later Vedic culture.
The latter, too, was performed by kings and high officials of the
realm for the prosperity of the lands, fertility of the soil and
material well being of the king and his kingdom. Women played
an important role in this ritual and, in fact, all the women of the
realm participated in it. The central ritual of the asvamedha was
the union of the queen with the dead horse while obscene language
was exchanged between the priest ( Aotr) and the crowned queen.'®
The Rg Veda knows nothing of this ritual horse sacrifice.'*? It was
probably borrowed from the existing rituals of the non-Vedic
people in the Later Vedic period. It is quite possible that the
elephant festival has its origin in some ritual that was older than
the asvamedha since the elephant appears as a sacred symbol from

--- Page 64 ---
THE ELEPHANT 65
an earlier period than the horse. Some of the ceremonies may
have been adapted to the horse in the Vedic context. Quite
possibly, the elephant festival had the sacrifice of the elephant as
the central ritual at some stage.

According to the Matangalila, ‘the creation of elephants
was holy and for the profit of sacrifice to the gods and especially
for the welfare of kings’.'* There is evidence in later literature
that elephant sacrifice did exist at some point in time. There are
Tantric texts which describe homas which must be performed with
elephant’s stool and elephant’s meat.'*’ Yantras (mystical diagrams)
are made with a mixture consisting of secretions from an elephant’s
temples, blood and semen.'® Other rituals include the drawing
of an image on the meatless shoulder blade of an elephant.'®
Although Tantric texts belong to the post-Christian era, many of
the rites described by them appear to be much older. Even when
the elephant evolves into the Brahmanical Ganapati, the latter’s
beheading retains the idea of sacrifice. According to some texts of
the early medieval period, human sacrifice is associated with the
rituals of the Buddhist Tantric Ganapati where the bali offered is
said to be a human leg.’ It is not possible to say when exactly
such a practice began and when it was given up. Some of the
Tantric practices may well have originated in ancient shamanistic
rituals. Divination through shamanism was often carried out
through animal bones and reference to the meatless shoulder
blade of the elephant suggests some such practice.

The sacrifice of elephants was probably given up eventu-
ally, not only because of the difficulties related to the procurement
of the animal but also because it is less easily bred in captivity.
Elephants have not been domesticated in the same sense as the
buffalo. They were most probably captured from the wild and
then trained. As they came to be used increasingly in battle and
for heavy physical work it was simpler and more economical to
sacrifice some of the other domesticated animals.

According to the Hasti Ratna Dhanamyeti Upadesa
(Instructions for Acquiring Wealth through the Precious Elephant),
a text which forms part of the Tibetan Buddhist canon, a ritual is
performed before the image of an Indian elephant for the purpose
of achieving earthly prosperity of all kinds.'* This text, which
belongs to about the eighth century ab, evidently refers to a practice
that is later than that described in the Hastydyurveda. The text

--- Page 65 ---
66 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

makes no reference to Ganapati nor to any elephant deity. It is
just the elephant which has the power to fulfil all desires. The
worship of its image is sufficient and there is no reference to a
procession or a festival. It is likely that since elephants were not
native to Tibet, a real elephant could not be associated with this
ritual. However, the idea itself appears to stem from the tradition
described in the Hastyayurveda. In the Tibetan Buddhist canon,
this text is grouped together with the largest body of texts on
Ganapati,'*© because anything relating to elephants in the sacred
context came to be associated with him. Even prayers to Ganapati
in the Buddhist Tantric context retain a reference to his association
with rainfall. There is a text in which Ganapati is invoked to send
down hail. He has to be meditated upon as riding a dragon (the
equivalent of the naga of the Indian tradition). Similarly, there
are rituals for stopping hail.'*’

From the Hastydyurveda it is evident that the worship of
the elephant was associated with that of the Goddess. Possibly, the
latter was also sometimes represented in the form of an elephant.
The Matsya Purana lists about two hundred goddesses including
Vainayaki and Matangi.'** Whereas Vainayaki evidently refers to
the sakti of Ganapati-Vinayaka when the latter had become an
important god, Matangi harks back to an older period since Matang
signifies ‘elephant’ and Matangi suggests the existence of an
elephant goddess. In the contemporary context, Matangi is a
woman of the Madiga community (one of the untouchable
communities in Andhra Pradesh) who is associated with buffalo
sacrifice at the village goddess festivals. She is an unmarried woman
who is initiated as a special representative or manitestation of the
goddess, an office which she holds for life.'" She is symbolically
married to a tree and thereafter her life knows no moral restric-
tions. Perhaps that is why Matangi is also a name for a class of
prostitutes.’ Since the term) mdatanga signifies ‘elephant’ it is
surprising that the term Matangi should be associated with the
goddess and with buffalo sacrifice (the slaying of the buffalo itself
is done by the chief Madiga). It is quite likely that her prototype
originally played a similar role in the context of elephant sacrifice
and when that ritual ceased to be practiced she was associated
with the buffalo sacrifice since her role and symbolism in that
context remained unchanged.

The wearing of women’s attire by the male attendants in

--- Page 66 ---
THE ELEPHANT 67
the performance of the elephant festival is a practice that conunues
to be followed in many village or popular rituals associated with
other deities who constitute the non-Sanskritic tradition. In
Maharashtra and Karnataka, an officient from one of the
untouchable communities such as the Mang, Mahar or Holeya, is
responsible for killing a sheep or goat prior to or after the sacrifice
of the buffalo in the goddess festivals. Known as Potraj (the term
literally means ‘buffalo king’), he is often dressed as a woman. '*!
In Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, Potu Raju is the name of the
divine attendant of the Goddess. Whitehead mentions that an
Andhra image of Potu Raju carries ‘nine glass bangles belonging
to his sister Ellamma’. This practice aims at a symbolic unification
or identification with the Goddess.'? Even among the Malas
(Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka), who act as bards and priests in
the worship of Angalamma, the poet-priest, dressed as a woman,
accompanies the sacrificial animals being taken to the shrine of
the goddess.'®? Similar rites are also associated with naga worship.
Vogel describes a sacred ceremony called Naga -mandala practiced
by people in the Dakshin Kannad District of Karnataka, either to
get rid of an affliction due to the wrath of a serpent for having
killed a snake in a former life, or to get progeny. The figure of a
serpent is made and then worshipped. The ritual is performed to
the accompaniment of music provided by a group of male
musicians dressed in women’s attire and bedecked with jewels.
The parallels between the buffalo sacrifice and naga worship in
the contemporary context and rituals centred around the elephant
described in ancient texts are striking.

THE ELEPHANT IN THE MYTHOLOGY AND ART OF

EARLY BRAHMANISM, BUDDHISM AND JAINISM

BRAHMANISM
The Vedic Indra does not ride an elephant. It is only in the epics
that he acquires the animal as his vahana (vehicle). The
explanation generally given for this is that by the mid-first
millennium sc the elephant had become the symbol of royalty
and so it came to be considered the most appropriate mount for
Indra, king of Gods. Yet, an understanding of who Airavata is,
provides another possible explanation.

--- Page 67 ---
68 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

According to the Atharva Veda,’ Airavata is the son of
Iravan who is the chief Naga. He is also known as Dhrtarastra. In
some other texts he is described as a sage of the Sarpa ethnic unit,
who acted as a priest. In this case, his name is mentioned as
Dhrtarastra of the Airavata lineage.'* In the Rg Veda, a hymn is
devoted to the worship of sarpas (serpents). Evidently snake worship
required a special category of priests. In the Rg Veda, the Sarpas
and Nagas are mentioned as two different people.'*’ Over time
the distinction seems to have become blurred since in later texts
Airavata is sometimes a Naga and at other times a Sarpa. The
question arises as to why he became the vahana of Indra. If Indra
had to be given an elephant vahana, why did it have to be named
Airavatar

A uahana is generally associated with the personality and
role of the deity it bears. The goat, a sacrificial offering, is the
vahana of Agni (Fire) who carries all oblations to the gods. The
antelope, a swift animal, bears Vayu (Wind). The goddess Ganga
is borne by the alligator, one of the bigger and more powerful
riverine creatures. Indra and Airavata also have some common
associations. One of Indra’s epithets is Vrtraha Indra (destroyer of
Vrtra). Originally, the term vurtra expressed the general idea of
‘resistance’.' As Indra came to be considered the hero who
destroyed the foes of the Vedic Aryans, urtra came to denote those
very human foes.'*? When Indra was made into a deified hero,
Vrtra became the mythical dragon that he destroys.'” Since Indra
was also regarded as the rain-god, Vrtra was also looked upon as
the cloud-demon. Indra destroys the cloud-demon and releases
the rain. The mythological dragon and the naga are closely related.
However, the term naga had come to signify ‘elephant’ in addition
to ‘serpent’. Both the elephant and serpent were associated with
clouds and rain. but since the elephant was considered the mount
of kings, it was considered more appropraite as a vahana than the
serpent. So Indra acquired the elephant as a mount and the latter
was named after one of the oldest lineage of Naga priests possibly
signifying the superiority of Indra over the naga deities.

In the Puranas, Airavata is sometimes described as a snake
and at other times as an elephant. He is named as one of the
eight diggajas (elephants of the quarters) along with Kumuda,
Padma, Puspadanta, Vamana, Supratika, Afijana and Nila.'* In
the Vayu Purana, Airavata is described as being born from the

--- Page 68 ---
THE ELEPHANT 69
ocean.'” He is the white elephant churned from the ocean along
with Laksmi, the white horse, Ucchaisravas, and others. The
association of the elephant with water and with the Goddess is
constant. Here, Laksmi is associated with Airavata, even as she is
associated with Ganapati at a later stage. This has its parallel with
the goddess of Kapisa and the elephant deity of the mountain. In
Buddhist texts Airavata is described as one of the four great naga
kings. Among the Bharhut reliefs is one which shows the Lord
Buddha being worshipped by the Nagaraja Airavata or Elapattra.
An inscription contirms the identity of the nagaraja who, in
Buddhist art, is depicted either as a five-headed serpent or as a
human being with a five-fold serpent crest.'”

The elephant first makes its appearance in the
Brahmanical pantheon as Airavata, the mount of Indra. In the last
couple of centuries before the Christian era, Indra was still an
important God. Airavata, therefore, was given an equally important
role. He was made the ruler of all the elephants'™ and was invoked
in the propitiatory rites to destroy the diseases of elephants along
with Visnu and Sri on the fifth lunar day (naga pancami).!® In the
early centuries of the Christian era, however, Indra’s importance
began to decline. Visnu and Siva ascended to take his place. Many
of Indra’s functions and attributes were taken over by these gods
who represented the aspirations of a changing society. Along with
Indra, Airavata also lost his importance. As Puranic myths describe
the humiliation of Indra in order to glorify one or the other of
the newer Gods, so also is Airavata humiliated. In one instance, he
is described as being struck on the head by the mace of an asura
(demon) and, consequently, falling in a swoon. He is then
abandoned by Indra who mounts a chariot.'"° On more than one
occasion, he is forced to retreat during combat because of severe
head wounds.'”’

In Puranic mythology the elephant, along with serpents,
is often used as a metaphor for clouds. This suggests common
functions and symbolism for the two creatures. According to the
Vayu Purana elephants, mountains and clouds along with serpents
belong to one and the same family since water is known as the
source of their origin.’ ‘Clouds arising from the waters of
ocean ... assume the shapes of buffaloes, boars and elephants in
their rut. They are called jimitas since they are the source of
living beings’! by virtue of the fact that they provide the earth

--- Page 69 ---
70 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

~ with fecundating rain. It is this association with the clouds that
probably gave rise to the myths of flying elephants. According to
the Matangalila, elephants could originally fly in the sky unul they
were cursed by the sage Dirghatapas. Only the elephants of the
quarters escaped the curse.'” This idea is present even in the
Buddhist texts like the Chaddanta Jataka which refers to eight
thousand royal elephants who, by exercise of supernatural powers,
were able to move through the air.'”! Similarly, the Dummeda Jataka
describes an elephant who flies from Rajagrha to Kasi.'” There is
a close parallel between the diggajas and the digndgas (serpents of
the quarters).

In the Vedas the elephant is referred to as hastin, gaja,
mrgha or varana.'” It is not clear when exactly the term naga came
to be considered as a synonym of hastin.'"* The grammarian Panini
(c. fifth century Bc) provides the earliest evidence of the term
having this dual significance.'” Naga also means ‘mountain’ and
snakes and elephants appear to be associated with mountains as
well. Sometimes specific mountains are mentioned as the abode
of certain nagas.' The sacred elephant of Kapisa was associated
with the mountain referred to by Hsuan Tsang as Pi-lo-sho-lo.
There are parallels between the function of rain-bearing clouds
which fertilize the earth, the fertility symbolism of the sacred
elephant/serpent, and the role of mountains as the abode of clouds
and the source of rivers. This perhaps explains why the term ndga
signifies these different things. Even the term matanga signifies
both ‘elephant’ and ‘cloud’.'”

At umes the nagas also appear to be synonymous with
yaksas. Manibhadra is sometimes referred to as Maninaga!”* and at
other times as Manibhadra yaksa.'” Both nagas and yaksas share
common functions. They are intimately connected with the waters
and associated with vegetation. The great tutelary yaksas control
the rains essential to prosperity.'" Since some ndga deities were
yaksas too, it is possible that the clephant deity was also a yaksa.
This idea is clearly present in the context of early Buddhist art
which is discussed further on. The association of the elephant
with water and mountains finds an echo in the worship of the
later Ganapati. In the Agamas, a dhyana of Ganapati describes him
as seated on a jewelled mountain located in a sea filled with sugar-
cane juice. Inside the sea are crocodiles, sankhas (conches) and
fish"!

--- Page 70 ---
THE ELEPHANT 7]

BUDDHISM
In the three or four centuries following the death of the Buddha, a
substantial mythology began to be woven around this historical
figure. Buddhist art acquired newer forms in order to embellish
the great stupas. The conventional symbols representing the Buddha
without showing him in his human form did not provide much
scope for such a display of art as was required. So animal stories,
which became the Jataka stories, began to be sculpted along with
the newly fabricated myths.

According to one such myth, Maya Devi, mother of the
future Buddha, dreamed of a young, white elephant entering her
side. This was symbolic of the conception of the Buddha and the
scene has been sculpted at the stupa at Bharhut (second century
Bc).' It is significant that even in the context of Buddhism the
elephant retains his role as a fertilising agent.

The elephant motif is one of several motifs sculpted on
the walls of the early Buddhist stupas. In some cases it recalls the
elephant motif on the early punch-marked coins. That of the
elephant with uplifted trunk, before a tree in railing, on the coins
of the Arjunayanas, or the tree in enclosure with the forepart of
an elephant to the right in the coins of the Audumbaras referred
to earlier, has another variation on a stone railing at the stupa of
Bharhut. Three elephants offer worship to a tree with altar. The
scene appears to be a mountain. Two elephants are approaching
the stone seat, the bigger one bears a bundle of lotus fibres in its
trunk; the smaller sprays itself with water from the brook.’ Another
bas relief of the Bharhut stipa shows a big banyan tree with a seat
in front it of it, decorated with an ornamental band and strewn
with flowers. On either side, three elephants, one of which is a
very young animal, are bowing or offering garlands. On the right
are figures of two men. One stands with his hands joined
in devotion. On the altar is engraved: 1. Bahuhathiko nigodho,
9, Nadode; the banyan tree Bahuhathika (of many elephants) on
(Mount) Nadoda.'** Although the sacred tree in the Buddhist
context evidently refers to the Bodhi tree under which the Buddha
achieved enlightenment, the motif itself is clearly older than
Buddhism. The artisans employed to sculpt and decorate the
Buddhist stizpas made usc of skills and traditional motifs handed
down since before the birth of Buddhism. Occasionally, this mouf

--- Page 71 ---
72 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
is combined with a pair of worshippers bearing rooted plants or
saplings.'*

In early Buddhist art, the serpent and the elephant
sometimes perform the same functions. In Bharhut, Sanchi and
Bodh Gaya, as also at Mathura, the new born Buddha is bathed by
two elephants standing on a lotus.'® A couple of centuries later,
in the Gupta period, a sculpture from Sarnath shows the infant
Buddha being bathed by two serpents who float in the air above
him and hold round, inverted water-jars which the elephants of
the earlier stupas held with their wunks.'*’ At other times, the
elephants and serpents appear closely associated although they
remain distinct. For example, a piece of sculpture (from its style it
may be assigned to the Kusana period—first-second century AD)
which was excavated at Sarnath and is now preserved in the local
museum, shows a stupa being worshipped by a wild elephant with
an offering of lotus-flowers and at the same time protected by
some triple-headed serpents which form a garland round its
dome.'* The parallels between the serpents and elephants has
already been pointed out earlier within the framework of
Brahminism. Its existence in the Buddhist context points to it
being a well-established notion which was recognized by both
religions.

In Buddhist art, the elephant symbolising the immaculate
conception of the Buddha is depicted with six tusks.'* It is distinct
from the elephant-headed yaksa, the earliest representation of
which exists at Amaravati in the lower Krishna Valley (second
century aD)'” and at the Kantaka Celinga stipa in Sri Lanka (second
century Ap).'"' Even some nagas acquire human forms retaining
their naga identity because of the capello over their heads. This
elephant-headed yaksa and the humanised nagas are distinct from
the purely decorative motif of the elephant and the snake.

The earliest yaksa statues date to the Mauryan period.
Those found at Parkham and Noh (in the Bharatpur region of
Rajasthan) are colossal statues.'” These tall and well built super-
human figures became the models of the Bodhisattva and Visnu
images of later times. As the Buddha and Visnu took the place of
these local divinities the latter had to be shown in an inferior
position and without the perfection of the newer deities. The
problem was solved by making them smaller in size, often in the
form of dwarfs with pot-bellies. In early Buddhist art the naga, the

--- Page 72 ---
THE ELEPHANT 73
elephant and other animal deities were differentiated from ordinary
animals by being given a therianthrophic form. The functions of
many of these old deities such as those of protection, bestowing of
wealth and well-being got transferred to the greater ones. However,
the role of guardian so essential to these older deities was
transformed. They now became the guardians or attendants of
the principal deities and were placed at the entrance to or around
the main shrines of the newer gods.

JAINISM
In Jaina iconography, the elephant is sometimes associated with
Parsvanatha, the twenty-third Jina. The latter is normally depicted
seated in padmasana (lotus pose) with a hooded cobra over his
head. In fact, the cobra is the laachana (characteristic mark) of
Parsva and is represented by five or seven snake-hoods over his
head.'*® However, in some sculptures the elephant appears to
substitute for the snake-hooded attendants or worshippers. A statue
found at Tumain, district Guna (Madhya Pradesh, seventh century
AD) depicts Parsvanatha with the canopy of seven snake-hoods but
attended on each side by an elephant carrying in its raised trunk a
lotus-bud with a long stalk. The upper parts of the sculpture are
badly muulated; however, the figure of an elephant is visible on
the upper left end. Perhaps there was an elephant on the other
side and both the elephants were performing an abhiseka (ritual
bathing) on the Jina. Another sculpture of Parsvanatha preserved
in an old Jaina temple at Rajgir shows him sitting in padmdsana.
Part of the pedestal is mutilated but there is an elephant just to
the left of the place where the dharmacakra (wheel of dharma) was
but is now mutilated. In the Department of Archaeology,
Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh), there is a stone statue of Parsvanatha
standing under a canopy of seven snake-hoods. Two small figures
of camaradharas (chowry bearers) stand on elephants by the side
of Parsva’s shoulders. The sculpture is dated to about the twelfth
century ab.'® There is even a legend according to which
Parsvanatha was once worshipped by an elephant when he visited
the Kadambari forest near a mountain named Kali with a kunda
(tank) nearby. King Karakandu of Campa knowing this, visited
the spot but arrived when Parsvanatha had already left the place.
The king was dejected, but on digging near the spot found a

--- Page 73 ---
74 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

beautiful jewel-image of the Jina which was then installed in a
shrine.’ It is worth mentioning that Parsva who, according to
Jaina tradition, lived in the eighth century Bc, was from Kasi and is
reported to have travelled widely in eastern India and Kalinga. '’
The area of Banaras, Magadha and Kalinga, as we have seen earlier,
were regions where the elephant appears to have been worshipped
as a deity. The close association between elephant and snake is
present in some icons of Parsvanatha. Since his danchana is the
snake and since naga signifies both ‘snake’ and ‘elephant’ the
latter was sometimes associated with him. However, these elephant
motifs are the exceptions rather than the rule in the depiction of
Parsvanatha who is usually flanked either by a male or female
worshipper, or standing cdmaradharas on each side, sometmes
with snake hood, sometimes in half-snake, half-human form. At
other times he is flanked by his yaksa and yaksi both of whom have
a snake-hood above the crown.

Ajitanatha, the second Jina, has the elephant as his
lanchana and the twenty-fourth Tirthankara, Mahavira, has Matanga
as his yaksa and Siddhyayika as his yaksin?. Mahavira is the the
most important Tirthankara for the majority of Jainas. If he is
associated with Matanga, the latter must have been one of the
more important minor deities from the Jaina point of view.
Although Matanga is not represented as an elephant the name
itself signifies ‘elephant’. Siddhyayika’s name is somewhat similar
to Siddhi, one of the consorts of Ganapati. The fact that she
accompanies Matanga as the yaksini of Mahavira further confirms
the impression that Matanga represents one of the aspects of the
prototype of Ganapati. Just as the snake, which was worshipped
from the earliest of times, was absorbed in one form or another in
the art and mythology of Vedic religion, Brahminism, Buddhism
and Jainism, so also was the worship of the elephant very old and
the animal found a place in the pantheons of the these newer
religions.

It is from the Gupta period onwards that the yaksa and
yaksini figures began to be regularly appended to the sculptures of
the Tirthankaras.' Many statues depicting Mahavira with his yaksa
and yaksint are post tenth century when Ganapati had been
accepted into the Jaina pantheon. Therefore, even if Matanga
and Siddyayika are latecomers in the Jaina pantheon and even if
parallels exist between them and Ganapati and Siddhi, they remain

--- Page 74 ---
THE ELEPHANT 75
distinct to them. Besides, their appearance in art does not rule
out the possibility of their being associated with Mahavira from an
earlier period. The name Matanga evokes a deity older than
Ganapati. Like so much else in Indian tradition, the old continued
to coexist with the evolving new.

By the turn of the Christian era the elephant had found a
place in the mythology and art of Brahminism and Buddhism. At
a later stage the animal was associated, directly or indirectly, with
some of the Jaina Tirthankaras. However, this elephant was distinct
to Ganapati. It is not ever referred to by any of the epithets
associated with Ganapati. Although by the second century ap the
elephant-headed yaksa form exists, it cannot be presumed to
represent Ganapati-Vinayaka. There is no evidence of a deity by
this name having an elephant or elephant-headed form at this
early stage. Ganapati-Vinayaka had yet to make his debut.

NOTES

1. Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, History of Indian and Indonesian Ant,

JH).

2. BP. Sahu, From Hunters to Breeders, p. 112.

3. Bridget and Raymond Allchin, The Rise of Civilization in India and
Pakistan, p. 163.

4. B.P. Sahu, op. cit., pp. 116-17.

5. Ibid., p. 163.

6. Richard Meadow, ‘Animal Domestication in the Middle Easi’, in
Gregory Possehl, ed., Harappan Civilization, p. 298.

7. The dates for this period are cited from Bridget and Raymond
Allchin, op. cit., p. 214.

8. Shubhangana Atre, The Archetypal Mother, p. 142.

9. B.P. Sahu, op. cit., pp. 166-7.

10. Ibid.

11. F.R. Allchin, ‘The Legacy of the Indus Civilization’ in Gregory L.
Possehl, ed., Ibid, p. 386.

12. Shubhangana Atre, op. cit., p. 140.

13. These sites are Harappa, Mohenjo-daro, Chanhu-daro, Allahdino,
Balakot, Kot Diji, Amri, Desalpur, Surkotda, Lothal, Rangpur, Rojdi
(Srinathgarh), Kalibangan, Banawali, Alamgirpur, Hulas, Rupar,
Manda, Shortugai, Sutkagen-dor and Sotka-Koh. See Shubhangana
Atre, op. cit.

14. Ibid.

1%. Bridget and Raymond Allchin, op. cit., p. 215.

--- Page 75 ---
76 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

16. Ibid., p. 211.

17. EJ.H. Mackay, Further Excavations at Mohenjo-daro, p. 333.

18. Shereen Ratnagar, Enquiries into the Political Organization of Harappan
Society, p. 146.

19. D.D. Kosambi, An Introduction to the Study of Indian History, p. 157.

20. Ibid., p. 176.

21. Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya, Lokdyata: A Study in Ancient Indian
Materialism, p. 206.

22. Mircea Eliade, The Encyclopaedia of Religion, Vol. 5, pp. 81-2.

23. Ibid.

24. Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya, op. cit., p. 142.

25. Franklin Edgerton, trans., The Elephant Lore, pp. 45-6, w. 15-19.

26. Vayu Purana, Vol. I, p. 283, fn. 2.

27. Ibid., I. 44.9-15.

28. Ibid.

29. V.S. Agrawala, India as Known to Panini, p. 456.

30. Ibid.

31. D.C. Sircar, Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India,
p. 149.

32. The term ‘yoga’ appears anachronistic for the Bronze Age since it
appears to have developed much later and is associated in its
early stages with Patanjali in the second century BC.

33. T.M.P. Mahadevan, ‘Saivism and the Indus Civilisation’, JGJARI,
Vol. IV, Nov. 1946, pp. 1-10.

34. Elizabeth C.L. During Caspers, ‘Some Thoughts on the Indus
Script’, in Ellen M. Raven and Karel T. Van Kooij, eds., Indian Art
and Archaeology, pp. 54-67.

35. Alf Hiltebietel, “The Indus Valley ‘Proto-Siva’, Reexamined through
Reflections on the Goddess, the Buffalo and the Symbolism of
vahanas’, Anthropos, Vol. 73, 1978, pp. 767-97. See, in particular,
p. 768.

36. Personal communication from Shereen Ratnagar.

37. Alf Hiltebeitel, op. cit., pp. 771-2.

38. E.C.L. During Caspers, ‘Magic Hunting Practices in Harappan
Times’, in K. Friefelt and S. Sprensen, eds., The Indus Civilization,
SAA, 1985, pp. 227-36.

39. Ibid., pp. 775-6.

40. Shubhangana Atre, op. cit., p. 191.

41. Alf Hiltebeitel, op. cit., see p. 776 where the author discusses this
view put forth by Volchok, a member of the Russian team that has
studied the Indus Valley script since the mid-1960s.

42. Nevill Drury, Shamanism, p. I.

43. Shubhangana Atre, op. cit., pp. 99-199.

--- Page 76 ---
THE ELEPHANT 77

44. Ibid., p. 41.

45. E.C.L. During Caspers, ‘Magic Hunting Practices in Harappan
Times’ in K. Friefelt and S. Sprensen, eds., op. cit.

46. Elizabeth C.L. During Caspers, ‘Some Thoughts on the Indus
Script’ in Ellen M. Raven and Karel T. Van Kooij, eds., op. cit.

47. Sudhir Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, pp. 56-7.

48. Shereen Ratnagar, op. cit, p. 182; Shubhangana Atre, op. Cit.,
p. 195.

49. Shubhangana Atre, Op. cit.., p. 203.

50. Ibid., p. 89.

51. Ibid., p. 80.

52. Ibid., p. 196.

53. Bridget and Raymond Allchin, op. cit., p. 215.

54. Shubhangana Atre, op. cit., p. 182.

55. Shereen Ratnagar, op. cit., p. 152.

56. Shubhangana Atre, op. cit., p. 142.

57. H.W. Bailey, ed., Corpus Inscriptionum Iranicarum, Part I
(Inscriptions of the Seleucid and Parthian Period and of Eastern
Iran and Central Asia), Vol. V, (Saka), p. 68. This reference occurs
in the context of an eulogy of the Buddha.

58. Linga Purana, 1.21.25.

59. Vayu Purana, 1.24.110.

60. Bhagavata Purana, 1.ii.7.1.

61. Ibid.

62. Mircea Eliade, Patterns in Comparative Religion, p. 164.

63. Robert Graves, Greek Myths, p. 484, see fn. no. 1.

64. Ibid., p. 553.

65. Shubhangana Atre, op. cit., p. 102.

66. Alexandra Ardeleanu-Jansen, ‘The Terracotta Figurines from
Mohenjo-Daro: Considerations on Tradition Craft and Ideology
in the Harappa Culture (CA. 2400-1800 BC)’, Lahore Museum
Bulletin, Vol. I, No. 2, July-Dec. 1988, pp. 9-28.

67. Ibid., p. 211.

68. Bridget and Raymond Allchin, op. cit., pp. 273, 278-9.

69. Cited in M.K. Dhavalikar, ‘Daimabad Bronzes’, in Gregory L.
Possehl, ed., Harappan Civilization, pp. 421-6.

70. M.K. Dhavalikar, op. cit.

71. Ibid., p. 424.

72. Ibid.

73. Alexandra Ardeleanu-Jansen, op. cit.

74. Shereen Ratnagar, op. cit., p. 147.

75. B.B. Lal, ‘Excavation at Hastinapura and Other Explorations in
the Upper Ganga and Sutlej Basins, 1950-52’, in Ancient India,

--- Page 77 ---
78 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Nos. 10 and 11 (1954 and 1955), p. 148.

76. S. Sorensen, An Index to the Names in the Mahabharata, p. 287 (MAb.
XII,7711).

77. Ibid., p. 287 (Mhb.1,1700, 3000, 4360, 4441, 4460, 4468, 5034,
5149; 11,1676, 2647; III,9, 1348; V,6092, 7106; XIV,1476, 1479).

78. Ibid., (Mad. 11,2600, 2640; III,279; V,6071; XII,2121; XIV,370;
XV,439; XVIII,181).

79. Ibid., p. 494 (Mhbd. 1,3,793, 796, 815, 823; IIT, 82, 5055; V,97, 3980,
etc.).

80. Ibid., p. 320 (MAb. I,2,512,514; 1,3,672; 1,102, 41285, etc.).

81. D.C. Sircar, ‘Mahamayuri: List of Yaksas’, Journal of Ancient Indian
History, Vol. V, Parts 1-2, p. 33.

82. Vidula Jayaswal and Kalyan Krishna, An Ethono-Archaeological View
of Indian Terracottas, p. 115.

83. Ibid., pp. 115-16.

84. EI, Vol. XIV, No. 23, pp. 327-8. See lines 48-49; JHQ, Vol. XX,
p. 328; JO, Vol. IV, p. 100.

85. The Lalitavistara Sutra, trans. into English from the French by
Gwendolyn Bays, Vol. 1, pp. 37-38.

86. V.N. Jha, ‘Varnasamkara in the Dharma Sutras: Theory and
Practice’, JESHO, Vol. 13, nos. 1-3, 1970, pp. 273-88.

87. A.K. Warder, Indian Buddhism, p. 203.

88. J.A.B. Van Buitenen, Mahabharata, Vol. 1, p. 162. .

89. Ramaprasad Chanda, ‘The Beginnings of Art in Eastern India
with Special Reference to Sculptures in the Indian Museum’,
Memoirs of ASI, No. 30, 1927, p. 33.

90. Ibid., p. 32.

91. Ibid.

92. Ibid.

93. Ibid.

94. A. Foucher, The Beginnings of Buddhist Art, p. 25.

95. Thomas Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India (AD 629-645),
p. 236.

96. Alinaatta Jataka in E.B. Cowell, op. cit., Bk. IT, No. 156, pp. 13-17.

97. A. Foucher, Etudes Sur l’Art Bouddhique de l'Inde, p. 11.

98. Ibid.

99. Ibid., p. 33.

100. John Allan, Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India, see ‘Introduction’,
pp. Ixxxi and Ixxxiii.

101. Tbid., pp. Ixxxiii-lxxxiv.

102. Ibid., pp. xcii-xciii.

103. [bid., p. xev.

10-4. Tbid., pp. cxlvii and cxlix.

--- Page 78 ---
THE ELEPHANT 79

105. E.B. Cowell, op. cit., Bk. III, No. 276, pp. 251-60.

106. Narada Purana, Vol. IV, p. 1350, fn. 4. Presently Puri is a Vaisnava
sacred site and the location of the famous Jagannatha temple.

107. Ibid., p. 144.

108. Thomas Watters, op. cit., p. 128.

109. H. Kern, Histoire du Bouddhisme dans I'Inde, p. 141.

110. Ibid., p. 142.

111. Ibid., p. 147.

112. See El, Vol. IX, No. 19, pp. 160-1, where reference is made to
Dantewara, a village or small town not far from Jagdalpur in the
Bastar area. Numerous images of nagas have been found in the
villages around. Dantewara contained the shrine of Danteévari,
the tutelary goddess of the former ruling family of the state. She
was a form of Mahisasuramardini. This temple was associated with
human sacrifice. The only explanation one can offer for the
association of a Mother Goddess with such a name, especially in
an area which was never associated with the tooth relic of the
Buddha, is that since Danti signifies ‘elephant’ (and it may have
also signified a snake) this practice of preserving teeth was
associated with a goddess whose worship may originally have been
associated with the elephant and with serpents. See Chapter III
for further discussion on Dant.

113. V.S. Agrawala, Ancient Indian Folk Cults, p. 10.

114. Ibid.

115. A.K Narain, The Indo-Greeks, p. 52.

116. Ibid.

117. There are scholars such as Basham and Sircar who write the name
as Kapisa (A.L Basham, The Wonder that was India, see map on first
page; D.C. Sircar, Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval
India, pp. 51n and 293). Both Kapisam and Kapisam signify
‘spirituous liquor’ (V.S. Apte, op. cit., pp. 334 and 348). It is
possible that this name was given to the place as it came to be
associated with Bacchanalian festivals as a result of Greek influence.
The cultivation and drinking of wine is believed to have been
introduced in the region by Greek settlers during the time of
Cyrus the Great, king of Persia (George Woodstock, The Greeks in
India, pp. 17, 21-2). Kapisa signifies ‘reddish-brown’, or ‘reddish’
which may refer to the colour of wine (V.S. Apte, op. cit., p. 334 ).
However, the name Kapisa may well have been an older name,
especially since the elephant is definitely associated with this place.
There are other scholars such as Narain and Dhavalikar who refer
to the city as Kapiga and Kapisa respectively (A.K. Narain, ‘Ganesa:
The Idea and the Icon’ in Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of

--- Page 79 ---
80 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
an Asian God, pp. 19-48. See, in particular, p. 35; M.K. Dhavalikar,
‘Ganega: Myth and Reality’ in Robert L. Brown, ed., op. cit.,
pp. 49-68, see p. 53), Probably Kapisa (Kapi + isa= Kapisa ) in this
case is shortened to Kapisa. Kapisa appears to refer to the feminine
form of Kapiga. This may have been the name of the tutelary
goddess of the city.

118. A.K. Narain, op. cit., pp. 62-3.

119. A.N. Lahiri, Corpus of Indo-Greek coins, p. 126-7.

120. A.K Narain, op. cit., p. 63.

121. Thomas Watters, op. cit., p. 129.

122. V.M. Apte, op. cit., pp. 621 and 982.

123. Alice Getty, Ganesa, p. 1.

124. Frederick E. Zeuner, A History of Domesticated Animals, p. 286.

125. W.W. Tarn, The Greeks in Bactria and India, p. 164.

126. E.B. Cowell, op. cit., Bk. I, No. 163, pp. 31-4.

127. A.K. Narain, op. cit., p. 53.

128. Ibid., p. 65.

129. Ibid., p. 79.

130. A.N. Lahiri, op. cit., p. 158.

131. Ibid., pp. 145-6.

132. Ibid., pp. 147-8.

133. A.K. Narain, ‘On the Earliest Ganesa’ in J.E. Van Lohuizen De
Leeuw et al., eds., Studies in South Asian Culture, Vol. VII, (Senarat
Paranavitana Commemoration Volume), pp. 142-4.

134. Osmund Bopearachchi, ‘On the So-Called Earliest Representation
of Ganesa’, in Marie-Francoise Boussac and Jean Francois Salles,
eds., Athens, Aden, Ankamedu, pp. 45-73.

135. Ibid., p. 30. The elephant is found on no more than three of
Allan’s nine classes of local Taxila money and only on forty-seven
of the one hundred and seventy one specimens described.

136. Heinrich Zimmer, Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization,
p. 108.

137. Ibid.

138. N.N. Bhattacharya, Ancient Indian Rituals and their Social Content,
pp. 3-5.

139. Ibid., p. 5.

140. Franklin Edgerton, trans. into English, The Elephant Lore of the
Hindus. The Elephant Sport (Matangalila) of Nilakantha, p. 47.

141. Devi Rahasya,, XXV1.54;, Guhyasamaja Tantra , V1.23.

142. Christopher Wilkinson, ‘The Tantric Ganesga: Texts Preserved in
the Tibetan Canon’, in Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of an
Asian God, p. 263.

143. Ibid.

--- Page 80 ---
THE ELEPHANT 8l

144. Ibid., p. 258. (Sri Ajnd Vinivarta Ganapati Sadhanam.)

145. Ibid., pp. 270-4.

146. Ibid., p. 270.

147. Mahaganapatitantra, see Christopher Wilkinson, op. cit., p. 250.

148. V.S. Agrawala, Ancient Indian Folk Cults, pp. 21-3.

149. Richard L. Brubaker, ‘Barbers, Washermen and Other Priests:
Servants of the South Indian Village and its Goddess’, History of
Religions, Vol. 19, No. 2, Nov. 1979, pp. 128-52. See in particular
pp. 136-7.

150. Alf Hiltebeitel, ‘Rama and Gilgamesh: The Sacrifices of the Water
Buffalo and the Bull of Heaven’, History of Religions, Vol. 19, No.3,
Feb. 1980, pp. 187-223. See p. 197.

151. Ibid., p. 190.

152. Alf Hiltebeitel, ‘The Indus-Valley Proto-Siva’, op. cit., p. 791.

153. Pupul Jayakar, The Earth Mother, p. 83.

154. J. Ph. Vogel, Indian Serpent Lore, p. 275.

155. Ralph T.H. Griffith, Hymns of the Atharva Veda, Book VIII, Hymn
X, pp. 350-3.

156. Ibid.

157. G.S. Ghurye, Vedic India, p. 414.

158. R.N. Dandekar, Vedic Mythological Tracts, p. 173.

159. Ibid., p. 174.

160. Ibid., pp. 190-1.

161. Agni Purana, IN.269.14-23.

162. Vayu Purana, 1.1.124.

163. J.Ph.Vogel, op. cit., p. 39.

164. Agni Purana, 1.19.27.

165. Ibid., HI.291.1.

166. Bhagavata Purana, I1.viii.11.14-16.

167. Ibid., I.vi.11.10-11; Padma Purana, 1.67.42-4.

168. Vayu Purana, 1.51.44.

169. Ibid., 1.51.29-31.

170. Franklin Edgerton, op. cit., I.11-12 (pp. 434).

171. E.B. Cowell, op. cit., Vol. IIT, Bk. XVI, No. 514, pp. 20-31.

172. Ibid., Vol. I, Book I, No. 122, pp. 269-71.

173. Rg Veda, X.40.4.

174. In the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad (1.3.22) the term naga is translated
as ‘elephant’ and in the context it makes sense (S. Radhakrishnan,
The Principal Upanisads, p. 161). Similarly, there is reference to
naga side by side with gaja, hasti and kunjara in the old ballad of
the six-tusked elephant known indisputably to be prior to the bas-
reliefs of Bharhut. Cited by A. Foucher in ‘On the Iconography of
Buddha's Nativity’, Memoirs of ASI, No. 46, p. 4.

--- Page 81 ---
82 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

175. V.S. Agrawala, India as known to Panini, p. 218.

176. J. Ph. Vogel, op. cit., p. 33.

177. V.S. Apte, op. cit., p. 734.

178. Mahabharata, Adi Parva, 31.6.

179. D.C. Sircar, ‘Two Brahmi Inscriptions’ in JBRS, Vol. XXXIX,
Pts. 1-2, pp. 41-8; V.S. Agrawala, Ancient Indian Folk Cults, p. 183.

180. Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, Yaksas, Part II, p. 13.

181. [sanasivagurudevapadhati, Vol. 2, 15.20-1.

182. B.M. Barua, Barhut, Bk. III, p. 50.

183. H. Luders, ed., C//, Vol. II, Part II, p. 165.

184. Ibid., p. 168.

185. Bridget and Raymond Allchin, op. cit., p. 214.

186. A. Foucher, ‘On the Iconography of the Buddha's Nativity’, Memoirs
of ASI, No. 46, 1934, p. 11.

187. Ibid., p. 16.

188. J. Ph. Vogel, op. cit., p. 130.

189. A. Foucher, The Beginnings of Buddhist Art, p. 188.

190. Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, op. cit., Pt. I, plate 23.

191. H. Heras, The Problem of Ganapati, p. 28.

192. R.C. Agrawala, ‘Yaksa Torso from Bharatpur Region’, in /O/JB,
Vol. 17, Nos.1-4, 1967-8, pp. 645.

193. Umakant P. Shah, Jaina-Rupa-Mandana (Jaina Iconography), Vol. I,
p. 181.

194. Ibid., p. 183.

195. Ibid., p. 186.

196. Ibid., p. 187.

197. Ibid., p. 172.

198. R.P. Hingorani, Jaina Iconography in Riipmandana, p. 29.

--- Page 82 ---
%
\,
»
9 AREAS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ELEPHANT
pactaia (Pre-Harappan Period up to Circa A.D. 200)
Cn
GagapnOm kk
AFGHANISTAN
KEO ean t
Kapisa CU TTT
e
Canny, 0 dun, © 100 200 300 400 S00
eo |
(Se ~
PAKIS TAINS 7 Mtg ~~ Semon \ aK
Menon ial ° .- a enn oo ann by
Dn ok _
. i \
Morenodao 4% (Mabangen + \ \ xosata woes
© epantu-daro fr) aS \U-y TTT unas = PS
° Anuniiyenes ey nn TT
Sanuaa UL or aan
° ear MAGADKA
3 as Yaudheyas / A -, A.
. ce oN L,
Lothal A \
> ow a ty * 2 A
ot . °
Parl er aye m
wo ® nee,
ae iS
g
( Ri Codeven 4 Bay of Bengal
rt J Ls
| \ sume sail
Arabian Sea hee kn, ~~ &  —_ Evidence of launat rem ains of @ single specimen
ee Yo Of he elephant af a pre-Havappan we. \
um C v © —_Etephant mot! an tevracotis asl end on seasfamuiets = \
\ \ wn he Mature indus penod \
: \ Elephant bones discovered af sites of the
\ \ Mature indus permd. Ly
‘ Rimage of eephant discovered at the Post-
| Hasappan see of Damabad
“ee, A Places named altar the elephant n cca post
\ Chem, 81h contury BC
ws J —Trmes named aller the elephant mn greg post
j @in century BC
\ ~~) A Asoka palarinscr iptions wah image or
ralerence to ine elephant.
\ ° Tribal coins wilh elephant mott
& (Sed - 18t century BC)
. a P\ @ Corns of indo- Greek kings wath etephant mott
\ haitutdie (2nd - 18t century BC)
~/ . Places assocusied with (ne @epnant in
Buddhes! mythology
' + Tooth retics of the Buddha associaied
\ with the elephant
Cad Buddtes! stupas where earkes! representation of the
INDIAN OCEAN elophant-heaced yakse ausis (cwca 2nd century AD)
Map 1. Sites mentioned in Chapter Il.

--- Page 83 ---
CHAPTER 3

Vinayakas and Ganapatis
‘Vinayaka’ and ‘Ganapati’ are among the most popular names of
the elephant-headed deity. Originally, however, these names or
titles were associated with other personalities in the sacred texts.
An analysis of the various Vinayakas and Ganapatis throws light on
the origin of the elephant-headed deity and enables a clearer
understanding of the process of his evolution. There appear to be
three distinct strands that converge in the personality of Ganapati: '
the tradition of the Vinayakas from whom Ganapati inherits his
role of creator of obstacles; the Ganapatis who are leaders of
heavenly hosts and from whom the elephant-headed deity acquires
his position as head of Siva’s gana; and lastly, the concept of a
sacred elephant which is represented by Ganapati’s elephant head.
These diverse traditions coalesce to create a composite deity.

VINAYAKAS
The word ‘Vinayaka’ literally means one without a superior (vi
signifies ‘without’ and nayaka a ‘leader’).? Scholars who have
analysed the origins of Ganapati, consider that the term is used
for the first time in the Manava Grhya Sutra. What seems to have
escaped their attention is the fact that the term appears with a
distinct meaning in the Buddhist context before the period of the
Manava Gryha Sutra or at least betore the section on Vinayakas in
that text.

The first epigraphical evidence of this term is in an
inscription on a stone box found at stupa No. 2 at Sanchi (last
quarter of the second century Bc).* The stone box contained four
small caskets of steatite, each enclosing portions of burnt human
bones of Buddhist saints. Each casket had inscribed the names of
the saints whose mortal remains were contained within it. The
stone box itself had the following inscription:

--- Page 84 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS 85

1. Savina vinayakana aram Kasapa-

2. gotam updaya aram cas vachi-

3. Suvijayitam vinayaka

The translation of this, according to Marshall is: ‘(Relics)
of all the teachers, including ara Kasapogota (Arhat Kasyapa-gotra)
and ara Vachi (Arhat Vatsi) Suvijayita the teacher (or teachers)’.
Whether or not the term ‘vinayaka’ actually means teacher is not
explicit. What is significant is the fact that it is associated with
exalted personalitics. Marshall goes on to point out that these
‘teachers’ belonged to different generations. The name
Kasapagota,’ is found also in inscriptions from the stupas of Sonari
and Andher in the neighbourhood of Sanchi. He was a
contemporary of Asoka. All these ‘teachers’ belonged to different
generations of the same Haimavata school. Therefore, ‘vinayaka’
probably signified a Buddhist spiritual teacher or a saint, at least,
as early as the third century Bc and, possibly, even earlier. It is
certain that the term did not have any derogatory connotation at
this time otherwise it would not have been associated with the
saints. The term continued to have the same meaning in the
Buddhist context even several centuries later. According to the
Amarakosa (c. AD 500) ‘Vinayaka’ signifies one of the names of the
Buddha, a Buddhist deified teacher and a spiritual preceptor. It
also signifies Ganesa, Garuda and Visnu.° So, by the fifth century
Ap, the term was used for some Brahmanical deities as well, other
than the elephant-headed deity.

In the Brahmanical context, the term is used for the first
time in the Mdnava Grhya Sutra, a text of the Krsna Yajur Veda,
where it denotes a group of four demons.® A chapter im this text
describes the wide range of calamities caused by these demons,
which affect virtually every category and age-group of society. The
possessed people develop the following symptoms:

A person possessed, pounds clods, tears grass, writes on his limbs and has
various inauspicious dreams in which he sees waters, men with shaved
heads, men with matted hair, persons wearing red clothes, camels, pigs,
asses, Candalas and so on. He feels that he is moving through the air; and
when walking along the road, he thinks that somebody is pursuing him
from behind. When possessed by these Vinayakas, princes do not get
their kingdoms, although they are otherwise qualified; girls cannot secure
husbands although eager to do so and possess auspicious signs. Women

--- Page 85 ---
86 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

do not get any issue although anxious for and capable of bearing them;
children of virtuous women die; a learned teacher fails to attain the
position of an dcdrya; students face great interruptions in the course of
their study, merchants’ trade fails and agriculture of husbandsmen yields
poor crops.’

The Manava Grhya Sutra then describes the rituals that
must be performed for the propitiation of these Vinayakas. These
include a wide range of offerings that are to be made at the
crossroads of a village, a town or a market place. They include
husked grains, unhusked grains, uncooked and cooked meat, fish,
flourcakes, pounded, fragrant substances, a fragrant beverage, a
white wreath, red, yellow, white, black, blue, green and mult-
coloured garments, beans, fragrant rice, roots and fruits. All these
must be offered with a new winnowing basket.’ Also included in
the ritual is the worship of a host of other associated beings. The
names of the four Vinayakas are Salakatankata, Kusmandarajapuwa,
Usmita and Devyajana. No physical descripuon of them is given,
the term Ganesa or Ganapat is not used and there is no reference
to their association with the elephant.

It is surprising that no attempt has been made to
understand who these four Vinayakas were. The fact that they
have names, shows that they were identities in their own right.
What did they have in common and why were they four in number?
If each had a name, why were they collectively referred to as the
Vinayakas? We also need to ask whether and why the term acquired
a derogatory connotation only within the Brahmanical context. A
fuller understanding of the four personalities does provide some
answers.

SALAKATANKATA
According to the Ramayana,’ Salakatankata is a vamSa (lineage) of
raksasas (demons) like that of the Pulastyas. Ravana’s mother came
from this family. Possibly, Salakatankata was the tutelary deity of
this family which was named after him. The name is also associated
with Skanda. A stanza of the Dhurta Kalpa hymn from the Parisista
of the Atharva Veda, invokes Skanda as follows: ‘Hail to Dharta,
Skanda, Visakha, Pinakasena, ..Salakatankata.’" In the first case it
is clear that Salakatankata referred to a category of people looked
upon as raksasas by the author(s) of the Manava Grhya Sutra. In

--- Page 86 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS 87
the second case, since he is associated with Skanda, Salakatankata
had probably come to be looked upon as a graha (grasper)like so
many other non-Vedic deities. One of Siva’s epithets in the Vayu
Purana is Katankata,!! and in the Mahabharata, Kalakatankata.” If
Siva, as Kalakatankata, was Lord of Time, so also Salakatankata
was perhaps the deity of the sala (Shorea Robusta) tree. This tree is
also associated with the third Jaina Tirthankara, Sambhavanatha,
who is believed to have obtained kevalajndna (highest knowledge)
under a Sala tree." Similarly, even the Buddha died under a group
of sala trees at Kuginagara.'* Neither in the Ramayana nor in the
Dharta Kalpa, is Salakatankata refered to as Vinayaka.

KUSMANDARAJAPUTRA
The name literally means the son of the king of kusmandas. The
term kusmdnda has two meanings. It signifies a kind of pumpkin
gourd and it is also the name of a category of demi-gods in early
Buddhist literature and sculpture. These demi-gods are referred
to as the kusmandas or kumbhandas. In some of the early Buddhist
texts such as the Digha Nikaya, Virudhaka is mentioned as the
Lord of Kumbhandas and guardian of the southern quarter.'° At
Bharhut (mid second century Bc) Viradhaka is sculpted as a
guardian yaksa on the corner pillar of the South Gate. An
inscription beside the sculpture confirms the identity of the yaksa.'°
The kusmandas and Virudhaka are also depicted on the Sanchi
gateways. Although the former are depicted as bandy legged, pot-
bellied, huge headed and short armed little dwarfs, their leader,
Virudhaka, is shown with no such deformity.’

In the literature of a later period, references to the
kusmandas make it quite clear that they were a tribe or clan. In
one of the Jatakas, the name of one of the kusmanda chiefs is
Kumbhira. He is otherwise called a yaksa who lived on the Vepulla
mountain outside the city of Rajagrha.'* This is the region where
Buddhism initially developed, which accounts for the early
association of the kusmanda people and their deity with Buddhism.
There are other references in Buddhist literature to the chiefs of
kumbhandas, kuSmandas or kusmandas (kumbhanda-ganendras),
invariably in the plural and in a mythologised form." Further
information on the kusmandas can be gleaned from the Puranas.
Although the Puranas belong to a later period than the Manava

--- Page 87 ---
S8 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Grhya Sutra they do throw some important light on this category
of beings. According to the Vayu Purana, the kusmandas are one of
sixteen pairs of pisdca twins, each pair comprising of a boy and a
girl.*? Possibly, this implies that the kusmandas were one of sixteen
pisaca clans or tribes. Each pair of twins probably represented the
progenitors of a different clan or tribe. This evokes the sibling
marriage symbolism associated with origin myths of many ksatriya
lineages that were the founders of the janapadas (Republics) in
the mid-first millenium Bc, such as the Licchavis or the Sakyas.”!
Many of these ksatriya families were associated with the Buddha,
Mahavira and other heterodox teachers. Such myths of marriages
between twins enabled the clans to claim purity of lineage since
each was descended of parents of identical blood. Since the
hkusmandas are referred to as pisacas which have the same
connotation as asuras or raksasas in Brahmanical literature, they
were probably people who did not abide by Brahmanical norms.
They also appear to have been associated with the ndgas because
the name kusmanda appears as one of the numerous naga names
in the epics.”?

On the basis of both sculptural and literary evidence, it is
clear that some kusmanda chiefs had adopted Buddhism in the
centuries preceding the Christian era. Their deities found a place
in the growing Buddhist pantheon. Virtdhaka, probably a tutclary
yaksa of the kusmandas, had become one of the four Buddhist
lokapalas. During this period when Buddhist mythology was
developing and had acquired Kubera, Dhrtarastra, Virupaksa and
Virtidhaka as the lokapalas,"* the Brahmanical guardian deities of
the quarters were still eight Vedic divinities. They were Indra,
Vayu, Yama, the Pitarah, Varuna, Maharaja or Kubera, Soma,
Mahendra, with Vasuki in the nadir and Brahma in the zenith.*4
The Manu Smrti mentions them as Indra, Vavu, Yama, the Sun,
Agni, Varuna, Soma and Kubera.”> Even in the Puranas, the
Brahmanical guardians of the quarters were never the same as
those of the Buddhists, with the exception of Kubera whe was
common to both traditions. They are generally described as Indra,
Yama, Varuna and Kubera.”’ At other times there are references
to the diggayas (elephants of the quarters) or the digndgas (serpents
of the quarters).

The kusmandas, yaksas, pisdcas and ndagas appear to have
been closely associated with each other. Viradhaka, a kusmanda, is

--- Page 88 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS. 89
depicted in later Buddhist art with the helmet made of the skin of
an elephant’s head.””? Hsuan Tsang, when describing the Four
Lords who divide Jambudvipa when no one has the fate to be
universal sovereign over that island, refers to the Lord of the
South (Virudhaka) as the Elephant-Lord.” While describing the
different pairs of pisdca twins, the Vayu Purana refers to one pair
as vakra and vakramukhi.™ The term vakra does not mean just
twisted but rather turned or twisted backwards as only the wunk
of an elephant can be. A later epithet of Ganapati is Vakratunda
which conveys the same idea.

The word kusmanda appears in the Taittiriya Aranyaka
where a special kusmanda homa (oblation to the gods) is prescribed
for a man who regards himself as impure. In this case the term
signifies a kind of pumpkin gourd. By offering a sacrifice with
kusmandas, accompanied by the appropriate mantras (incantations),
a man is able to purify himself. It is prescribed that a person
performing such a homa must shave his head as well as his upper
lip. He must also abstain from eating flesh. What could have been
the origin of this rite? Was there any link between this rite and the
people called kusmandas? The Vayu Purana states that ‘the Pisacas
called Kusmandikas are devoid of hair on their heads or bodies.
Skins and hides constitute their garments. They always eat gingelly
seeds and flesh."*! Is it coincidence that performers of the kusmanda
homa had to shave their heads and abstain from cating flesh? I
wonder whether the origin of the kusmanda homa in the Taittiriya
Aranyaka was in any way related to contact of a category of Vedic
priests of the Arsna Yajur Veda with this very clan or tribe whose
name is associated with a particular plant. Possibly, the kusmdnda,
or pumpkin gourd, was an ancient totem of the kusmanda clan or
tribe who derived their name from it. Perhaps it was to ward off
the contaminating effect of contact with these and other similar
people that this rite was elaborated by the Vedic priests. In that
case, was such a ritual appropriated from the people referred to
as the kusmandas and converted into a Vedic ritual? There is a
similar process described in the Puranas where it is said that by
visiting a certain pisdcatirtha the devotee avoids the possibility of
becoming a pisaca.”” It is more likely that the firtha (place of
pilgrimage) was originally associated with the pisacas and then

included in the Brahmanical list of ti7thas. The association remained
but in an inverse sense. The reference to the kusmandas appears

--- Page 89 ---
90 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

only in texts of the Krsna Yajur Veda. Even the Padma Purana states
that priests of the Yajur Veda should recite a hymn addressed to
the demons called kusmdandas.**

In the modern context the pisacas are believed to be the
ghosts of those men who were either mad, dissolute or violent-
tempered.* As malignant spirits, they are believed to possess
individuals and have to be placated in order to rid the individual
of them. An impending spirit attack usually announces itelf through
certain omens in dreams. Symptoms of dizziness and nightmares
are also widespread among victims of spirit attack.* In case of
possession, sometimes the spirit demands a full ritual worship or
an annual sacrifice.*° This sounds very similar to Vinayaka
possession and shows how certain concepts persist and how the
term pisdca has continued to have a maleficient connotation even
in present times.

USMITA
There does not appear to be any reference to this name in the
sources that I have consulted. It may have signified a local deity
popular in the region where the Manava Grhya Sutra was compiled.

DEVAYAJANA
The word literally means the worship of or sacrifice to the deva.
The term deva signifies both ‘god’ and ‘spiritual guide’. The term
Devayajana signifies the worship of certain non-Vedic divinities or
spiritual guides. The worship or sacrifice to these deities or spiritual
guides must have been performed by some brahmanas for material
gain and they must have, consequently, been looked down upon.
There is epigraphical reference to a grant being made to a
brahmana of the Taittiriya sakha of the Krsna Yajur Veda by the
Vakataka Pravarasena II. The brahmana is reterred to as gana-yajin
(one who performs sacrifices on behalf of various categories and
groups other than the ones prescribed in the Vedic texts) and the
grant was possibly made to him on the occasion of a gana-yajna at
which he officiated as priest. Pravarasena is stated to be a devotee
of MaheSvara.*” Numerous cults were associated with Siva which
did not form part of Vedic tradition. The Manu Smrti refers to the
performers of yajna for the ganas and excludes such persons from
the funeral feast.”

--- Page 90 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS 9]

The four Vinayakas, therefore, represented certain people

and practices in the region of the middle Ganga basin, that were
viewed with hostility by adherents to the Vedic tradition in that
same region. These beliefs and practices must have been
widespread to eventually find expression in the Manava Grhya
Sutra. In the description of the dreams which result as a
consequence of possession by the Vinayakas, the reference to the
sight of men with shaven heads, matted hair and those clad in red
garments is significant. The shaven heads suggest the kusmandas
or the Buddhists, the red robes indicate the Buddhist monks, and
the matted hair points to the ascetics of the Yoga and Samkhya
schools or to the early Pasupata Saivas. Equally significant is the
fact that the Vinayakas first find mention in a domestic manual,
and one which is associated with the region where Buddhism,
Jainism and several other new faiths originated and developed.
The brahmanas of the Maitrayaniya School, to which the Manava
Grhya Sutra adheres, were associated mainly with the region between
modern Gujarat and Banaras.”

The Manava Grhya Sutra is closely related to the Varaha
Grhya Sutra, which, although also belonging to the Maitrayaniya
School, does not mention the Vinayakas. Similarly, the Aathaka
Grhya Sutra, the manual of another school of the Krsna Yajur Veda,
that of the Kathakas, does not mention the Vinayakas. Yet. these
three domestic manuals are otherwise very closely related." It is
probably the difference in the region of their compilation which
is responsible for such minor variation. The Kathaka Grhya Sutra
was mainly followed by the brahmanas of Kashmir.’ The demonic
beings described as the Vinayakas by the Manava Grhya Sutra are
associated with the region of the middle Ganga plain. This region
witnessed the development of numerous non-Vedic sects and
philosophies in the mid-first millenium Bc. During the Mauryan
period, Jainism and then Buddhism received royal patronage and
became the greatest rivals of the declining Vedic religion.

To the individual, domestic rites were more important
than the elaborate Vedic rituals which only a very limited section
of society could afford and perform. The only way in which the
brahmana priests could find a large and satisfied clientele was by
acknowledging certain existing beliefs and practices among the
common people or by creating new rites to satisfy their needs. All
aspired to prosperity, progeny, beauty and health. Popular
superstition about evil spirits being the obstacles to the realisation

--- Page 91 ---
92 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

of these desires necessitated such rites. They were, therefore,
prescribed by the Mdnava Grhya Sutra. Rival deities and cults were
held responsible for all calamities and made into demons. The
rites associated with them were absorbed into the framework of
Brahmanism.

The Vinayakas are associated with a host of demonic
beings: Vimukha, Syena, Baka, Yaksa, Kalaha, Bhiru, Vinayaka,
Kusmandarajaputra, Yagnhaviksepi, Kulangapamara, Yupakesi,
Suparakrodi, Haimavata, Jambhaka. Virupaksa, Lohitaksa,
Vaisravana, Mahasena, Mahadeva and Maharaja.” An analysis of
these beings will throw more light on the idenuty of the Vinayakas.

Syena (hawk) and Vimukha (ugly face or one without a
face) could well refer to some pisaca deities.” The pisdcas are
described in the Puranas as having all kinds of strange faces. Those
called Arkamarkas have the forms of monkeys while those called
Panipatras have stout heads like those of elephants and camels. *
Baka is described as a man-eating raksasa in the Mahabharata.”
The Vayu Purana describes Baka and Yaksa as the brothers of
Purnabhadra and Maniman. Their father, Manivara, is stated to
be the brother of Manibhadra* the famous yaksa associated with
the region of Rajagrha. The Jambhakas appear to be a category of
bhitas in the Samavidhana Brahmana of the Sukla Yajur Veda which
lays down special rites for bringing them under control.*’ Clearly,
these were local gods or deified ancestors or leaders who, from
the Brahmanical perspective, were demons.

Kusmandarajaputra (Virudhaka), Maharaja, Vaisravana and
Virupaksa are names of the Buddhist lokapalas as described earlier.
Whereas for the Buddhists, Virupaksa is the Lord of Nagas,
Brahmanical literature refers to him as a danava® or a raksasa.”
The name Haimavata is also associated with Buddhism. It is in the
masculine gender and there is no deity by this name in either the
Buddhist or the Brahmanical pantheons. Yet, as indicated earlier,
the teachers mentioned in the casket inscription of the stupa at
Sanchi, all belonged to the Haimavata school. This may then be
an oblique reference to the tradition, which that group of teachers
represents. What is interesting is the reference to a single Vinayaka
as one of a host of demonic beings associated with the four
Vinayakas. Who he represents is not clear. Possibly it refers to the
concept of the Buddhist spiritual leader if not to the Buddha
himself.

--- Page 92 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS 93

The inclusion of Mahasena and Mahadeva indicates that
the Vinayakas were associated not only with Buddhism but also
with the non-Brahmanical Siva and his entourage. Although Rudra
is acknowledged as a deity in later Vedic religion, the Siva of the
non-Vedic tradition is associated with numerous other beings that
are not mentioned in the Vedic texts. Some form of sectarian
worship of Siva appears to have been in existence from as early as
the fourth century Bc. although at this stage, Sivaism, as a definite
religious group with its own tenets and theology, had not come
into being. The earliest Saivas were the non-Vedic Pasupatas and
the deity they worshipped was probably closely associated with
Yoga. The yogis and ascetics, like the Buddhists, did not dif-
ferentiate between castes. Sidras and outcastes could join their
orders as readily as they could the Buddhist samgha. There were
parallels between the pramdthas of Siva and the army of the
Buddhist maras, between the worship of the linga and that of the
Buddhist votive stupa.

If the kusmandas,Virupaksa and other yaksas form part of
the Buddhist mythology at an early stage, they were later associated
with the Brahmanical Siva as well. In the Puranas, Kusmanda
becomes a gana of Siva, all kusmdndas being represented by the
one. Iconographically he is depicted as a stout, dwarf-like dancing
figure®! like the kusmandas of the stupa at Sanchi. Virtpaksa
becomes an aspect of Siva and is described as one of the Rudras. ”
Kubera is closely associated with Siva and, with him, a host of
other yaksas and raksasas, including Salakatankata, are also
indirectly associated with him. The Puranic deity Ganapau-Vinayaka
remains distinct from Kusmanda, Virupaksa, Salakatankata and
others.

This brings us to the question as to why Salakatankata,
Kusmandarajaputra, Usmita and Devayajana were identified as
Vinayakas by the authors of the Manava Grhya Sutra. If, in the
Buddhist context, the term signified one without an equal in
spiritual achievement, in the Brahmanical context it signified one
without an equal in evil. Had the term originally had a negative
connotation it is unlikely that it would have been used by the
Buddhists to denote their saints. The term is used specifically by
the brahmana authors of the Manava Grhya Sutra in a derogatory
context to express their antagonism against rival religious sects,
especially the Buddhists. Such antagonism between rival faiths is

--- Page 93 ---
94 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

manifest in several texts and icons during the succeeding centuries.
Some such examples, even if they belong to a later period, permit
a clearer understanding of the phenomenon taking place in the
creation of the Vinayakas.

The Puranas are sometimes explicit in their denunciation
of rival sects. The Brahmanda Purana states: ‘Formerly, in the bate
between the devas and the asuras, the asuras were defeated. They
created the heretics like Vrddhasravakas, Nirgranthas (nude Jainas),
Sakyas (Buddhists), Jivaskas and Karpatas.’** Here the Buddhists
and others are clearly equated with asuras and this idea appears to
be inherent in the concept of Vinayakas in the earlier Manava
Grhya Sutra. There is a constant lament in the Puranas for ‘the
danger and fear to people owing to wrong performance of sacri-
fices, neglect of (Vedic) studies ... misleading religious scriptures
and faults in the performance of holy rites of brahmanas’.** Regret
is also expressed about the fact that ‘people do not accept the
authority of the Smrtis’.*°

A similar antagonistic attitude exists in certain Buddhist
texts where Siva, Visnu, Brahma and Indra are described as dusta-
raudra-devatas (mischievous, terrible deities) and designated as catur-
maras, or ‘the four evil ones’.”’ If the Buddha and his lokapalas are
Vinavyakas (demons) from the Brahmanical point of view, the four
principal Brahmanical deities become maras from the Buddhist
point of view. According to the Bhaktisataka by Ramacandra,
‘Brahma is overpowered by avidya, Visnu is embraced by great
usion by which it is difficult to discriminate, Sankara holds Parvati
in his own person, owing to excessive attachment, but in this
world the great muni, the Lord, is without avidyé, without illusion,
and without attachment’. There are several early medieval
representauons of Brahmanical deities being wampled under the
feet of Buddhist Gods. The Buddhist remover of obstacles,
Vighnantaka, trampling upon the Brahmanical Ganapati is only
one such example.” In another example the Buddhist goddess
Manjusri holds Ganapati prostrate under one foot.

A further comparison with present day belief in spirits
would not be out of place here. In the course of his research on
traditional Indian methods of healing ‘psychic distress’,
psychoanalyst, Sudhir Kakar, describes how many patients claimed
to be possessed by a Muslim spirit. In his words, ‘the Muslim
seems to be the symbolic representation of the alien in the Hindu

--- Page 94 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS 95
unconscious. Possession by a Muslim bhita reflects the patients’
desperate efforts to convince himself and others that his hungers
for forbidden foods, tumultuous sexuality and uncontrollable rage
belong to the Muslim destroyer of taboos and are farthest away
from his ‘good’ Hindu self.’ Similarly, from the perspective of
the Vedic priest, the Buddhists, Pasupatas and others of the
heterodox tradition all represented everything that was alien to
him and they were collectively blamed for the ills in society.

The Vinayakas are, therefore, not original deities, but an
epithet given to a concept: that of the vighnakartas (creators of
obstacles). This concept had existed since the earliest umes. The
vighnakartas are personified in the Manava Grhya Sutra as the more
important rival deities which existed in the region where this text
was composed and which had been absorbed into the Buddhist
fold. Each deity keeps his original name but they are collectively
named after the greatest of rivals, the Buddhist spiritual guide if
not the Buddha himself. The fact that a term associated with the
highest of Buddhists is selected to nominate what are described as
demonic beings by the author(s) of the Manava Grhya Sutra, is
significant. Eventually, this term loses its negative connotation,
not because the elephant-headed Ganapati evolves from a
maleficient to a beneficient being, but because the term did not
have a negative meaning in the first place, except in a limited
number of Brahmanical texts.

The four personalities which the Manava Grhya Sutra
names as the Vinayakas are probably meant to evoke the idea of
the four directions. Brahmanism saw itself threatened from all
sides by rival faiths. That is why every category of society—men,
women, children, kings, students and others—is described by the
Manava Grhya Sitra as being prone to Vinayaka possession which
resulted in the worst conceivable tragedies and disasters. The
concept of the four Vinayakas representing the four directions
finds expression, several centuries later, at the pillar at Ghatiyala
established by King Kakkuka of the Pratihara dynasty in samvat
919 (ap 861). This pillar is surmounted by four images of Ganapati
facing the four quarters.”

The Vinayakas evolve into one being with four names in
the Ydajnavalkya Smrti (second/third century aD). This Vinayaka is
stated to have been created by Brahma and Rudra for the purpose
of creating obstacles.*? Whereas in the Manava Grhya Sutra seven

--- Page 95 ---
96 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

goddesses personifying Beauty, Prosperity and other such qualities
are invoked after the worship of the Vinayakas and their
demoniacal entourage,® in the Yajravalkya Smrti Ambika alone is
invoked. She is worshipped along with Vinayaka for granting the
very qualities personified by the seven goddesses in the Manava
Grhya Sutra. The worship of Ambika is followed by that of the
grahas and finally that of Aditya (Sun). The concluding line of the
chapter states that he who applies tlaka to Swami (Karttikeya)
and Mahaganapati obtains all success.™

Vinayaka was absorbed into the Brahmanical pantheon
and his worship was associated with that of Ambika, Siva and
Skanda. Mahaganapati, no doubt, refers to Siva in this context.
Vinayaka acquires that tide not before the end of the sixth or the
seventh century aD. In the early centuries of the Christian era, the
epithet remains an appellation for Siva. The Yajnavalkya Smrti is a
text of the Sukla Yajur Veda and in the Yajur Veda the epithet
Ganapati is applied to Rudra.® Most of the demoniacal beings
that are worshipped along with the Vinayakas in the Manava Grhya
Sutra are associated with Mahadeva. If these beings now no longer
find mention, it is because they are all personified by Mahaganapati
(Siva), even as all the mothers are personified by Ambika and the
four Vinayakas by the one Vinayaka. Mahasena was already
associated with Siva in the Manava Grhya Sitra and had grown in
importance since. He is, therefore, mentioned separately. It is
unlikely that the worship of Vinayaka could include that of Ambika,
the grahas, Aditya and Skanda and ignore that of Siva. Therefore,
I consider that Mahaganapati refers to Siva. If, however, the term
does signify Vinayaka, then this last line is a verv late interpolation
(post seventh century).

There is a Vinayaka Kalpa in the Narada Purana® which is
similar to that of the Yajnavalkya Smrii.” These sections of the
Yajnavalkya Smrti and the Narada Purana represent a second stage
in the development of the personality of Vinayaka. He has become
a well established concept. He is associated with Rudra, Ambika,
Skanda and the grahas. The association with the grahas comes
about quite naturally because of the evils that he causes. Yet, being
derivative of different local deities, there is no indication of his
having any particular image. No physical descripuon of him is
given. The epithet Ganapati is not associated with him nor is
there any indication of a link with the elephant.

--- Page 96 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS 97
Some of the references in the Puranas, to the many
Vinayakas, probably belong to the earliest layers of these texts,
perhaps between the third and fifth centuries of the Christian era.
They are mentioned along with bhitaraksasas, bhramaraksasas,
guhyakas, gandharvas, apsaras, siddhas, devas, dakinis and ksetrapalas
as forming the entourage of Siva. Elsewhere, there is reference
to ‘the cruel ones belonging to Skanda, Vinayaka, Pramatha and
Guhyaka which are greatly inimical and terrible’.” Even the single
Vinayaka in some Puranas appears as a minor and maleficient
being and he does not seem to be associated with the elephant. It
would be misleading to identify every reference to ‘Vinayaka’ in
the Puranas with the elephant-headed deity. It is not obvious in all
cases. In one version of Siva’s fight with Andhakasura in the Kurma
Purana, Andhaka is said to create thousands of daityas called
Andhakas. Eight of these Andhakas are said to be prominent and
they include Meghanada and Vinayaka. Siva cannot defeat Andhaka
and finally seeks refuge in Visnu. Finally, by the grace of Visnu,
Andhaka is defeated by Siva, praises him and gains the chieftancy
of the ganas. Meghanada is the son of Ravana in the Ramayana
(therefore related to Salakatankata). If Vinayaka is associated with
him he is, quite evidently, equated with the raksasas. There is no
indication of his being the son or a gana of Siva. Skanda is not
mentioned along with him. At this stage the epithet ‘GaneSa’ does
not appear to be associated with Vinayaka.
GANAPATI/GANESVARA/GANESA
The term ‘Ganapati’ is used in early Vedic literature as an
appellation for several deities. In the Rg Veda it is used for
Brhaspati” as well as for Indra.” In the literature of the Yajur
Veda,”* however, it denotes Rudra. The epithet Ganapati has no
negative connotation. The term ‘gana’ signifies a ‘multitude’ in
the Vedic context. It also signifies the followers of a deity or cult
associated with specific regions or categories of society. According
to the Milindapanha, followers of different cults under the guidance
of a spiritual head were referred to as ganas.’”* Evidently, there
were numerous ganas. Some of the heads of the better known
sects had a specific title. Makkhali GoSala of the Ajivikas is referred
to as Gananayaka and Nigantha Nataputta (Mahavira) of the Jainas,
as Ganacharya.”* The Lalitavistara refers to the Ganapatis (in plural)

--- Page 97 ---
98 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

along with a long list of deities which include Brahma, Indra,
Rudra, Visnu, Devi, Kumara, Matr, Aditya, Vaisravana, the nagas,
yaksas, gandharvas, kumbhandas, pisacas, etc.”” Krsna in the Maha-
bhdrata is referred to as Suraganesvara.”° Similarly, Siva is refer-
red to as Ganadhipa.”” The terms GaneSa, Ganesvara, Ganadhipa
and Ganapati are synonymous since they all mean ‘lord of the
gana’. In that respect, some of the four Vinayakas were also Ganesas
since they were deities of a category of people.

The epithet ‘GaneSa’ is frequently used for the various
ganas of Siva who act as doorkeepers. Sati, on her way to Daksa’s
sacrifice, is accompanied by ‘eight hundred groups of the thousand
strong-armed Ganeéas equal in brilliance to Lord Siva’. The
attendants at the portals of Siva’s abode are referred to as Ganeéas. ”
According to one Purana, all those who eulogise and worship
Mahadeva at Varanasi are forgiven all sins. They then become
Ganesvaras.”’ ‘Ganesvara’ is also an epithet of Siva®' and so are
‘Vighnesvara’ (Lord of Obstacles) ® and Vighnakaraka (Creator of
obstacles).*3 In fact, Siva is worshipped by many names which
include those of his ganas - Nandin, Nandisvara, Kumara, Skanda
and GaneSsvara. What is striking is that he is not referred to as
Vinayaka.™

The first time that the Vinayakas are acknowledged as
Ganesvaras is in the Mahabharata, where the Ganesvara-Vinayakas
are described as the Lords of all the worlds (/svarah sarva-lokanam
ganesvaravinayakah)." Although it is not specifically stated that
there are four Vinayakas, since the term is used in the plural, we
can presume it does, indeed, imply four. They are mentioned
along with several other deities including Nandisvara, the
Rudragana, bhutagana, yogagana, naksatra, the rivers, seas,
Himalayas, Skanda and Ambika. They are no longer demons, but
one category of numerous deities that Bhisma advises Yudhisthira
to worship. This worship ensures the destruction of all sins. These
Ganesvara-Vinayakas appear in the same role as the Buddhist
lokapatas, the diggajas and the dignagas. With the rise of Siva and
Visnu_ several local cults, each represented by its Ganapati or
Ganesvara, are recognized by the Brahmanical religion. As these
numerous Ganésvaras find acceptance, so do the Vinayakas. The
adding of the tide GaneSvaras (which has no negative connotation)
to the epithet Vinayakas, confirms this acceptance.

Elsewhere in the Mahabharata the Vinayakas, again in the

--- Page 98 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS 99
plural, are referred to as evil beings associated with pisdcas, bhutas
and raksasas*® all of whom are believed to be responsible for
creating obstacles. This description belongs to the earliest portions
of the Mahabharata, and would be more or less contemporary with
the chapter on Vinayakas in the Manava Grhya Sutra, or perhaps a
little later but certainly before the Christian era. The Anusasana
Parva is believed to contain some of the latest additions to the
epic®’ and this would perhaps explain how the evil Vinayakas of
the Santi Parva become the Ganefévara-Vinayakas worthy of worship
in the Anusasana Parva. This portion of the Mahabharata probably
belongs to the second century AbD, and is a little earlier than the
section in the Yajnavalkya Smrti where the four Vinayakas have
merged into one.

If the Vinayakas are viewed as demons around the second
century Bc, by about the end of the second century aD they are
identified with the GaneSvaras and begin to find acceptance as
deities in their own right. However, they continue to form part of
the entourage of Siva. By the end of the third century they have
evolved into a single being who does not appear to have an
iconographical form at this stage. How was he to be represented
since he was a syncretism of several cults? Perhaps an icono-
graphical form was not even necessary since he formed part of
special domestic rites and did not require daily worship. Besides,
did Jambha, Syena and so many other ganas have an iconographical
form?

At this stage Vinayaka is still distinct from the elephant
deity. There is no evidence that the early images of an elephant
headed figure are indeed those of the syncretic Vinayaka-Ganapati.
Brahmanical literature, prior to the Christian era, makes no
reference to such a deity and existing references are generally
accepted as being later interpollations.** How and when does the
merger between Ganapati-Vinayaka and the elephant deity take
place?

VINAYAKA-GANAPATI-ELEPHANT DEITY
The earliest references to an elephant deity in Brahmanical
literature are in the Mahabharata. In the Sabha Parva, one of the
personalities present in Kubera’s abode is Danti. He is mentioned
along with Sankukarna, Kutimukha and Kastha who form part of

--- Page 99 ---
100 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Siva’s retinue.*? Skanda is not mentioned. When Skanda and
Ganapati-Vinayaka become sons of Siva and, therefore, brothers,
they are usually mentioned together in descriptions of Siva’s
entourage. In this case Danti is just one of Siva’s retinue. There
is no indication of him being a son or a gana of any particular
importance. In addition, there is reference to a yaksa by the name
of Gajakarna (elephant ears) in the retinue of Kubera.” This would
suggest that just as there were several naga deities, similarly, there
was more than one elephant deity. The Mahabharata, elsewhere,
has a long list of deities to be worshipped for the removal of sins.
These include Siva, Skanda, Ambika, the Ganesvara-Vinayakas,
various ganas and a deity called Mahakaya (one with a huge body).”!
Since Siva is already mentioned, this is possibly a reference to the
elephant deity. It is ue that Mahakaya is an epithet of Siva, but
it is essentially used for him in the Siva Sahasranadma (thousand
names of Siva). The term is also an epithet for Ganapati® and one
of the saktis associated with him is referred to as Mahakaya.** Among
the most popular slokas for Ganapat, is the one where he is invoked
as:

Vakratunda Mahakaya surya koti sama prabha

Nirvighnam kuru me deva sarvakaryesu sarvada.

O Lord with the twisted trunk, the huge body and

the brilliance of a million suns,

May you always rid me of all obstacles, in all I do.

In fact, many of the epithets of Siva are those of minor
deities associated with him and with each other. Nandisvara is
an epithet of Siva but it is also the name of a gana. Nandin is
the name of Siva’s bull but also another name for the gana
Nandisvara.”” Similarly, Mahakaya does not appear to represent
any particular aspect of Rudra-Siva as depicted in Vedic, epic or
early Puranic literature. There are Puranic myths about the giant
linga of fire, but the term Mahakaya is descriptive of some being
having an enormous body. It is possible that it refers to an elephant
deity. The epithet ‘Mahodara’ (having a large stomach) is
frequently associated with Ganapati especially in the Ganapatya
Puranas. Yet the latter is obviously an allusion to his human form
with pot-belly. Mahakaya is a more appropriate description for the
earlier elephant form.

--- Page 100 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS_ 10]
These references throw light on an important phase in
the evolution of Ganapati. They point to the existence of an
elephant deity along with the GaneSsvara-Vinayakas in Siva’s
entourage. The elephant deity appears to have been accepted
into the Brahmanical Siva’s pantheon, as a minor deity, at a
relatively early date. In this new situation, neither Danti nor the
Ganeévara-Vinayakas seem to have any negative connotation.
Danti is mentioned in two other texts of the Arsna Yajur
Veda, the Maitrayani Samhita and the Taittir'ya Aranyaka. Both texts
contain a gayatri to an elephant-god where he is invoked as Vakra-
tunda, Danti and Hastimukha. None of these gdyatris mentions
Vinayaka or GaneSvara. Danti remains an epithet rarely used for
Ganapati-Vinayaka. The epithet Hastimukha (elephant face)
suggests that the deity has a human body but the face of an elephant.
These gayatris are generally considered to have been interpolated
at a period when Ganapati had become an important god. How-
ever, since the form of the elephant-headed yaksa exists from
about the second century of the Christian era and since, as I have
already discussed, this form is not the syncretic deity Ganapati-
Vinayaka but simply the elephant deity, it is possible that this
interpolation was made as early as the second or third centuries AbD.
In the first two or three centuries of the Christian era, the
Vinayakas are mentioned only in the Mahabharata and in the
literature of the Krsna Yajur Veda. Similarly, Danti also finds
mention both in the Mahabharata and in the texts of the Arsna
Yajur Veda. The region associated with the Krsna Yajur Veda texts
included what had been the stronghold of Buddhism since the
time of the Buddha himself. The cult of the elephant was also
associated with this area. This was precisely the region where the
threat to the Brahmanical religion from rival cults was the strongest,
thereby giving rise to the concept of Vinayakas. Even references to
the Vinayak.as and Danti in the Mahabharata are limited to certain
editions which shows that the tradition was restricted to specific
regions and was only reflected in texts associated with those regions.
Like the Vinayakas, the elephant deity was not widely acknowledged
or accepted by Brahmanism at this stage. It was restricted to a
particular area and toa certain category of brahmanas.
At a first stage, the propitiation of the Vinayakas became
an established practice. At a second stage, they evolved into a
single being. Finally, they came to require an iconographical form

--- Page 101 ---
102 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

in a milieu where iconography was developing and where rituals
of worship necessitated the use of images. No form existed since
the Vinayakas were derivative deities. Yet, two of the Vinayakas
had a link with the elephant. Virupaksa, one of the deities who
forms part of the entourage of the four Vinayakas, is described as
the Lord of nagas but depicted as an elephant when, along with
Airavata, he stands as one of the eight diggajas.*° Kusmanda-
rajaputra, one of the four Vinayakas, as described earlier, is also
associated with the elephant. The GaneSvara-Vinayakas in the
Mahabharata play the same role as the diggajas and dignagas. They
are, therefore, equated with the elephants and serpents of the
quarters. The ndagas, kusmandas, pisacas and yaksas were all closely
related and form part of the antecedents of the Vinayakas. Some
of them are also associated with the elephant. Since the elephant
was the deity of a particular group of people, he must have had
his own gana. He was, therefore, a Ganesa or Ganapati in his own
right. The rituals for the four deities, collectively referred to as
the Vinayakas, and for Danu must have been similar, outside the
Brahmanical fold.

Worship of some of the more famous nagas was gradually
adopted into the Brahmanical tradition. In the early centuries of
the Christian era, the brahmana priests of the Maitrayaniya school
were especially associated with the worship of Manibhadra or
Maninaga.”’ Manibhadra is both a yaksa and a naga and was famous
in the region of Rajagrha. Two of the demonic beings that are to
be placated along with the Vinayakas, Baka and Yaksa, were
associated with Manibhadra. It was within this same school of the
Maitrayaniyas that the concept of Vinayakas had emerged and it is
within a text of this school, the Maitrayani Samhita, that Danti
finds early menuon. The rituals for Vinayaka propitiation, borrowed
from outside the Brahmanical tradition, must have been similar
to the rituals associated with the naga deities, including those of
the elephant deity. Vinayaka had become one deity by the time
of the Yajnavalkya Smrti. He had lost his evil connotation. Since
both the Vinayakas and Danti find mention essentially in the works
of the Maitrayaniya School in a particular region, and since there
are parallels between them, it is likely that the two are gradually
identified with each other by the Maitrayaniya braéhmanas in the
region of the middle Ganga basin around the fourth century aD
or so. However, it is only in the Saiva Puranas that Ganapati-

--- Page 102 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS 103
Vinayaka acquires the myths and personality that we know today.
Probably, the manufacture and worship of Ganapati icons was also
popularised by the Saivas.

The iconographical form of the elephant-headed yaksa
already existed (Amaravati, second century Ap)."° It was distinct to
the form of Airavata (elephant figure with four tusks) and the
symbol of the Buddha’s conception (an elephant with six tusks)
and was accepted as the form for the syncretistc deity Ganapat-
Vinayaka-sacred elephant. Some Saiva myths attempt to explain
why the elephant-headed figure has the name Vinayaka. After all,
there are numerous heads of ganas so why is only one referred to
as Vinayaka. In the Skanda Purana, Siva tells Parvati that the head
is normally considered to be the leader (nayaka) of the body.
Since Ganapati’s head is so large, it represents a greater leader
than the normal head. Therefore, he is named Mahavinayaka. *”

The elephant-headed yaksa from Amaravati and the one
from Mihintale in Sri Lanka have often been quoted in discussions
relating to Ganapati’s origins. Distinction, however, must be made
between Ganapati and the elephant headed yaksa. The latter
represents only one aspect of Ganapati’s origin whereas Ganapati
represents the syncretistic deity Vinayaka-Ganapati-elephant.
Therefore, I prefer to refer to these representations as those of
the elephantheaded yaksa or as incipient Ganapatis. Five elephant-
headed figures also appear on the lowest band of a fragmentary
relief of the Kusana period found at Mathura.’ These are also
considered by some scholars to represent the five Vinayakas.
However, the bas-relief is badly damaged making it difficult to
determine whether the elephant figures are similar to the elephant-
headed yaksa of the Amaravati sculpture. In the case of the figure
in the centre, the proboscis is turned to the proper left, a common
feature of the Ganapati statues of the Gupta period from Mathura
and elsewhere.'”! Yet, the band of the frieze on which these images
are sculpted is only partly preserved. There is no knowing if it was
not a motif which covered an extended portion of the frieze.
Secondly, even if the number is actually five, it does not necessarily
associate this image with the concept of four or five Vinayakas.
Five is an important number in both Mahayana Buddhism as also
in Sivaism and was probably used for a variety of representations
since it was considered auspicious. In fact, on the second band,
just above the five elephant figures, are sculpted the busts of five

--- Page 103 ---
104 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

worshippers while the top-most band has the design of a railing.
The relief dates to around the same time as the Amaravat elephant-
headed yaksa. It may well have been a purely decorative mouf,
forming part of a Buddhist or Jaina stupa since most of the products
of the Mathura School of Art under the Kusanas were Buddhist or
Jaina images. One of the common themes in the decoration on
the railings of Buddhist and Jaina stupas is that of worshipping
figures paying homage to the stupa representing either the Buddha
or the Jina. Therefore, it is very likely that these five elephant
yaksas are not Ganapati-Vinayaka even though the theme of five
elephants in a group gave rise to similar sculptures associated with
Ganapati in a later period.'”

According to Coomaraswamy, the full-fledged image of
Ganapati, and which I take to be that of Ganapati-Vinayaka-
elephant deity, begins to occur quite commonly in Gupta art,
from about ap 400.' Some of the earliest statues of Ganapati
have been found in and around the region of madhyadesa: at Sankisa
mound!“ and the Mathura region’® (Uttar Pradesh), Bhaumara!”
and the Udayagiri caves'” (Madhya Pradesh) and Rajgir (Bihar).'°*
All are dated to approximately between the end of the fourth and
sixth centuries of the Christian era and this would correspond to
the period when Ganapati begins to find mention in the Puranas.
Some scholars, on the basis of reference to Ganesa’s trunk in the
Gathasaptasati,'” consider that this deity, in its present form, was
already in existence around the first century ab. However, this
work, traditionally attributed to Hala Satavahana, is believed to
have been regularly added to almost up to the eighth century. '!°
Hence, I do not consider this reterence to be suggestive of such
an early date for Ganapati.

Dhavalikar argues against the generally accepted theory
that Ganapati images appear only from about the fourth/fifth
centuries AD.'!! He refers to three images, presenuy in the Mathura
museum, all carved in the round and similar to each other and
which he ascribes to the Kusana period. They depict the deity
with two hands. The left holds a bowl of sweets into which the
trunk dips. Dhavalikar considers that, since carving figures in the
round was the speciality of the Kusana artists of Mathura, these
statues have to be assigned to c. first to third century ap. Similarly,
the image from Sankisa mound which Getty dates not before the
fifth century is assigned by Dhavalikar to the late second or early

--- Page 104 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS. 105
third century ab. Literary evidence at the close of the first millenium
BC points to the existence of the cult of the elephant but there is
no evidence to show that the animal was worshipped in an
therianthropic form. This elephant-headed yaksa gradually became
popular through Buddhism and was accepted as the basis for the
iconography of the syncretistic Brahmanical deity Ganapati.
Therefore, I prefer to consider the Kusana images as incipient
Ganapatis which represent the elephant deity who, because of the
influence of Buddhist iconography, had acquired a newer form
but whose worship was old. What appears quite clear is that the
few early images of the elephant-headed figure attributed to the
third century or so were not common. After c. 400 ap, the number
of images increases greatly and this corresponds to the period
when Ganapati begins to be mentioned in Puranic literature.

Finally, all the three distinct strands in Ganapati’s
personality are apparent in later literature—Purdnas, Tantras and
Agamas—on which the present-day Ganapati worship is based. As
a relic of his elephant past, he is invoked in special homas for
calming elephants and for granting them sénéi and prosperity.!”
He himself is to be meditated upon as an elephant.'" His naga
past is reflected in the special rites performed in his honour for
the purpose of driving away both serpents and clephants.'!4 The
various myths in the Puranas about his head asso-iate him with
some older and impertant elephant. In some cases it is the head
of Airavata that is transferred on to the trunk of Ganapati.’ At
other times it is the king of elephants!''® or an ordinary elephant
that lends its head to him. As a remnant of his evil side deriving
from the Vinayaka tradition, there are homas in his honour
prescribed to rectify graha dosa (evil effects of graspers) and
diseases. Like the Vinayakas he is associated with the pisdcas. He is
sometimes referred to as Hastipisaciga'!'’? and his consort as
Hastipisaci.''* At other times, he is referred to as the god of
kusmandas.''* He has special propitiation rites which require the
offering of bali at the crossroads.'”’ It is also the Vinayaka strand

which is responsible for making Ganapati the creator and remover
of obstacles. Originally, that was the role of the vighnakartas
personified as the Vinayakas by the Maitraiyaniya brahmanas. The
theme of four Vinayakas is echoed in the four headed form of the
deity.'” As Ganapati, he remains the head of a gana and has
numerous Vinayakas as his followers.'”? These three distinct strands

--- Page 105 ---
106 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
are responsible for his numerous powers and attributes and are
responsible for raising him, eventually, to the status of a major
god. They are equally responsible for the many dichotomies that
exist in his character.
NOTES
1. The first scholar to suggest these strands in the personality of
Ganapati is V. Ramasubramaniam in his article “The Ganapau-
Vinayaka-Gajanana Worship: Analysis of an Integrated Cult’, in
Bulletin of the Institute of Traditional Cultures, Madras, 1971, pp. 110-
46. A.K. Narain also bases his analysis of Ganapati on these three
different aspects in his article ‘Ganesa: A Protohistory of the Idea
and the Icon’ in Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesha: Studies of an Asian
God, pp. 19-48. However, the analysis and conclusions of these
scholars are quite distinct to those put forward by me.
2. For discussion on the various possible meanings of the term
‘Vinayaka’ see A.K. Narain, op. cit.
3. J. Marshall and A. Foucher, Monuments of Sanchi, p. 289.
4. Ibid., p. 294.
5. A.A. Ramanathan, Amarakosa: With Unpublished South Indian
Commentanes, p. 302.
6. Manava Grhya Sutra, 11.14.
7. Trans. from R.C. Hazra, ‘Ganapati-worship and the Upapuranas
dealing with it’, JGJARI, Vol. 5, Pt. 4, 1948, pp. 263-76.
8. Manava Grhya Sutra, 11.14.28.
9. Ramayana, 8.23.

10. P.K. Agrawala, Ancient Indian Fotk Cults, p. 69.

11. Vayu Purana, 1.30.203.

12. Mahabharata, cri. edn., Anusasana Parva, 17.56.

13. Umakant P. Shah, Jaina Rupa Mandana (Jaina Iconography), p. 132.

14. A. Foucher, Etudes Sur U'Art Boudhique de l'Inde, p. 9.

15. Cited by H. Luders, ed., Bharhut Inscnptions, in C/I, Vol. Il, Pt. I,
p. 76.

16. Ibid., pp. 73 and 76.

17. P.K. Agrawala, ‘The Kumbhanda Figures in Sanchi Sculpture’,
EW, Vol. 37, 1987, pp. 179-89. See in particular, p. 184.

18. P.K. Agrawala, ‘The Kumbhanda Overlord Viradhaka’, in Devendra
Handa and Ashvini Agrawal, eds., Ratna-Chandrika: Panorama of
Onental Studies (Shri R. C. Agrawala Festschrift), pp. 67-74.

19. Ibid.

20. Vayu Purana, 11.8.198-9 and I1.8.251-2.

--- Page 106 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS_ 107
21. Romila Thapar, ‘Origin Myths and Historical Tradition’, Ancient
Indian Social History, pp. 294 -325. See in particular, pp. 311-12.
22. J. Ph. Vogel, Indian Serpent Lore, p. 191.
23. Ibid. See also, P.K. Agrawala, ‘The Kumbhanda Overlord
Viradhaka’, in Devendra Handa and Ashwini Agrawal, eds. op.
cit., p. 68.

24. J. Gonda, Visnuism and Sivaism, p. 36.

25. J.L. Shastri, ed., Manusmrti with the Sanskrit Commentary Manvartha-
muktavali of Kulluka Bhatta, V.93.

26. Padma Purana, 11.1.41.17b-18a; Varéha Purana, 11.158.18-19.

27. P.K. Agrawala, ‘The Kumbhanda Figures in Sanchi Sculpture’,
EW, op. cit., p. 180. See also J.Ph. Vogel, op. cit., p. 213.

28. Thomas Watters, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, p. 35.

29. Vayu Purana, 11.8.198-9 and 210.

30. Taittiriya Aranyaka (With Commentary of Sayana), 11.7-8.

31. Vayu Purana, 11.8.262.

32. Narada Purana, V.71.24.

33. Padma Purana, 1.27.32b-35a.

34. Sudhir Kakar, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, p. 56.

35. Ibid., p. 110.

36. Ibid., p. 99.

37. V.V. Mirashi, ed., C//, Vol. V, No.3, p. 10.

38. F. Max Muller, ed., Manu Smrti (The Laws of Manu), III.164.

39. J. Gonda, The Ritual Sutras, p. 600.

40. Ibid.

41. Ibid., p. 598.

42. Manava Grhya Sutra, 11.14.30.

43. The Pisacas are believed to have been a tribe of people who
originated in the north-west, in the region of Kafiristan. They
gradually spread southwards and eastwards to the Ganga basin
and the region near the Vindhyas. (See A.N. Upadhye, ‘Paisaci
Language and Literature’, ABORI, Vol. 21, 1940, pp. 1-37). The
Brhatkatha of Gunadhya is believed to have been written in the
Paisaci language around the third century AD in the region of
Ujjain or Kausambi (see Maurice Winternitz, History of Indian
Literature, Vol. III, p. 346).

44. Brahmanda Purana, I1.3.7.390 and II.3.7.394.

45. Mahabharata, cri. edn., Adi Parva, 151.26-7.

46. Vayu Purana, 11.8.153-7.

47. Samavidhana Brahmana (with Vedarthaprakdsa of Sdyana and
Padarthamatrvivrti of Bharatsvamin), 11.7.10.

48. J.A.B. Van Buitenen, Trans., The Mahabharata, Vol. I, p. 149.

49. Vayu Purana, 11.8.168.

--- Page 107 ---
108 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

50. Sadhakar Chattopadhyaya, Evolution of Hindu Sects, p. 110.

51. Agnt Purana, 1.50.40.

52. T.A. Gopinatha Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconugraphy, Vol. UH, Pt. Il,
p. 387.

53. Brahmanda Purana, 11.3.14.38b-42.

54. Vayu Purana, 1.58.36.

55. Ibid., 1.58.34.

56. H. Mitra, Ganapati, p. 43.

57. Cited by S. Radhakrishnan in /ndian Philosophy, Vol. I, p. 462.

58. Pratapaditya Pal, Bronzes of Kashmir, pp. 166-7.

59. Alice Getty, Ganesa, pp. 445.

60. Sudhir Kakar, op. cit., p. 87.

61. El, Vol. IX, No. 38, p. 279.

62. Yajnavalkya Smrti (With the Commentary of Vijnanesvara called the
Mitaksara), Vol. 1, pp. 174-5.

63. Manava Grhya Sutra, I1.14.30.

64. Ydjravalkya Smrii, p. 178.

65. Cited by R.C. Hazra, op. cit., p. 268.

66. Narada Purana, 11.51.58-79.

67. There is a chapter in the Garuda Purana entitled ‘Teachings of
Yajnavalkya’ which also describes the symptoms of Vinayaka
possession and treatment. It is an abbreviated and somewhat
modified version of that described in the Yajnavalkya Smrti.

68. Narada Purana, 111.77.64-77.

69. Ibid.

70. Rg Veda, I1.23.1.

71. Tbid., X.112.9.

72. Taittiriya Samhita, 1V.1.2.2 and Vajasaneyi Samhita, 11.15 and 22.30.
Quoted by R.C. Hazra, op. cit., p. 268.

73. Milindaparhapali, 1.1.5 (p. 3 for original text and p. 6 for Hindi
translation).

74. Ibid.

75. Gwendolyn Bays, Trans., The Lalitavistara-Siitra, Vol. II, p. 381.

76. Mahabharata, cri. edn., Dronaparva, 124.9.

77. Ibid., Anusasana Parva, 17.116.

78. Siva Purana, Vayaviyasamhita I, IV.18.33-4.

79. Ibid., IV.27.2.

80. Kurma Purana, 1.31.53b-56a.

81. Langa Purana, 11.98.40.

82. Ibid., 1.1.24.

83. Ibid., 11.98.712.

84. Ibid., 11.98.40, 477, 618, 804 and 805. For a current version of the
Stva Sahasranamastotram and Namavali see the publication by the
Central Chinmaya Mission Trust, Bombay.

--- Page 108 ---
VINAYAKAS AND GANAPATIS_ 109

85. Mahabharata, cri. edn., Appendix 18.54. In Geeta Press edn.,
AnuSasana Parva, 150.25-8.

86. Ibid., In Geeta Press edn., Santi Parva, 284.197.

87. Suvira Jaiswal, The Ongin and Development of Vaisnavism, p. 13.

88. R.C. Hazra, in his article ‘Ganapati Worship and the Upapuranas
Dealing with It’, discusses the reference to a deity called Hasti-
mukha along with Vinayaka, Vighna, Lambodara and others in
the Baudhayana Grhyasesasutra and the Baudhayana Dharmasitra.
He considers this portion of these works as being of doubtful
authenticity. Since there is no evidence of the syncretistic deity
Ganapati-Vinayaka with the elephant head before the Christian
era, these portions were evidently interpolated much later. It is
worth pointing out, however, that both these texts also belong to
the Krsna Yajur Veda.

89. Mahabharata, Geeta Press edn., Sabha Parva, X.35.

90. Ibid., Sabha Parva, 10.16.

91. Mahabharata, cri. edn. Appendix 18.53 and 54. In Geeta Press
edn., AnuSsasana Parva, 150.25-8.

92. Linga Purana, II.98.527.

93. Agnt Purana, IV.312.16-22.

94. Linga Purana, 11.27.142-7.

95. Ibid., II. 9. 410a.

96. Agni Purana, III. 291.2-5a.

97. D.N. Das, ‘Serpent Worship in Ancient Kalinga’, PIHC, 1965,
pp. 43-4.

98. Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, Yaksas, Pt. I, plate 23. A similar
elephant-headed yaksa belonging to the same period is also present
on a frieze from a stipa near Mihintale, Sri Lanka. See Alice
Getty, op. cit., p. 25. ;

99. Skanda Purana, Venkateshwar Steam Press edn., Sri Prabhasa
Khanda, 3.32.15-17.

100. P.K. Agrawala, Goddess Vindyaki, p. 4.

101. Ibid.

102. See P.K. Agrawala, ‘A Pafica-Ganesa Panel from Varanasi’, JO/B,
Vol. 25, pp. 71-3. The article describes three sculpted panels of
GaneSas dating to between AD 800 and 1200 found in Rajasthan
and Varanasi. Two of these panels depict four elephant headed
figures in a row with the fifth figure being that of an elephant.
The third shows five elephant headed figures in a row. These are
obviously Ganapati because in two of the three cases the rat is also
depicted. These examples show how older iconographical forms
influence the art of the succeeding centuries. However, this does
not justify the consideration of the five Kusana gajanana yaksas as
Ganapati-Vinayaka.

--- Page 109 ---
110 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

103. Ananda Coomaraswamy, op. cit., Pt. I, p. 7.

104. D.C. Sircar, Studies in the Religious Life of Ancient and Medieval India,
p. 114.

105. V.S. Agrawala, ‘Miscellaneous Architectural Sculptures: Buddhist’,
Journal of the Uttar Pradesh Historical Socety, Vol. XXIV-XXV, 1951-
52, pp. 77-118. See in particular, p. 96.

106. D.C. Sircar, op. cit., p. 114.

107. R.C. Agrawala, ‘Urdhavaretas Ganega from Afghanistan’, EW,
Vol. 18 (NS), 1968, pp. 166-8.

108. Shiela L. Weiner, From Gupta to Pala Sculpture, p. 173.

109. Gathasaptasati, IV.72 and V.3.

110. V.V. Mirashi, ed., CJ, Vol. V, see ‘Introduction’, pp. Ivi-lix and
pp. 76-9.

111. M.K. Dhavalikar, ‘Ganesa: Myth and Reality’ in Robert L. Brown,
ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God, pp. 49-68.

112. Isdnasivagurudevapadhhati, 11.16.121.

113. Ibid., 11.16.21.

114. Ibid., 1.15.118.

115. Brhaddharma Purana, 2.60.50-2; Mudgala Purana, IV.47.47.

116. Brahmavaivarta Purana, 3.12.9-22.

117. Ganesa Purana, 1.46.4.

118. T.S. Sundaresa Sharma, Sri Ucchista Ganapati Stotra Satanamavah,
p. 58.

119. Kurma Purana, 1.22.47.

120. Svayambhuvagama, 58.52.

121. Ajttagama, Vol. HI, 55.7.

122. Varadha Purana, |.23.20-5.,

--- Page 110 ---
CHAPTER 4
A Brahmanical Deity

In the early centuries of the Christian era, as Siva and Visnu grow
in importance, a new body of literature known as the Puranas
comes into being. These texts reflect a changing material and
social milieu. As Brahmanical culture spreads from the madhyadesa
region into the peripheral areas and tries to cope with the challenge
of Buddhism and Jainism, it comes in contact with a variety of new
ethnic groups and undergoes a process of syncretism. As a result,
newer gods take precedence over the Vedic divinities. A variety of
new myths or new versions of old myths are created with the
purpose of glorifying Siva and Visnu and, later, the Goddess. The
rise in stature of these new gods results in the inclusion of several
non-Vedic deities as part of their expanding pantheons. The temple
is closely associated with the worship of these sectarian gods.

Consequently, new beliefs and rituals are incorporated into the
Puranas, festivals develop and holy sites are associated with each
deity. The practice of making pilgrimages becomes popular. Several

religious traditions such as the Vedic, Tantric, Pasupata and
Panicaratra are reflected in the Puranas. It is within this context,
between approximately ap 400 and ap 1400, that Ganapati gradually
acquires the personality and role that we associate him with today.

From a simple gana of Siva, he rises to become the principal gana
and the son of Siva and Parvati. Initially, the younger brother of
Skanda-Karttikeya, he is eventually considered the elder. He is

associated with other Brahmanical deities besides Siva and develops

a cult of his own.

GANAPATI AND THE SAIVA PANTHEON

The first definite reference to an elephant-headed deity exists in

the context of Sivaism as it is described in the Puranas. References

in the Mahabharata are limited to the GaneSvara-Vinayakas or to

--- Page 111 ---
112 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Danti. Whereas the Vinayakas are not described as having any
form, Danti clearly designates an elephant. The two do not appear
to be synonymous. The elephant-headed human deity is described
only in the Puranas. It is essential, therefore, to understand the
nature of Sivaism in the early centuries of the Christian era because
it influences, to a large extent, the character and role of Ganapati.

Pasupata Sivaism appears to be the oldest form of Sivaism.
In its earliest stages it prevailed in north-western and western India
in the two or three centuries before the Christian era. The early
Pasupatas were looked down upon by the followers of the
Brahmanical tradition because they did not accept the authority
of the Vedas and because they did not follow the dharma of the
varna (caste) and asrama (four stages of life).

In the early centuries of the Christian era, the Lakulisa
sub-sect of the Saivas emerged. This form of Sivaism is described
in the Pasupata Sutra (c. aD 100-200) which is supposed to have
been taught by Lakuli to his pupil Kusika.' Lakuli is believed to
have lived in the country of Lata in the Kathiawad region which
lies in modern Gujarat.? This sub-sect represented a limited
rapprochement with the Brahmanical tradition. However, like the
heterodox Pasupatas, Lakulisa-Pasupatism emphasised yoga
(meditation) and bhakti (devotion).* Lakulisa had four disciples
who, in their turn, became the chiefs of four distinct lines of
teachers concerned with the propagation of the Pasupata religion. ‘
In early medieval times, Lakulisa was deified and subsequently
worshipped as a cult-person. He came to be looked upon as the
twenty-eighth incarnation of Siva. His icons have been found dating
from the sixth century in Karnataka and in temples of the Calukyas
of Badami dating to the seventh-eighth centuries.°> He also appears
at the Kailasa temple at Ellora. Temples to Lakulisa have also
been found in Gujarat and Rajasthan.

Pasupata Sivaism in the earlier portions of the Puranas is,
in fact, a mixture of Vedic, Samkhya and Yoga practices. In the
Vayu Purana, Siva states:

Having established the Vedas with their six ancillaries together with the
Samkhya and Yoga and performing penances inaccessible to devas (gods)
and danavas (demons), the Pasupata rite has been evolved by me. This
rite is accompanied by objects of worship. It is evolved in secret and is
unintelligible to the unintelligent. In some respects it agrees with the
functions of different castes and stages of life. In some respects it is

--- Page 112 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 113
contrary to them. It is determined by the meanings of the Vedic pas-
sages ... it can be followed by a person in any stage of life.°
These three different streams of thought and practice —Samkhya,
Yoga and Veda—are largely responsible for the many dichotomies
in the character of Siva and, by extension, in the character of his
ganas (a group of demi-gods considered as Siva’s attendants).

The school of Yoga with its strict physical and mental
discipline is responsible for the ascetic aspect of Siva. With Samkhya
comes the importance of the Sakti, since according to Samkhya
philosophy, purusa (the soul—conceived as the male principle)
alone is inactive and inert without prakrti (primeval matter—
conceived as the female principle). This idea is best represented
in the ardhndrisvara aspect of Siva where the latter combines in
himself both the male and female principles. The left side is
feminine and the right, masculine. The earliest such statues date
to the Kusana period. The role of Sakti was later reinforced with
the influence of Tantrism. From the Vedic tradition and, more
specifically, from the character of Indra, Siva acquires the aspect
of the demon-killer and destroyer of the cities of his enemies
aided by a host of ganas.

Conflict with and destruction of asuras (demons)is an
intrinsic aspect of Saiva mythology in the Puranas. These asuras
are overcome by Siva’s numerous ganas. Their battles represent,
among other things, a reflection of the conflict with other
developing religious sects, local cults and also with the Vedic
tradition. Perhaps some of these myths are also part of the oral
traditions of war-like tribes and other ethnic groups that were
associated in one way or another with Brahmanical society and
culture.

Siva has two aspects to his character, one the siva (calm
and pleasing) and the other ghora or terrible. Each of these aspects
is said to be manifold.” These various aspects are often manifested
in his ganas who are essentially of two types. They are either
repositories of profound spiritual knowledge or they are fierce
demonic creatures that inspire terror. To the first category belong
Nandin, Nandiévara and Upamanyu. Nandin is the name of Siva’s
bull who is always positioned outside the sanctum sanctorum of
Siva’s shrine or temple. It is also the name of a gana described as
an incarnation of Siva, born to the brahmana Silada, as a boon for

--- Page 113 ---
114 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

his unswerving devotion to Siva.® This second Nandin is also known
as Nandisvara.? There is, however, another Nandisvara who is
described as a sage who performed severe penance in order to
propitiate Siva. In return he was granted a form and splendour
like that of Siva himself and the lordship of the ganas. Siva tells
him ‘O brahmana, you will be the foremost among my attendants
and will be known as Nandisvara’.'® Similarly, Upamanyu is also a
brahmana. As a young boy he invoked Siva when, due to poverty,
he could not get milk to drink. As a reward for his severe penance,
Siva told him: ‘You have been adopted as my son now.... Immortality
is bestowed upon you. So also the perpetual chieftaincy of the
ganas."

There is a second category of ganas, those created
specifically as fierce beings for the purpose of destroying Siva’s
foes or the foes of his devotees. To this category belong Canda or
Virabhadra. The latter is created, according to one version, from
the mouth of Rudra and is described as being ‘a goblin that
resembled the fury of fire’, with a thousand heads, a thousand
feet and eyes. Virabhadra’s appearance inspires fear and awe. Like
most demonic forms he has ‘curved fangs’"* and is said to be ‘the
terrible form’ of Siva.’ It is Virabhadra who assumes the form of
the Sarabha incarnation of Siva (Sarabha is a mythological creature
that is half animal and half bird, with eight legs and stronger than
a lion) to kill Narasimha, the half-man half-lion incarnation of
Visnu.'* Likewise, it is he who destroys the sacrifice of Daksa. !°

What is common to both categories of ganas is that they
are created by Siva alone. None are connected with the Goddess
except for the fact that when Siva makes some of his ganas his
sons, Uma/Parvati accepts them as her sons as well. In the myths
associated with the birth or exploits of these different ganas, Skanda
and Ganapati are not mentioned. Nandin, the bull, appears to be
the carhest associate of the Puranic Siva.

The various deities that were gradually associated with the
Puranic Siva are described as his gana. In this way the elephant
deity also becomes a gana of Siva. However, there appear to be
two aspects to the evoluuon of the elephant deity in the Puranic
pantheon. On the one hand, as some myths suggest, Siva was
already associated with the elephant outside the Puranic framework
in the early centuries of the Christian era and these myths seek to
justify this association. On the other hand, there is the creation of

--- Page 114 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 115
an elephant-headed human figure who becomes a gana of the
Puranic Siva and is, subsequently, elevated to the position of son
of Siva and Parvati. The first aspect is suggested by the myth of
Gajasura (elephant demon). Gajasura is described as the lord of
danavas. As a result of a penance performed by meditating on
Brahma he acquired the boon of being invincible to humans,
gods, the guardians of the worlds and others. The asura then
conquered all the quarters, the three worlds, the gods, demons
and human beings. Finally, when he reached Kasi, the abode of
Siva, he was defeated by the latter. As his body was pierced by
Siva’s trident he begged for a boon: that his hide would be worn
by Siva. The latter accepted and, moreover, declared that on his
death, the asura’s body would become the linga known as
Krttivasesvara (he who is clad in hide).'* In another version of this
myth Siva appears out of a linga and kills the demon with his
trident’” and then wears his hide.

Earlier literature refers to Siva clothed in animal skin" or
in dripping animal hide but does not specify whether it is the hide
of an elephant.'? In the Puranas, he is specifically associated with
the elephant hide. Not only does he wear the hide but, according
to one myth, he also creates a linga from the body of Gajasura
which becomes one of the more famous Sivalingas in Kasi. By
these actions the elephant becomes a part of Siva in Kasi. The
significance of the myth of Gajasura is better understood when
compared to that of Mahisasura (buffalo-demon). The latter is
slain by Durga. Yet he is different to other asuras in that he is a
devotee of Siva and a leader of his ganas.” As a result of a curse of
sages whom he had insulted, he had been transformed into a
buffalo. When the goddess beheads him, not knowing that he is a
devotee of Siva, a linga emerges from within his head and it is
then worshipped by the goddess.”' Hence both Mahisasura and
Gajasura are associated with the linga. In one case the linga is a
part of the asura’s body and, in the second case, the asura’s body
is converted into a linga. This makes these two asuras distinct from
others slain by Siva or the goddess.

In one version of the Puranic myth of Mahisa, the latter
asks the goddess to marry him. ” In fact, there are folk traditions
where Mahisasura is looked upon as Siva himself. He is worshipped
as an avatara (incarnation) of Siva in some parts of Rajasthan and
Orissa where sakta conceptions are at their strongest.” At Kothrud,

--- Page 115 ---
116 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Vakad and Vir in Maharashtra, Mahisasura, under the name
Mhatoba, Mhasoba or Maskoba, is worshipped as the husband of
Jogubai who is none other than Durga. This identification of Siva
with a deity of the non-Sanskritic tradition is something which
occurred time and again throughout the centuries. Nandin, the
bull deity, was ultimately identified with Siva as the latter became
a more popular deity. Similarly, the elephant deity was also
identified with Siva, at least in a few regions. By the ume the
Puranas came into being the association between Siva and Nandin
must have been well established. However, that between the sacred
elephant and Siva was not so old and found reflection in a myth
which sought to justify the deity’s association with the elephant.

In the Puranas, Gajasura is said to be the son of
Mahisasura.”‘ If, in folk tradition, Mahisasura is Siva, then Gajasura
is also the son of Siva. Since the son represents an aspect of his
father, Gajasura is but an aspect of Siva. Mahisasura in his fight
against Durga transforms himself, turn by turn, into a lion, an
elephant and a man and each time he is beheaded by Durga.* In
temple art the mahisa demon is depicted variously as a buffalo, as
a man,”° as a man emerging from the buffalo body”’ or as a man
with horns.”8 Siva is sometimes described as wearing horns.”
Besides, since he wears the elephant hide, has his linga symbol
made of the elephant demon’s dead body and since one of the
forms of Mahisasura is also the elephant, it would appear that
Gajasura is another form of Siva. In the Puranas the term asura is
often equated with the ignorant and the non-believer. The asura
ceases to be an asura when he accepts the superiority of Siva and
becomes his devotee. He is then converted into a gana. Gajasura
becomes more than that. He becomes a permanent part of Siva.
The Bhairava form of Siva is specifically associated with the elephant
hide. Bhairava’s complexion is described as being dark as the rain
cloud, he has a flabby belly and side-tusks all which make him
similar in concept to Ganapati.“ Among the sixty-four Bhairavas
described in the Rudrayamala Tantra three are referred to as
Modaka-priya (he who is fond of the sweatmeat, modaka), vighna-
santusta (he who grants peace from obstacles) and Mahakaya (he
who has a huge body).*! These names suggest a close affinity with
Ganapati since they are also his epithets.

The Heramba form of Ganapati also appears to have some
association with Mahisa. The term heramba is synonymous with

--- Page 116 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 117
mahisa and signifies ‘buffalo’. Why would Ganapati, who has no
association with the buffalo, be named after the animal? This
form of Ganapati has five heads and rides on a lion instead of the
mouse (photo 11). The five heads recall the five heads of some
forms of Siva. The lion mount is borrowed from Durga. There
appears to be some kind of Siva and Durga melding in the
Heramba Ganapati form.

In the one or two centuries before the Christian era Siva
already had a following outside the Brahmanical fold. Since the
Pasupatas appear to have been the earliest sect of the Saivas it is
possible that in certain regions local deities were associated with
Pasupata Siva even as the various village goddesses were eventually
associated with Parvati. The Mahisasura and the Gajasura of the
Puranas probably represent the cults of the buffalo and the
elephant which were identified, in some regions, with Pasupata
Siva as he grew in importance and popularity and as the various
goddesses came to be considered as forms of his consort. This
association is grudgingly acknowledged in the Puranas by making
the elephant into an asura that is defeated and then identified
with Siva. In other regions, however, the elephant’s association
with Siva was recognized but he remained a distinct deity. In this
case he became the gana of Siva. Possibly, it was because the
elephant was popular over a wide region that an attempt was
made to reconcile these two differing traditions. The elephant
deity, therefore, eventually acquired an independent status in the
Puranic framework in the form of an elephant-headed son of Siva.

The myth of Gajasura appears to be associated with the
earlier stages of Siva’s mythology in the Puranas since there are
some early images depicting this myth. There is a sixth century
image of Bhairava Siva from Pandrenthan (Kashmir) dated to the
second half of the sixth century. It depicts the deity holding aloft
the elephant hide attached to the elephant head.** The image is
presently in the Sri Pratap Singh Museum, Srinagar. Its
representation in Cave No. XVI at Ellora is another early example. ™
Elsewhere, the Gajasura motif appears more frequently from the
eighth/ninth century aD. The motif also appears in the Cola
temples. However, this does not necessarily imply that the myth
did not exist earlier than the sixth century when it first appears in
sculpture. Many of the Jataka stories that were sculpted on the
walls of the early Buddhist stipas had already existed betore being

--- Page 117 ---
118 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

incorporated in Buddhist art. Similarly, in the Brahmanical context,
as temple building became more complex and elaborate, a greater
number of myths were required to embellish the temple walls. It
was perhaps at this point that the myth of Gajasura came to be
represented in sculpture. Just as in the Jatakas the Buddha is said
to have been a noble elephant in a previous life so also is Siva
associated with the elephant. The elephant in the early centuries
of the Christian era was associated with the non-Brahmanical Siva
as it was with the Buddha and that is why it came to be regarded
as an asura from the Brahmanical point of view. Even when
Ganapati-Vinayaka is made Siva’s son, the older myth of Gajasura
continues unchanged unul, finally, Ganapati himself is made the
slayer of Gajasura. According to a south Indian version of this
myth there was a giant-demon with the face of an elephant who
was unconquerable either by god or by man. Ganapati, being only
a demi-god, was able to fight him. At the first encounter, the
giant-demon, Gajamukhasura, broke off Ganapati’s right tusk. But
Ganapati caught his broken tusk and hurled it at the giant-demon
who instantly turned into a rat, whereupon Ganapati took him
into his service as his va@hana.* Here the demon is not an elephant
but only elephant-faced which makes him even closer in concept
to Ganapati. Similarly, the demon becomes a part of Ganapati
since it becomes his vahana even as the elephant skin is worn by
Siva.

The Puranic Siva is also sometimes clad in tiger skin.
According to one myth, it was at Kasi that a certain daitya assumed
the form of a tiger. Siva killed him, wore his skin and was thus
known as Vyaghresvara (Tiger Lord).* At the place where the tiger
was killed Siva established a linga called Vyaghresvara.** Just as
there is a linga associated with the elephant demon so also is there
a famous linga associated with the tiger demon.

Siva wears the elephant hide and also has an elephant-
headed gana. Similarly he also wears the tiger skin and has a tiger
gana. Both ganas are associated with the Goddess. According to
one myth, when Kali retires to a lonely grove to do penance in
order to attain a fair complexion, a tiger waits upon her with great
devotion and piety. The Goddess comes to regard him as her son.
Upon her request, Siva converts him into a Ganesa (Lord of the
ganas) called Somanandin™ and he assumes guard of the entrance
to her appartment. Similarly, Parvati creates the elephant-headed

--- Page 118 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 119
Ganapati to guard her door. This association between the goddess,
the tiger, the elephant and the buffalo suggests that these animals
represented the consorts of various village goddesses who eventually
were identified as different forms of Parvati. The animals associated
with them sometimes became a form of Siva and at other times
the ganas of Siva. Several ancient cults coalesced in the personality
of the non-Brahmanical Siva as he grew in popularity. They helped
shape the personality of the Puranic Siva and provided scope for
his growing mythology. Siva was already known to have animal
forms. In the form of a bull, the Greeks knew him as the god of
Gandhara.” It was during the Kusana period that the bull came to
be regarded as his mount and his human form became
predominant. In fact the earliest icons of Brahmanical deities were
made at Mathura during the Kusana period. They include the
lingas with one or four faces of Siva, Durga as Mahisasuramardini,
Varaha and Ardhanari.*? The Mahisasuramardini image also
appears in Gupta Art in Udayagiri caves (Madhya Pradesh), * and
seems to be closely associated with early Sivaism and with linga
worship.

Siva’s association with the tiger, the elephant and the linga
has a parallel in some of the early statues of Ganapati-Vinayaka
which strongly suggest an identification of the two deities in some
specific regions. Some of the early images of the elephant-headed
deity depict him in an urdhavamedhra (ithyphallic) form wearing
the vyaghracarma (tiger-skin) Two such statues were found at Gardez
and Sakar Dhar, both near Kabul, Afghanistan,*! in the region of
ancient Kapiga. These statues are dated between the fourth and
seventh centuries. Another statue from Mathura depicts Ganapau
wearing a vydghrajina (tiger-skin) and his face has both tusks
intact.”? Ai: image carved on the facade of cave no. 6, Udayagiri,
Madhya Pradesh, also depicts Ganapati in the urdhvamedhra form.“
In all these images the mouse is absent. There are several reasons
for thinking that these statues represent a syncretic form of Siva
and the elephant deity. Firstly, the statues from Afghanistan are in
the region of Kapiga where evidence of the elephant cult has been
discussed in the previous chapter. Early Sivaism is also associated
with this region. Similarly no other deity, other than Siva and
these few examples of Ganapati, is shown in the ithyphallic state.
The earliest depiction of iurdhvamedhra Siva appears to be ona
gold coin of the Kusana king, Huviska. In fact the urdhvalinga is

--- Page 119 ---
120 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

common in sculptural representations of Siva from the late Kusana
period onwards.‘ The tiger skin also appears for the first ume on
one of the coins of Vasudeva where it adorns a three-headed Siva.
There is a stela with Siva from Uttar Pradesh, now in the Los
Angeles County Museum of Art, where Siva is depicted with the
urdhvalinga and what appears to be an ascetic’s staff. Even
Lakuliga, believed to be an incarnation of Siva, is represented
naked in an ithyphallic state. A sculpture from Mukhalingam,
Andhra Pradesh, shows Lakulisa as a four-armed ithyphallic god
seated on a double-petalled lotus.** Therefore, the erect phallus
and tiger skin became part of Siva’s early iconology and only later
were they associated with the early statues of Ganapati. They did
not, however, become a regular feature of Ganapati’s iconology.

The earliest literary evidence of Siva being ithyphallic
comes from the Mahabharata where he is described as draped in
dripping animal hide, having a serpent-form, being of short stature,
ithyphallic, four-faced and carrying skulls.*” The suggestion that
some of these early statues of Ganapati represent a syncretic form
of Siva-elephant deity is more plausible when compared to some
of the representations of Nandin. The latter, originally Siva himself
in theriomorphic form and, later, his mount, is carved exactly like
Siva in late mediaeval and modern reliefs of southern India. The
only distinction lies in the fact that his ‘front’ hands are in the
namaskara pose (the ‘back’ hands, like those of Siva, carry the
parasu (axe) and mrgha (deer)) while Siva’s tront hands are shown
in the abhaya (freedom from fear) and varada (boon granting)
poses.“ There is even a description of Nandin wearing a tiger-skin
garment.” In some Puranas there are indications that Ganapati
resembles Siva. According to the Skanda Purana, GaneSsavara has
the same form as that of Siva.”

This syncretism between Ganapati and Siva is also seen in
some statues in southeast Asia which evidently had their prototypes
in some early Indian images. In the eighth century Cambodian
Ganesa from Triton, the two armed figure holds a kalasa (water
jar) in one hand and a rosary in the other.*! These attributes
highlight his ascetic nature and recall the Pasupata form of Siva.
Another statue from Mi-so’n in Vietnam depicts Ganapati with the
liger’s skin worn around his hips, the only known instance of this
in southeast Asian art.” I have referred earlier to statues of Lakuliga
also being depicted in an ithyphallic state. It is possible that one

--- Page 120 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 12]
reason why Ganapati becomes so important in Cambodia at an
early stage (by the sixth century he had temples devoted to him)
is because he was considered an aspect of Siva. To make an analogy,
Varaha whose images became popular in the early Gupta period
was worshipped as a deity in his own right even though he was
considered an incarnation of Visnu. It is true that religious
literature is not explicit on this point. However, Ganapati’s
iconological and mythological developments do not always proceed
in a parallel manner. As we shall see further, there is much in his
images which remains unexplained by literature. It should be borne
in mind that Brahmanical literature, by and large, reflects only
the accepted practices and beliefs of a limited few. The images,
however, suggest other possibilities.

All the early images of the elephant-headed figure cannot
be referred to as Ganapati. There is a terracotta bas-relief from
Akra (Bannu district, North West Frontier Province, Pakistan)
which some scholars date to about the fifth century,** and others
to the second century.” It depicts the figure in a dancing pose
holding a round object. The latter is, according to Brahmanical
texts, the modaka (a sweetmeat). However, most Brahmanical statues
depict Ganapati holding a bowl of modakas rather than the single
modaka. Besides, in many Puranic myths of Ganapati’s birth there
is no reference to the modakas. There is, moreover. no satisfactory
explanation provided for Ganapati’s penchant for these sweetmeats
or how he came to be associated with them. In the Buddhist
context, the round object is stated to be the cintamani (wish
fulfilling jewel). However, the earliest Buddhist texts that deal
with Ganapati date from about the seventh century or so. It would,
therefore, appear that the elephant deity of the north-west region
was associated with this round object which may have been a fruit
and it eventually took on a specific connotation in the Brahmanical
and Buddhist contexts.

In most of the surviving Gupta temples, Siva in the form
of the linga was the principal cult image. The elephant deity also
appears to have been associated with a form of mga worship in
that it was associated with jutting out rocks and promontories. In
the previous chapter, I have referred to the elephant deity at
Kapisa who was associated with the mountain. In the myth of
Gajasura, the demon’s body is converted into a linga. In Kashmir
three famous pilgrimage sites are associated with Ganapati. One is

--- Page 121 ---
122 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

a rock lying at the foot of the Hariparbat hill near Srinagar which
is worshipped as Ganapati under the name of Bhimasvamin.
Another svayambhi murti (self-existent image) of Ganapati lies near
the village of Ganes-bal in the Lidar river near its right bank. The
third pilgrimage site is called Ganesa Ghati or GaneSagiri.® It is
located in the Upper Kisanganga valley and is close to the shrine
of Sarada. The Rajatarangini refers to a castle called Sirahsila which
Stein identified with this site.°° Sirahsila literally means the rock
with the shape of a head. This rock was identified with Ganapati.

Ganapati is ithyphallic, is associated with the linga and
wears a tiger-skin. Yet there are no myths that explain how he got
a tiger skin or that even mention his wearing one. Similarly, the
Puranas stress that Ganapati has only one tusk. Yet the statue of
Ganapati from Mathura has his two tusks intact. It is rue that in
some of the Buddhist Tantras Ganapati is described as having
both tusks intact and possibly that is why Agrawala classifies this
statue as a Buddhist one. However, some of Siva’s ganas, as also
some manifestations of Siva such as Virabhadra, are described as
having two curved fangs which would correspond to Ganapati’s
two tusks. In that case, this statue is probably a syncretic Siva-
elephant deity in a fierce form like that of Virabhadra. Another
possible interpretation is that this is an early statue when Ganapati-
Vinayaka’s elephant head is represented in a realistic fashion before
the myths about his single tusk evolved. Siva’s association with
Ganapati in the Puranas is subsequent to his association with the
elephant deity outside the newly emerging Puranic fold. The
Krtyakalpataru quoting from the Narasimha Purana describes
Ganapati as having one, two or four tusks.*’ This in itself is
suggestive of the different sources of Ganapati’s origin: Airavata
with his four tusks, an ordinary elephant with its two tusks and the
Brahmanical version of the single tusked elephant.

The second aspect of Ganapati’s development in the
Puranas is centred around the process of beheading, acquiring an
elephant head and the name Vinayaka. This process of death and
rebirth with a different form and name is common to several of
Siva’s ganas. Andhakasura is transformed by Siva into his gana
chief called Bhrngi. Daksa is killed, resurrected with the head of a
sacrificial animal and granted the chieftancy of the ganas.* Brahma
is beheaded by Siva (only his fifth head) and then brought back
to life by the yogic power of Siva, who he then accepts as the

--- Page 122 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 123
greatest god.*? Ganapati is also beheaded and acquires a new form
and a new name. The elephant thus becomes a human deity
retaining the elephant head for identity. Death represents the
transition to ganahood and to the entourage of the Puranic Siva.
Some of the ganas are, in fact, incarnations of Siva, such as Lakulisa.
Others, like Mahakala or Virtpaksa, were originally deities in their
own right and were later identified with Siva. Ganapatu, like Nandin,
represented the cult of the elephant even as Nandin represented
the sacred bull. Both were identified with Siva, initially, outside
the Brahmanical framework. Later, both became distinct from,
but closely related to, the Puranic Siva.

In the myths regarding the birth of Skanda and Ganapau,
their association with the Goddess is evident which again points to
a pre-Puranic tradition. Neither is born from the sexual union of
Siva and Parvati. Skanda is born from the semen of Siva, but is
also fathered by Agni and mothered by Ganga, the Krttikas and
then, finally, accepted by Parvati. The concept of his having several
mothers, and several heads with which to feed from, is an echo of
his older association with the mé@trkas (mothers) who possessed
children. Ganapati, on the other hand, is generally associated
with one mother. He is frequently referred to as ‘the son of the
daughter of the king of mountains’®! as ‘son of Ambika’®™ or as the
‘son of Parvati’.® ‘ his is an echo of his earliest personality, the
elephant deity who, as a fertility deity, was intrinsically associated
with the worship of the Earth Goddess. Images of Ganapati in the
company of the mdtrkas begin to appear from as early as the sixth
century aD. No myths, however, explain his association with them.
The earliest representations of this kind are found at: Deogarh
(along the Betwa River ghats on the border of Uttar Pradesh and
Madhya Pradesh);™ at Samalaji, a village in Gujarat and close to
the Rajasthan border;® at Mandor (near Jodhpur, Rajasthan); in
the Calukyan temples at Aihole, Badami (Karnataka), and at
Elephanta and Ellora (Maharashtra). These matrka images formed
part of Saiva shrines and their cult was already established in these
regions, prior to Ganapati’s association with them.

There are basically three kinds of myths relating to the
origin of Ganapati: where he is formed by Parvati; where he is
created by both Siva and Parvati; where he is created by Siva
alone. Yet, even in the last case, the creation of Ganapati is
indirectly associated with the Goddess. In the Siva,® Skanda,® and

--- Page 123 ---
124 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Matsya Puranas,” Ganapati is formed by the scuff that Parvati rubs
off her body during her bath. In the Bhavisya”’ and Vamana”
Puranas, Ganapati is a creation of both Siva and Parvati but not
through sexual union. According to the Brhaddharma™ and Varaha”™
Puranas, Siva alone creates Ganapati. Yet the association with the
goddess remains because in the former case, he is created out ofa
piece of Parvati’s garment and, in the latter, it is because Parvati is
enamoured by Siva’s creation, Ganapati, that he is cursed by a
jealous Siva to assume his ugly form. The Puranas themselves justify
these numerous and often contradictory versions about Ganapati’s
creation by stating that the several myths are related to different
kalpas (ages).

Ganapati is different to the other ganas in that he acquires
a childhood. He is described as a happy dancing child whose
dance amuses Siva who crowns his son as lord of ganas. He is
described as playing pranks even as Krsna did with Yasoda. He
hides the moon in the matted locks of his father’s hair. He is
depicted as dancing and singing in order to amuse his mother. At
the same time, he is described as having independent power.”
Just as Krsna acquires a childhood in the Bhagavata Purana which
he does not have in the Mahabharata, similarly, Ganapati also
acquires many dimensions to his personality, which make him
more lovable to the public and lend the austere Siva a more
human side. If he cannot be approached, his son acts as an
intermediary.

The child god is a new phenomenon in the early medieval
period. During this period temple ritual corresponded closely to
palace ritual. The temple was the Lord’s palace and the deity was
awakened, bathed, fed, entertained and put to bed in the same
manner as the king. Similarly, he acquired a family at par with the
royal family. Perhaps that is why even Visnu’s incarnations have
families since that made it possible for devotees to identify the
cosmic world with the human world. Just as Krsna became the
subject of so much folklore, being more popular than the Visnu
of the Sanskritic tradition, so also Ganapati provided the same
possibilities in the Saiva context. Siva and Visnu, as they rose to
the position of major gods, gradually grew more distant. Their
sons or incarnations provided them with the dimensions necessary
to make them the objects of veneration for all levels of society.
Epigraphical evidence, remains of temples and statues show that

--- Page 124 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 125
Visnu and Siva were the deities that enjoyed royal patronage.
Ganapati or Krsna were more popular with the other categories of
society. There is another parallel between the secular and religious
world in the early medieval period. Just as kings of lesser dynasties
often observed the formality of claiming ksatriya status, or at least
of participating in a common ksatriya past as embodied in the
itthasa-purana tradition, so also were non-Brahmanical divinities
converted into family members or incarnations of the Puranic
gods.
At first, Ganapati appears as a malevolent deity. He is
described as being surrounded by Vinayakas, all elephant-faced
like him, who are dark-coloured and who hold various weapons.
‘They have fierce eyes, flowing ichor and massive bodies’. They
represent beings that invoke fear and terror.” Yet, the instances
when Ganapati is depicted in the role of a warrior are few indeed.
In the Siva Purana he is described as bravely and single-handedly
resisting Siva and his ganas at Paravati’s door until Siva has to use
cunning to behead him.” In the same Purana, he is depicted as
bravely fighting against the asura Sumbha.”® However, in most of
the battles fought by Siva it is Skanda and the other ganas that are
actually engaged in battle and Ganapati's role remains somewhat
ambiguous. Karttikeya is the perfect general, created specifically
to destroy the Tripuras (three cities), a task that Indra and the
other gods are unable to accomplish. Perhaps it is Ganapati’s role
as a gana which led him, in a few cases, to be identified with
rituals pertaining to war. There is an inscription which records
the installation of an image of Vinayaka by a prince of the Visnu-
kundin family at the command of Visnukundin Mahendravarman
(c. AD 556-616). According to the inscription, the prince set up a
military drum, brought an image of the elephant-faced Vinayaka
and installed it after having worshipped it with great care.”
Traditionally, prayers to the war-drum were offered by the king on
the occasion of rana diksa or the preparation of war. This
association of Ganapati with the war-drum perhaps came about
because of his role as Siva’s gana and also because of his elephant-
head. Elephants formed an important arm of the army and their
role was crucial to success in battle. The king himself often
participated in the battle on elephant-back.
Initially, Skanda was the older brother of the two. He was
accepted as part of the Brahmanical Siva’s pantheon at an earlier

--- Page 125 ---
126 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

date than Ganapati. In the Brahma,® Linga’! and Matsya” Puranas,
Skanda is stated to be the the older brother. In the Siva Purana,
the chapters dealing with the birth of Ganapati follow upon those
dealing with the birth of Karttikeya making Ganapati the younger
brother.®’ In the Brahmavaivarta* and Narada® Puranas he is
referred to as Guhagraja (elder than Guha, another name for
Skanda). In the Varaha Purana the chapter describing the birth of
Ganapati precedes that of the birth of Skanda, so we may presume
that he is the elder.*© However, it is not certain whether these
different texts represent a chronological development or merely a
regional difference in the importance given to each of these two
deities. Possibly, in some regions and among some categories of
people, as Ganapati became more important Skanda received less
attention and was relegated to the status of a younger brother. A
clearer idea can be had if one examines some of the inscriptions
of the early medieval period. By the eighth century, in some regions
at least, Ganapati was considered the older or, at least, the more
important of the two. An inscription from Baijnath in Kangra,
dated to about ap 750 begins with an invocation to Siva, followed
by one to Gajasya (elephant face), Skanda, Nandi and Virabhadra. ®
However, in Bengal, in the Barrackpur grant of Vijayasena’s thirty-
second year (eleventh/twelfth centuries during the reign of the
Sena dynasty), Siva is invoked first and, thereafter, Karttikeya and
Ganapati."

Some myths depict how Ganapau is the cleverer of the
two and, therefore, more important. The Siva Purana narrates the
myth of Siva and Parvati holding a competition—a race round the
earth—for their two sons. While Karttikeya sets off on his peacock,
Ganapati merely circumambulates his parents seven times since
he believes that his parents represent his whole world. He is
declared the winner and is married to the daughters of Prajapati,
Siddhi and Buddhi. From Siddhi he has a son, Ksema, and from
Buddhi, another son, Labha. Karttikeya on his return is furious to
learn what has taken place and departs to the Kraunica mountain
where he remains an eternal bachelor.®

Ganapati wins the race because of his intelligence and
devotion. By this he adds yet another dimension to his personality
-that of a householder. He was a gana, a child, and now, by his
marriage to Siddhi and Buddhi, he becomes a husband and a
father. This would also reflect a changing society where, what

--- Page 126 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 127
Karttikeya represented was not valid any longer. Just as Indra, the
warrior god, cedes his place to Siva and Visnu, so also Karttikeya,
as protector of children and then as warrior, cedes his important
position to Ganapati. The latter acquires greater and wider powers
since he removes obstacles of every kind. He can be manipulated
to suit a larger number of needs for many more categories of
society. Perhaps, in the early centuries of the Christian era,
continuous invasions made war a constant feature of life. Skanda,
therefore, was very popular as a warrior God. However, over time,
especially in north India, his importance within the Puranic
pantheon and, more specifically, within the Saiva pantheon,
declined. After being declared the winner of the race, Ganapati is
told by Siva: ‘He who has intelligence possesses strength as well.
How can he who is devoid of intellect have strength’.* Ganapati
represents intelligence which is considered more important than
martial might. He is also the perfect bhakta and, against a
background of a growing bhakti movement, he acquires greater
significance.

Within the Saiva pantheon, Ganapati and Karttikeya, as
indeed all the other ganas, remain essentially an extension of Siva.
If Siva acquires many of the characteristics of Vedic Indra, so do
his sons. Karttikeya, as Senapati, is shown riding on the elephant
Airavata,*! the mount of Indra. In fact, he is created to destroy the
Tripuras, a task that Indra is unable to accomplish. Similarly, in
one myth, Ganapati also acquires the head of Airavata. The ganas
have great yogic powers and yet they are warriors. Karttikeya is the
commander of the army and yet he is ‘conversant with the reality
of the teaching in the Vedas and Sastras’.’ The ganas are described
as being celibate, perfect yogins, and yet, at other times, they are
said to be married. Nandin is married to Suyasa, the daughter of
the Maruts.*? However, he is also described as being ‘stationed in
the harem of the lord’,™ a role normally associated with a eunuch.
Karttikeya is a bachelor and yet he is described as being attended
to by two Saktis. At other umes he is described as having a wife
called Devasena.®% Similarly, Ganapati is married to Siddhi and
Buddhi. At other times, he is said to be married to Pusti, the
daughter of Daksa.*’

At another level, Karttikeya and Ganapati represent the
two contradictory aspects of Siva. The former is tall and handsome,
the eternal youth, whereas the latter is short and potbellied. Siva

--- Page 127 ---
128 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

is always iconographically depicted as tall and slim, yet in his
Bhairava form he resembles the short stout form of Ganapati.”
Karttikeya is born on the sixth day of the bright half of the lunar
month of margasirsa. (November/December).” He is associated
with the sun, the fire, with brilliance and purity. Ganapati, on the
other hand, is born on the dark half of the month of bhadrapada
(August/September) at the auspicious hour of moonrise.'” He is
associated with the moon, with death and regeneration, hence
with fertility and prosperity. Siva's tapas (asceticism) and austerity
is brilliant and pure as the sun. Yet he wears the moon in his
locks. In Saiva philosophy, Siva is the embodiment of the five
elements which together make up every form of life. Skanda
represents both fire and water, the nga represents air, the Goddess
the earth, and Ganapati the sky or ether.’’ Both Ganapati and
Karttikeya thus appear to be extensions of Siva himself, the only
deity who is both erotic and ascetic at the same time, who has a
family with two sons, but who is also the eternal yog? living on the
peak of Mount Kailasa. The conflict between Ganapati and
Karttikeya, as represented by the myth of Ganapati’s marriage,
can be seen as a parallel to the constant conflict in the personality
of Siva because of his dual personality.

Within the framework of Pasupata Sivaism as described in
the Puranas, all the gana chieftains are extensions of Siva, but they
are not Siva himself. This is because the Pasupata School is dualistic.
The supreme and individual souls are distinct entities. In its
delivered condition the individual soul shakes off its ignorance
and acquires the supreme and ultimate knowledge and purity. It
attains perfect resemblance to Siva without, however, the power of
creation.'” In describing such a delivered soul it is said: ‘if he is
unattached, Sadasiva, Lord of Gods, teaches him the purport of
the great mantra, crowns him as the chief of the ganas, and gives
him a body similar to him’.'” Siva is lauded as ‘the one having the
face of a great elephant’,'" or as the one assuming the form of an
elephant.'” He is ‘One who has the form of a boy, or one assuming
the form of a boy.’' ‘You are the animals, beasts and birds.’ !”
Siva was also worshipped in eight forms which were considered to
represent his diverse manifestions—the five elements together with
the sun, the moon and the sacrificer. Ganapati, similarly, also
acquires eight forms and is invoked with eight names—Ganeéa,
Ekadanta, Heramba, Vighnanayaka, Lambodara, Surpakarna,
Gajavaktra and Guhagraja.'"

--- Page 128 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 129

At an initial stage, before Ganapati acquired the right to
be worshipped first, various leaders of ganas enjoyed this honour.
Canda, Nandin, Bhrngin, Skanda, Adityas, the Maruts and the
goddess are all, at some point or the other, stated to have the
privilege of being worshipped first. So also are Virabhadra, the
bhitas, the pretas and the kusmandas."” In the case of Kirtimukha,
it is stated that ‘this gana shall be specially worshipped in the
course of the adoration of Siva. Those who do not worship him at
the outset will find their worship in vain’.''® At other times, it is
recommended that Nandin be worshipped at the outset and only
then, Mahakala, Ganga, Yamuna, ganas and others. There is no
specific mention of Skanda and Ganapati.''' There are some
descriptions of Siva worship in which the ritual begins with the
adoration of the eight cosmic bodies of Siva. This is followed by
worship of his retinue consisting of Igana, Nandi, Canda, Mahakala,
Bhrngin, Skanda, Kapadisa, Soma and Sukra. Virabhadra is placed
in front of Siva and Kirtimukha at the back. Ganapati is not
mentioned.'!? Being a latecomer into the Brahmanical fold, he
was, initially, not included in the worship of the Puranic Siva.
Sometimes his name appears as a superimposition on an already
established ritual. In the Linga Purana, for example, there is a
chapter on the worship of Siva in the form of a linga.'* In the
entire chapter, which describes the procedure in detail, there is
no mention of Ganapati. Only at the end of the chapter is it
stated that for the achievement of all desired objects, Ganesa, the
lord of the universe, shall be worshipped at the outset, and in the
end, by brahmanas and devas. This instruction appears to have
been inserted at a later stage and shows that the worship of
Ganapati was not, initially, an intrinsic part of this rite.

Ganapati, in the context of Sivaism, 1S either a gana which
makes him a warder deity, or he is the son of Siva. As ‘Vinayaka’
he is usually depicted in the role of attendant along with other
gana chiefs. In the Agni Purana, for example, in the context of the
intial consecration of an image, the warder-gods Nandi and
Mahakala, Bhrngi and Vinayaka, Vrsabha and Skanda, Goddess
and Canda, are all worshipped first.''* As ‘GaneSa’, too, the
elephant-headed deity usually appears as a warder-deity. In the
Matsya Purana, for instance, in the context of the installation of
an image of Siva and its worship, GaneSa’s worship is part of the
worship of Siva’s attendants, along with that of Nandi, Bhrngi or
Karttikeya.'? These are probably references to the earlier stages

--- Page 129 ---
130 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

in the development of Ganapati-Vinayaka in the Saiva pantheon.
However, his worship as ‘Ganapati’ is distinct from that of the
warder deities and, in this case, he appears as an independent
deity who is worshipped as the Lord of Obstacles. According to
the Mahesa Mantra-Kathanam described in the Narada Purana,
meditation on Maheé§a is followed by the worship of the nine
Saktis. This is followed by the worship of the Lord of Obstacles.
Only then are the eight attending deities, including Ganesa,
worshipped.'!® A definite evolution is percepuble. He is both an
attendant deity and yet he has acquired the right to worship at an
independent level but, of course, within the framework of Sivaism.
At other times, instead of being worshipped as an attendant of
Siva, he is worshipped as his son along with his parents and brother.
In this case, the worship begins with Nandin, as an aspect of Siva,
and only then, inside the sanctum sanctorum, is Siva worshipped
along with the Goddess and their two sons.!"

Gradually, Ganapati comes to be worshipped for a variety
of purposes: for warding off impediments, for the fulfilment of all
desires, for emancipation and enjoyment,'"® for the sake of victory,
for prosperity and for the power to subdue.''’ He is worshipped
for progeny, for the achievement of holy rites, to bestow equality
on those men and women who worship him on all occasions and
for achieving oneness with Siva.'2? The Padma Purana adds that,
among other things, worship of Ganapati ensures control of the
entire universe. Evil spirits become calm. Such a devotee is not
troubled by disease. Being free from all sins, he eternally obtains
heaven.'*! According to the Bhavisya Purana, by worshipping
Ganapati, kings become powerful, kingdoms prosper, a beautiful
virgin can be acquired as a bride and victory in battle is ensured. !??

Ganapati in the Saiva pantheon has a counterpart in
Laksmana of the Vaisnava pantheon. It is said that if a man desires
success in the worship of Rama he must first worship Laksmana. !*
The mantra of Laksmana must be repeated before that of Rama if
the devotee wishes to achieve siddhi (success).'** By worshipping
Laksmana, a devotee regains lost kingdoms, overcomes premature
death, achieves victory in battles and never suffers from illness
and poverty.'?°

At other times, Ganapati has his perfect counterpart ‘in
Hanuman. The latter is sometimes an attendant of Rama and, at

--- Page 130 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 13]
other times, he is entitled to independent worship. Rama considers
Hanuman as his child.’ Like Ganapati, he is described as ‘the
young brahmacdrin, who confers all auspiciousness’.'®” By the
worship of Hanuman ‘the various harassing calamities from goblins,
poison, evil planets, and diseases as well as adverse planets and
demons perish at the same instant’.' These are the very dangers
with which the evil Vinayakas of the Manava Grhya Sutra were
associated. By the worship of Hanuman the devotee ‘obtains wealth,
grain, son, grandson, good fortune, unequalled renown, intellect,
learning, lustre, kingdom, victory in arguments, activities facilitating
the control of people and victory in battle’.'” Human problems,
fears and aspirations are common to all categories of society and
to all regions. To that extent, Hanuman and Ganapati both
represent the same thing within different contexts. The image of
Hanuman is stated to face the south’ as is often the case with
images of Ganapati in the Saiva temples. Both have faces that are
red with the application of sindira (red lead) and Tuesday is the
special day for their worhip.

GANAPATI AND THE OTHER PURANIC DEITIES
In the sectarian Puranas there are two distinct themes. On the
one hand, there is animosity and rivalry between different religious
sects and on the other, there is an emphasis on the essential unity
of the different deities. The efforts at syncretism between various
Brahmanical sects were embodied in distinct iconic types such as
the Hari-Hara (Visnu and Siva),'*! the Ardhandrisvara (Siva in his
form as half man and half woman) '* or the Sarvatobhadra images.
The latter depict Siva, Visnu, Surya and Durga on four sides of a
pillar. These forms evolved during the Gupta period. 'S8 The efforts
at syncretism resulted in Vaisnava deities being associated with
Siva and vice-versa. Kubera and his entourage begin to find mention
in the context of Visnuism.'™* In the same manner, Hanuman is
described as doing obeisance to Siva.'® It is said that he can be
worshipped in the pedestal of images of either Siva or Visnu.'*
Ganapati, the son of Siva, is accepted into the Vaisnava pantheon
and described as ‘one who served Krsna as well as Siva, who made
the gopis (cowherd maids) laugh, who is single-minded by being
devoted to the Lord of the gopis’.'°” Some Puranas go a step further

--- Page 131 ---
132 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

and bestow upon Krsna the role of having given Ganapati his
elephant head.'™ In fact even his birth is described as being the
result of Krsna’s propitiation by Parvati.’ Eventually Ganapati
becomes an amsavatara (partial incarnation) of Krsna.'*° His
worship ensures the attainment of Visnuloka (world of Visnu).!*!
The caturthi (fourth) day, normally associated with the worship of
Ganapati, is said to be the special day for some Vaisnava deities as
well. The caturthi in the month of vaisakha (April/May) is associated
with the worship of Sankarsana (brother of Krsna) and that in the
month of jyestha (May/June) is associated with Ganapati in the
form of Pradyumna (the son of Krsna and Rukmint).!*? So
completely is Ganapati absorbed within the fold of Puranic
Visnuism that, according to some Puranas, even the caturthi day in
the bright half of the month of bhddrapada, normally associated
with Ganapati alone, is celebrated as the holy day for the
bahuladhénuka vrata (a vow observed for the acquisition of many
cows) . On this day the cow is to be worshipped and the devotee
attains goloka, the realm of Krsna.

In the context of certain Vaisnava tirthas (pilgrimage sites)
such as that of the Visranti tirtha at Mathura, Hanuman is
worshipped first followed by Ganapau. Only then, are Visnu and
the Goddesses evoked.'** This would suggest that Ganapati is
accepted in his own right into the fold of Vaisnava worship, but
not in the highest rung of secondary deities. Subsequently, the
worship of Ganapati at the beginning of any rite and ritual was
accepted. According to the Narasimha Purana, for example,
Ganapati is first honoured at the beginning of any sacrifice or
worship.’ King Iksavaku is described as first worshipping Lord
Vinayaka before setding down to practice penance.'* In Uttar
Pradesh, the Mathura prasast? (eulogy) of the reign of Vijaypalla
(ap 1149-50) refers to a temple of Visnu but it begins with an
invocation and then mangala (invocation for auspiciousness) to
Ganapati’ which shows that by the twelfth century this was an
accepted practice in some regions.

Some Puranas recommend that the Sun or the pitrs
(ancestors) be worshipped at the beginning of any prayer or ritual.
According to the Brahma Purana, ‘The devotee should not worship
Visnu, Siva or the Lord of devas unless the water-offering has been
made to the Sun-god in the manner prescribed in the Sdstras’.\“7
At other times, the worship of the pitrs is considered imperative

--- Page 132 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 133
before the worship of any other deity. According to the Vayu
Purana, ‘One should especially worship pitrs before devas’.'* Both
the sun and the pitrs are closely associated in their roles. The sun
is the source of all life on earth even as the pitrs are the source of
existing generations. The pitrs are sometimes conceived of as
dwelling in the sun’s orb or the moon’s rays.'™ In fact, there are
many parallels between the pitrs, the sun, the moon and Ganapau.

The pitrs are said to have their abode in the sky (or in the
ether) and their quarter is the south.’ The nagas too, are
associated with the south and with the sky. The myth, quoted
earlier, whereby Rudra does not have a form in the sky and
therefore creates Ganapati, suggests the latter's association with
the sky. As a warder god of Siva, Vinayaka is positioned in the
south along with Bhrngi.'"' Pancayatana-Ganesa is always placed
either in the south-east or in the south-west.'*? Only when
worshipped as the principal deity is he placed in the centre.
Ganapati temples often face the south.'* The south is also the
abode of Yama, of death and, thereby, of regeneration. In the
Mahabharata, the southern region is described as being the abode
of the deceased ancestors and also the location of the town named
Bhogavati, ruled by Vasuki, the Naga Taksaka and by Airavata. '*4
In Buddhist literature, the southern region is presided over by
Viradhaka, the Lord of kumbhandas. As discussed in the preceding
chapter, the kumbhandas and the nagas form one aspect of
Ganapati’s origins.

The worship of some ndgas and pisacas appears to be litde
other than pitr-pija (ancestor worship) and this would account for
the close association between them and the pitrs. The nagas and
the pisacas were, originally, a people before becoming mythological
figures. The Nilamata Purana, recommends the worship of
Nikumbha who is said to have been the attendant of Nila, the
most famous of the naga kings to have ruled over Kashmir at the
dawn of civilization in the valley. According to this text, the earliest
inhabitants of the Kashmir Valley were the nagas and then the
pisacas. Nikumbha is described as a pisaca chief and it is prescribed
that oblations for him and the pisdcas should be placed, among
other places, in cemetries, rivers and on the tops of mountains. 155
Nikumbha appears to be a deified leader or chief of some of the
early inhabitants of Kashmir. Similarly, several nagas such as
Taksaka were also probably deified rulers or ancestors. Since

--- Page 133 ---
134 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Ganapati is partly derived from the ndgas/pisacas/kumbhandas, it is
hardly surprising that he shares a common symbolism with them
on the one hand and with the pitrs on the other.

Pitrs, when worshipped, confer many good things. * Pitrs in
the form of grandfathers grant nourishment, progeny and heavenly
pleasure to him who desires nourishment or who desires
progeny’.'% ‘A man devoted to pitrs immediately attains all the
jewels, vehicles and women on the earth’.'*’ A king regains his
kingdom; a poor man becomes wealthy; a man about to die, attains
longevity. In fact, a man devoted to pitrs has all his wishes fulfilled
by them. In a nutshell, worship of pitrs ensures a better material
life and it is precisely this that Ganapati comes to represent as he
grows in importance.

Gaya is the most famous place for the performance of pitr-
puja." Because of its age-old sanctity, it eventually became
associated with the important deities and sages. The padas
(footprints) of different deities here are said to include those of
Visnu, Siva, Indra, Ravi, Karttikeya, Kraunca and Matanga. The
other holy places for the performance of sraddha (rites for the
dead) are the mountain Amarakantaka (in Bilaspur District,
Madhya Pradesh), and other places situated in present day Kurnool
District (Andhra Pradesh), and KoSala (part of modern Uttar
Pradesh). These very regions were associated in one form or the
other with the sacred elephant. The earliest evidence of an
elephant-headed yaksa was found at Amaravati in Andhra Pradesh;
KoSala was associated with the Matanga dynasty. Gaya has a special
association with elephants, for it is stated that ‘by granting elephants
in Gaya, one can be free from all worries about sraddhas .'°

The pitrs, the moon, the sun, na@gas and the Goddess are
all symbols of fertility and the theme of fertility is woven around
the waters, vegetation, women and the mythological ancestor. All
five are associated with periodic regeneration—the sun that rises
and sets each day as does the moon, the ancestors who die but are
reborn in their descendants, and the Goddess who, as the
personification of the earth, gives and sustains life and takes back
the dead into her fold. This theme of regeneration is evoked by
the naga and other lunar animals, by the opposition of light and
darkness (night and day), the sky and the underworld. In fact ‘To
Sakti, the Sun and Vighnesvara red cloth is offered’.'!© Red is the
sign of virility and fertility.

--- Page 134 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 135

The association of Ganapati with the pitrs, the moon, the
sun, ndgus and the Goddess is never explicit in the Puranas. Yet,
the parallels are striking. Sometimes, the images of the deity are
eloquent testimony of this association. An early image of the
elephant-headed deity (c. fifth century) from Rajgir depicts him
seated and entwined by cobras. This image was one of several
figures forming the base of a structure of an old temple of Maniyar
Matha. The other iinages on the base of this statue are: a nude six-
armed dancing Siva, a linga garlanded with glowers, a nagzni and
five ndgas.’*' Even today, there are many places, particularly in
south India, where Ganapati is worshipped with ndgas. In Madurai,
for example, he is worshipped in the presence of nagas at the
Ganeéa Nataraja temple where there is a belief that childless
couples who bathe the image and circumambulate it in the early
morning for forty-eight days will have their wishes for progeny
fulfilled.’ There are no myths in the Puranas, however, which
throw any light on this aspect of the deity. It is evident that in the
Puranas Ganapati’s personality is being remodelled to fit into the
Brahmanical framework. However, older associations which were
popular and well-established continued and were gradually
incorporated into Brahmanical practices even if the texts did not
prescribe or describe them. From the iconological point of view,
Ganapati retains his link with the nagas because of the serpent
that he usually wears in the form of a sacred thread or as a waist
band.

Ganapati figures on the lintels of Sun temples in Gujarat
belonging to the Maitraka (aD 470-788) and the post-Maitraka
(eighth/ninth centuries) period. In the Sun Temple at Sutrapada
(District Junagadh, Gujarat), each doorway has an image of
Ganapati on the dedicatory block.'®3 Similarly, in the Surya temple
at Kalasar (District Bhavanagar), Ganapati is carved on the lintel
of the door. This association between Surya and Ganapati is never
explained in the Purdnas. Yet the association was old. In Chapter
II, I have referred to the description by Philostratus of the practice
of keeping a sacred elephant in the Sun Temple of Taxila in the
first century of the Christian era. This is yet another example of
how pre-Puranic associations of the sacred elephant are reflected
in a Brahmanical context without any explanation or justification
in religious texts.

What also remains unexplained in the Puranas is

--- Page 135 ---
136 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Ganapati’s association with the navagrahas (nine planets). Images
of the deity with the navagrahas, dating to about the seventh
century, have been found essentially in Orissa, Bengal and
Gujarat.'* Ganapati is always placed at the extreme right of the
navagrahas, next to Ravi, the sun. A carved navagraha slab was
found near the ancient ruins of Kankandighi (District of 24
Parganas, West Bengal), where the images of the Nine Planets are
represented standing in a row with Ganapati. Although two
navagraha slabs have been found in Bengal with the image of
Ganapati accompanying them, it is not known where these slabs
originally came from since there is no ancient temple in Bengal
still standing.'® In Orissa, often, only eight planets were depicted
and they were found in Saiva temples. They belong to the late
sixth or early seventh century. In the famous Parasuramesvara
temple (AD 650), which is the best known of the earliest Orissan
temples, images of the matrs, the navagrahas, Lakulisa, Ganapati
and Karttikeya are present. Although the Puranas do not provide
any explanation, the origin of this associauon can be sought in
the Vinayaka propitiauion rites described in the Manava Grhya
Sutra where the planets are invoked after the Vinayakas.

AS AN INDEPENDENT DEITY IN THE PURANAS

There are some Puranas, like the Agni Purana,‘ where chapters
are devoted to the worship of Ganapati as a deity in his own right.
He is depicted as a personality quite distinct to the GaneSa who is
Siva’s gana. The nature of the puja itself shows how the Puranas
have absorbed a non-Brahmanical ritual wholesale into their fold.
It does not include the worship of any other deity and the influence
of Tantrism is evident. There is emphasis on the importance of
the preceptor, the yantra (mystical diagram) the mudra (gesture)
and the manira (incantation)'*’ As in the case of the Tantras the
sadhana (worship) consists of two parts, puja (ritual worship) and
yoga (meditation).’* However, unlike Tantric texts which
recommend the use of the pancamakaras ( five essentials, i.e. wine,
meat, fish, gesture and sexual intercourse), the offerings to
Ganapati in Puranic religion are purely vegetarian, and do not
include any intoxicants either. Clearly, non-Brahmanical practices
related to Ganapati cannot be ignored once the deity has been
Brahmanized. The process of evolution is a continuous one. On

--- Page 136 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 137
the one hand, the deity is used to perpetuate Brahmanical norms
of caste and dharma. On the other hand, he is associated with all
categories of society and with rituals that are borrowed from non-
Brahmanical sources, thereby, making him a Brahmanical deity,
accessible to all.

Like in other aspects of Ganapati’s personality and worship,
there is ambiguity in his association with the caturthi at an initial
stage. According to the Rudrasamhita of the Siva Purana, Ganapati
was born on the fourth day of the waning moon in the bhadrapada
month at the auspicious hour of moonrise, and so this is the most
auspicious day for his worship.'*’ According to the Vidyesvarasamhita
of the same Purana, the days of special worship of Ganapati are
Fridays, the fourth days of the waxing moon in the months of
Sravana ( July/August) and bhadrapada.’” At other times the caturthi
in the month of dasddha (June/July) is considered specially
auspicious for the worship of Ganesa.'”' According to the Varaha
Purana, the vighnahara rite, for the purpose of warding off obstacles
should be performed on the caturthi in the month of phalguna
(February/March).'” Yet, at other times the caturth? in the month
of pausa (December/January) is considered specially auspicious. '*
If sometimes Fridays are considered particularly auspicious for the
worship of Ganapati, at other times it is stated that if the caturthi
coincides with Sunday or Tuesday in any of the twelve months, it
yields special benefits. Further, all the caturthis, whether of the
dark half or of the bright half of the month, are considered
auspicious for the worship of VighneSa, the Lord of Obstacles.
Eventually, the month of bhadrapada becomes the most popular
one for the celebration of the GaneSa caturthi.'”4

Ganapati, like the other Gods who figure in the
pancdyatana piija, is to be worshipped in his image. Clay idols are
particularly recommended. However, an idol made of metal, coral
or white arka (Calotropis gigantea) flowers can also be installed.'”
Among the articles that are specially associated with Ganapati
worship are vermillion, the ketaka (Pandanus odoratissimus, the Screw
Palm or the modern keora) flower, the arka flower and root.'”

The gd@yatris to the the elephant deity mentioned in the
Maitrayani Samhita and the Taittiriya Aranyaka are modified and
there is specific reference to Mahaganapati. The Bhavisya Purana
describes the mantra as Mahdganapataye vidmahe, vakratundaya
dhimahi, tanno Dantih pracodayat.'” The Agni Purana describes it as

--- Page 137 ---
138 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Lambodaraya vidmahe mahodaraya dhimahi tanno Dantih pracodayat.
In both cases, the appellation dantth is retained which associates
these gayatris with the earlier ones in the Mattrayant Samhita and
the Taittiriya Aranyaka. However, the epithets Mahaganapati and
Lambodara are those that are clearly associated with the Puranic
elephant-headed deity.

Ganapati-Vinayaka is created by the brahmanas. He is then
imposed upon the community at large and Brahmanical rites and
practices are superimposed on his non-Brahmanical associations.
According to the Padma Purana, a brahmana should first worship
GaneSa before performing any sacrifice. This ensures great religious
merit.! In the Linga Purana, Siva tells Ganapati, ‘my son, you are
born for the destruction of daityas and for rendering help unto
devas and brahmanas, the expounders of the Vedas’.'” If Ganapati
is created to destroy asuras, it is because at the origin, he was
looked upon as an asura himself. It is typical of the Puranas that
the most powerful and popular non-Brahmanical element in the
cultural tradition of a region is isolated and then transformed and
used for the promotion and transmission of Brahmanical norms.
The worship of Ganapati is thrust upon all other rituals by the
menace of ill-luck if this injunction is not adhered to. Siva is made
to say ‘O son, even when the brahmanas worship me as Narayana
or Brahma or when they perform sacrificial rites you will be
worshipped at the outset. If any one performs auspicious rites laid
down in the Sruti or Smrti or any wordly ceremony without
worshipping you at the outset, it will be turned inauspicious.’ !

Once Ganapati is made into a Brahmanical god, he is
used to ensure the maintenance of the caste structure. One prayer
implores the deity to ‘remove the vital breaths of men and women
fallen off from their castes’.'*' Patronage of the brahmanas is
ensured by prayers to Ganapati to create impediments in the rituals
performed without the offering of monetary gifts to brahmanas.'®
In a myth of the Skanda Purana,'** Ganapati is depicted as looking
after the welfare of the brahmanas. The text describes how before
the Kalt yuga, women, barbarians, sidras and other sinners entered
heaven by visiting the shrine of Somanatha. Asceticism, gifts to
brahmanas and other obligatory rites ceased to be performed and
heaven became crowded with men. Sacrifice was destroyed and
the earth emptied; heaven became so overcrowded that people
had to stand holding their arms straight up. Then Indra and the

--- Page 138 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 139
gods became distressed at being overrun by men, and sought
refuge with Siva blaming him for the overpopulation of heaven.
But Siva could do nothing. So Parvati created Ganapati to impose
obstacles before men so that they would be deluded and defeated
by desire and go to hell instead of coming to Somanatha. Ganapati
is obviously associated with the sudras but used by the brahmanas
to defend themselves against this very category.

NOTES
1. Sudhakar Chattopadhyaya, Evolution of Hindu Sects, p. 113.
2. Ibid., p. 123.
3. Ibid.
4. R.N. Nandi, Social Roots of Religion in Anaent India, p. 102.
5. Ibid.
6. Vayu Purana, 1.30.291-3.
7. Linga Purana, 11.96.106.
8. Ibid., 1.42.1-15.
9. Ibid., [.42.32.

10. Varadha Purana, 1.213.30-70.

11. Linga Purana, 11.107.55-8.

12. Vayu Purana, 1.30.122-4.

13. Linga Purana, I1.96.4-5.

14. Ibid., I1.i.96.64-75.

15. Ibid., 11.i.99 and 100.

16. Siva Purana, Il.v. 57.

17. Kiurma Purana, 1.32.16-18.

18. Vayjasaneyi Samhita, II: 61, HI:58. Quoted by Sukuman Bhattacharji,
The Indian Theogany, p. 109;

19. Mahabharata, XIII:17. Quoted by Sukumari Bhattacharji, op. cit.,
p. 111.

20. Skanda Purana, I11.11.72b-77.

21. Ibid., IJI.11.44b-49.

22. Ibid., 111.10.53.

23. Madeleine Biardeau, ‘The Sami Tree and the Sacrificial Buffalo’,
Contributions to Indian Sociology (NS), Vol. 18, 1, 1984, pp. 1-23.

24. Siva Purana, IL.V. 57.7.

25. Alf Hiltebeitel, ‘The Indus Valley “Proto-Siva”, Reexamined
through Reflections on the Goddess, the Buffalo and the
Symbolism of vahanas’, Anthropos, Vol. 73, 1978, pp. 767-97. See in
particular, p. 782.

26. K.V. Soundara Rajan, Cave Temples of the Deccan, p. 82.

--- Page 139 ---
140 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

27. Ibid., p. 191.

28. Carol Radcliffe Bolon, ‘Two Chalukya Queens and their Com-
memorative Temples’, in Vidya Dehejia, ed., Royal Patrons and
Great Temple Art, p. 71.

29. In the Mahabharata Siva is referred to as smgi (having horns—
AnuSasana Parva, 17.147), srngapriya (fond of horns—ibid.),
ursasrnga (having horns like those of a bull—Drona Parva, 173.30)
and visani (wearing horns—Anusasana Parva, 17.69). He is also
referred to as vrsana Sankara (horned Sankara—ibid., 17.80).

30. T.A. Gopinatha Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, Vol. II, Part II,
p. 177.

31. Ibid., p. 180. ;

32. V.N. Drabu, Saivagamas, A Study in the Socio-Economic Ideas and
Institutions of Kashmir (200 BC -AD 700), p. 221

33. K.V. Soundara Rajan, op. cit., pp. 192-3.

34. Alice Getty, Ganesa, p. 15.

35. Ndrada Purana, V.50.55-6.

36. Linga Purana, 1.92.79-80 and 84.

37. Siva Purana, IV.i.27.

38. J.N. Banerjea, The Development of Hindu Iconography, p. 129.

39. J.C. Harle, The Art and Architecture of the Indian Subcontinent,
pp. 645.

40. Ibid., p. 95.

41. R.C. Agrawala, ‘Urdhavaretas Ganesga from Afghanistan’, EW,
Vol. 18 (NS), 1968, pp. 166-8. The author discusses the dates
ascribed to these two statues by various scholars. Tucci considers
the statue from Gardez to belong to the end of the fifth or
beginning of the sixth century. D.C. Sircar prefers to ascribe it to
the sixth or seventh centuries. As for the one found at Sakar
Dhar, T.N. Ramachandran in his unpublished report of the Indian
Archaeological Delegation in Afghanistan in 1956 suggests the
fourth century as the probable date of this Ganapati.

42. Photo No. 509 in the Mathura Museum. See V.S. Agrawala,
‘Miscellaneous Architectural Sculptures: Buddhist’, JUPHS,
Vol. XXIX-XXV, 1951-2, pp. 77-118. See in particular p. 96.

43. R.C. Agrawala, ‘Urdhvaretas Ganesa from Afghanistan’, EW,
Op. cit.

44. J.N. Banerjea, op. cit., p. 123.

45. J.C. Harle, ‘Towards Understanding Gupta Sculpture’, in Karl
Khandalavala, ed., The Golden Age, p. 8.

46. Ibid., 104.

47. Mahabharata, XIII:17. Quoted by Sukumari Bhattacharji, op. cit.,
p. Ill.

48. J.N. Banerjea, op. cit., p. 536.

--- Page 140 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 141]

49. Ibid., p. 534.

50. Skanda Purana, 1.10.28.

51. Robert L. Brown, ‘Ganesa in Southeast Asian Art’, in Robert L.
Brown, ed., Ganesh, pp. 171-99.

52. Ibid.

53. D.C. Sircar, op. cit., p. 114.

54. M.K. Dhavalikar, ‘Ganesa: Myth and Reality,’ in Robert L. Brown,
ed., op. cit., pp. 49-67.

55. Alice Getty, op. cit., p. 22.

56. M.A. Stein, Kalhana’s Rajatarangini, Vol. I, p. 282.

57. Narasimha Purana, 26.6,8,13, cited in P.V. Kane, History of
Dharmasastra, Vol. V, Pt. 1, p. 149.

58. Linga Purana, 11.100.41-51.

59. Kurma Purana, 11.31.31.

60. Sukumari Bhattacharji, The Indian Theogony, p. 181.

61. Linga Purana, 1.72.1142).

62. Brahma Purana, IV.44.8. (Gautami Mahatmya)

63. Visnudharmottara Purana, 1.225.3.

64. Sara L. Schastok, The Samalaji Sculptures and Sixth Century Art in
Western India, p. 70.

65. Ibid., p. I.

66. G. S. Ghurye, Gods and Men, p. 77.

67. Alice Getty, op. cit, pp. 27-8. See also Aschwin de Lippe, /ndian
Medieval Sculpture, p. 138.

68. Siva Purana, Il.iv.13.20.

69. Skanda Purana, Venkateshwara Press edn., Sri Brahmkhanda,
11.12.23.

70. Matsya Purana, 1.154.502-4.

71. Bhavisya Purana, 2.4.31-3.

72. Vamana Purana , 28.64-6 and 28.57-9 (Saromahatmya)

73. Brhaddharma Purana, 2.60.35-50.

74. Varaha Purana, 1.23.9-18.

75. Brahma Purana, 1V.44.10-12 (Gautam! Mahatmya).

76. Varaha Purana, 1.23.20-9.

77. Siva Purana, ILiv.16.

78. Ibid., I.v.21.13-18.

79. EI, Vol. XXXVII, pp. 125-30

80. Brahma Purana, IV.44.11.

81. Linga Purana, 1.82.92-5.

82. Matsya Purana, 11.158.2442.

83. Siva Purana, I1.iv.2. for birth of Karttikeya and ILiv.13 for Ganesa.

84. Brahmavaivarta Purana, 11.44.85.

85. Narada Purana, IV.i.113.31-7.

86. Varaha Purana, 1.23 and 1.25.

--- Page 141 ---
142 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

87. G.S. Ghurye, op. cit., p. 70.

88. EI, Vol. XV, No. 15, pp. 278-86.

89. Siva Purana, ILiv.19 and 20.

90. Ibid., I.iv.19.52.

91. Linga Purana, 1.82.92-5.

92. Ibid.

93. Ibid., 1.44.38-9.

94. Ibid., 1.82.26-9.

95. Siva Purana, 1V.11.17-21.

96. Brahmavaivarta Purana, 11.17.1419

97. Ibid., III.17.23.

98. In the Visnudharmottara Purana, Siva, in his aspect of Bhairava, is
described as having ‘a flabby belly (other texts give pot-belly) and
round yellow (or red) eyes, side tusks and wide nostrils’. See Alice
Getty, op. cit., p. 13. There is an image dated to late fifth century
AD, from Mansar, Maharashtra, presently at the National Museum,
Delhi, which depicts Siva as a corpulent dwarf. Sivaramamurti has
drawn attention to the Satarudriya, a celebrated Vedic text, in
which allusions are made to the dwarf form of Siva, and this
unique image may be related to some such concept.

99. Siva Purana, I1.iv.2.68.

100. Ibid., IT.iv.18.35-7.

101. Varaha Purana, 1.23.10-15.

102. R.G. Bhandarkar, Vaisnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious Systems,
p. 127.

103. Siva Purana, IV.ii.21.21-2.

104. Linga Purana, 1.21.59.

105. Skanda Purana, VII.i.325.2.

106. Vayu Purana, 1.30.214.

107. Ibid., 1.30.238.

108. Brahmavaivarta Purana, 11.44.85.

109. Linga Purana, 1.82.25-110.

110. Siva Purana, I1.v.19.51.

111. Agni Purana, 1.21.9-14.

112. Ibid., 1.2.22.

113. Ibid., 11.25.

114. Ibid., 1.96.

115. Matsya Purana, 11.266.42-9.

116. Nardda Purana, I1.i.91.1-30.

117. Linga Purana, 1.27.1-23.

118. Agni: Purdna, 11.1.179.1-5.

119. Ibid., III.i.301.1-7.

120. Linga Purana, I1.i.104.3-6.

121. Padma Purana, 11.i1.63.29-31.

--- Page 142 ---
A BRAHMANICAL DEITY 143

122. Bhavisya Purana, 1.30.19-21.

123. Ndrada Purana, II1.73.146-7.

124. Ibid., WI.i.73.148-51.

125. Ibid., ITI.i.73.152-63.

126. Ibid. ,NI.i.78.20-3.

127. Vardha Purana, I1.i.160.10.

128. Narada Purana, III.74.19.

129. Ibid., III.74.199-202.

130. Ibid., II.75.79; 11.75.4244.

131. Skanda Purana, Venkateshwara Press edn., V.i.3.34; VILii.17.115.

132. Matsya Purana, 11.260.1-21.

133. Pratapaditya Pal, The Ideal Image, p. 30.

134. There is a myth in the Bhagavata Purana about a pair of Arjuna
trees who in their former birth were two guhyakas and sons of
Kubera (IV.x.9.22-3 and IV.x.10). They were known as Nala Kubera
and Manigriva. Due to a curse by Narada they were transformed
into trees. Eventually they are uprooted and redeemed by the
child Krsna, whose fervent devotees they then become.

135. Narada Purana, IlI.79.131-5.

136. [bid., III.75.49.

137. Brahmanda Purana, 11.1ii.43.6.

138. Brahmavaivarta Purana, II.12.14-22.

139. Ibid., III.6.92.

140. Brahmavaivarta Purana, 11.34.62 and IV.9.10-12.

141. Ibid., III.13.60.

142. Narada Purana, IV.113.2-5.

143. Vardha Purana, I1.1.160.11-14.

144. Narasimha Purana, 1.25.24.

145. Ibid., 1.25.14.

146. EI, Vol. 1, No. 33, pp. 287-93.

147. Brahma Purana, 1.26.40.

148. Vayu Purana, II.14.2.

149. Markandeya Purana, 96.31.

150. Vayu Purana, 1.14.34. and Narada Purana, 1.14.89.

151. Agni Purana, 1.96.3.

152. Narada Purana, I11.i.65—sce footnote on page 936 of this text.

153. H. Cousens, The Chalukyan Architecture of the Kanarese Districts, pp.
21-2. This is usually the case when the Ganapati temple is not the
principal one in a complex. The astavindyaka and some of the
other important Ganapati temples generally face east or, in some
cases, north, like many Siva temples.

154. J. Ph. Vogel, op. cit., p. 201.

155. Ved Kumari, The Nilamata Purana, Vol. I. p. 162.

156. Vayu Purana, 11.21.84.

--- Page 143 ---
144 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

157. Ibid., 11.18.58 and 62.

158. Markandeya Purana, 33.8 and Matsya Purana, I1.204.7-8., and many
other references.

159. Ibid., 11.21.84.

160. Narada Purana, III.i.67.56.

161. Shiela L. Weiner, From Gupta to Pala Sculpture, p. 173.

162. Lawrence Cohen, ‘The Wives of GaneSa’, in Robert L. Brown, ed.,
Op. cit., pp. 115-40.

163. Kantilal F. Sompura, The Structural Temples of Gujarat, p. 81.

164. In the Manava Grhya Sutra the rites for Vinayaka propitiation are
followed by the worship of the seven goddesses and then of the
Sun. In the Yajnavalkya Smrti Vinayaka propitiation precedes the
rites for the grahas. These different themes gradually manifest
themselves in the cult of Ganapati.

165. Alice Getty, op. cit., p. 30.

166. Agni Purana, 1.71.

167. Siva Purana, IL.iv.18.

168. Sanjukta Gupta, Dirk Jan Hoens and Teun Goudriaan, Hindu
Tantnsm, p. 121.

169. Siva Purana, IL.iv.18.35-7.

170. Ibid., 1.i11.16.21-2.

171. Narada Purana, IV.113.6.

172. Varaha Purana, 1.59.

173. Narada Purana, IV.i.113.70b-71.

174. In the contemporary worship of Ganapati in Maharashtra, both
the fourth day of the bright half of the iunar month as also the
fourth day of the dark half are considered important. The fourth
day of the dark half of the month is called Sankasta caturthi
(dangerous fourth) and is considered inauspicious to begin any
new undertaking. Puja performed on this day is done with the
aim of averting ill luck and obstacles. However, the fourth day of
the bright half of the month is called Vindyaka caturthi (Ganapati’s
fourth) and this is the day believed to represent Ganapati’s positive
side and considered auspicious for new undertakings. This day is
also celebrated as his birthday.

175. Siva Purana, U.iv.18.42-3.

176. Bhavisya Purana, 1.20.3.

177. Ubid., 1.30.15.

178. Padma Purana, I1.i.63.20-1.

179. Linga Purana, 11.i.105.15.

180. Ibid., IT.1.105.22.

181. Ibid., I1.i.105.15.

182. Linga Purana, 11.i.105.15-23.

183. Skanda Purana, Venkateshwara Press edn., VII.1.38.

--- Page 144 ---
ay
&
LY THE CULT OF GANAPAT)
Circa A.D. 400 - 800
isan ott a.
== =———t 0 100 200 KO 400 S00
js Rs Es Cs a
— ( : aon peohonapsire
= \ C
oe a = ik
e - =
Mandor 4 - ~ U3 0
== == ’
| ——— =
’ Udeyagen 24 Pasganas Onset ict tho
= .
=e = -_—e
~~ ——4 eae y/
OF purangabed y
a
Bay of Bengal
. (
Arabian Sea ao 2
aici \8 ete Sa o
8 okama Vigukunden ==
iN wey | == Cae
. e See where the ewliest mages of Ganapati have been tound
S (appraumesely anvSih Century AD)
eee, y SVEN Comtury - Gagapan wath Sova
~ f ie] StiVeIn Century - Ganapats in Buddhas! context
a 6th Century - Ganapas with Mines
4 e) Tin Century - Ganepat with Nevagrahas and Surye
ie { Tih-Bih Century - Ganapati in the extreme North and Gouth
)
INDIAN OCEAN
Map 2. Sites/Regions mentioned in Chapters III and IV.

--- Page 145 ---
CHAPTER 5

Lord of Trade
Early Vedic literature does not refer to any deity associated with
trade. This is understandable, given the fact that the Indo-Aryans
lived as a tribal society, where the main ocupation was nomadic
pastoralism. Cattle constituted the principal property. By the middle
of the first millenium sc, new political structures such as the
monarchy and the republic replaced tribal organization. Towns
developed as centres of industry and trade mainly in the Ganga
basin. Tribal loyalty was replaced by caste and guild loyalty. Each
caste and guild had specific norms by which to live and, probably,
the varied aspirations and functions of different groups led to
divergence in worship and ritual. According to the Brhadaranyaka
Upanisad, gods of the vaisya class were constituted in groups or
guilds like their human counterparts and were referred to as
Ganasa. They are stated to have been specially created for the
purpose of producing wealth. '

Between the third/second centuries sc and the sixth
century ap there is evidence of Manibhadra and Kubera being the
principal deities of the wading community. Both were yaksas and,
traditionally, yaksas were regarded as guardians of treasure. Kubera,
as the king of yaksas, was the lord of wealth. Manibhadra was more
specifically worshipped by traders for safety and success during
business voyages. Although his cult was associated with that of
Kubera, it appears to have been especially popular in some regions
with important urban centres. The evidence from archaeology,
epigraphy and literature connects Manibhadra with Mathura and
Pawaya (old Padmavati in Gwalior),? Magadha,? Orissa! and
Brahmavati (in the region of Gandhara).° Magadha and the middle
Ganga plain were regions where Buddhism and Jainism gained
their initial foothold. The social base of these two religions was
largely drawn from the mercantile class and it is their influence
which eventually made the cult of Manibhadra an important one

--- Page 146 ---
LORD OF TRADE 147
within the Buddhist and Jaina contexts. The deity is often
mentioned in the Pali works of the Buddhists and the Prakrit
canons of the Svetambara Jainas.

Until the first two centuries of the Christian era,
Manibhadra was associated with categories of people who were
not particularly high in the caste hierarchy. The Milindapanha’®
refers to Manibhaddas or followers of the Manibhadra cult together
with tumblers, jugglers and actors. His gradual acceptance by
Buddhism and Jainism and his growing popularity with a category
of people who were affluent, eventually led to his worship being
adopted even by some brahmanas because of the wealthy patronage
that ensured. A story in the Mahabharata describes how a brahmana
who, in his desire to perform yajnas, is constantuy in need of wealth.
He finally turns to Manibhadra to provide him with what he needs.
The yaksaraja Manibhadra, who is referred to as Dhanadata Deva,
fulfills his demands but only with the permission of the
Brahmanical gods.’

There is evidence of images of Manibhadra being
worshipped from as early as the first century Bc. The Parkham
image of the yaksaraja Manibhadra‘ dates to this period and appears
to be the earliest of its kind. A second image was found at Pawaya
and is dated to the first or second century of the Christian era.”
The dedicatory inscription declares that the members of the gostha
(corporation) for whom the image was set up called themselves
Manibhadra bhaktas (devotees).'” The left hand of the image grasps
a money bag. This gostha was obviously one of merchants or traders.
An inscription discovered in the vicinity of Kosam, the ancient
Kausambi,'! records the erection of a stone railing (vedika) by a
certain Gotiputa who was a caravan-merchant and a votary of
Manibhadra. The inscription begins with a salutation to a certain
Bhagavat whose name, unfortunately, is not given and ends with
the wish that the deity may be pleased. The deity probably refers
to Manibhadra given the fact that Gotiputa was his devotee.

The title Maharaja-Siri-Ganasa appears in the first line ofa
poorly preserved inscription of about the third century ap.'’ D.C.
Sircar interprets this as reference to a ruler called Sri-Gana during
whose reign the grant recorded in the inscription was made.
However, the existence of such a ruler is not confirmed by any
other source. It is, therefore, not improbable that Siri- Ganasa refers
not to a ruler, but to a deity. Since one of the meanings of the

--- Page 147 ---
148 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

term gana is a ‘corporation of traders and artisans’,'> Ganasa (Lord
of the Gana) could also signify the lord of a guild of traders or
artisans. The inscription records the installation of three idols by
a certain Milajapa. This may have implied the setting up of a
shrine dedicated to Ganasa and other deities associated with him.
Maharaja may be an honorific title for the deity just as it sometimes
is for Kubera or the Buddhist lokapalas. The inscription has been
found in Orissa. While it cannot be definitely said that Siri- Ganasa
signifies Manibhadra, it is likely that he was a deity associated with
traders. Milajapa must have been a wealthy man if he could set
up three idols and gift land for their maintenance. Since he does
not claim to be a king or a member of a royal family, and does not
associate himself with any particular geneology, it is possible that
he was a merchant of some means. The inscription suggests that
traders had their own deities and it was not uncommon for them
to set up their images for worship. Some of the earliest inscriptions
of the Christian era are those of traders.

The Jatakas provide numerous examples of rituals
pertormed by traders before setting out on their perilous travels.
They made animal sacrifices to some deity and vowed to make
more if the journeys were profitable. Such deities were usually
associated with a tree outside the village, in a grove or in the
dense jungle. Sacrifices were also made at the cross-roads with
fish, flesh and wine in bowls or sherds for the purpose of averting
evil influences and obstacles.'* The erection of a stone railing
referred to in the Kosam inscription, mentioned earlier, may have
been in commemoration of a safe return. Manibhadra probably
had shrines in the town as well as special sacred trees in the forest
or on the periphery of the town. There is reference to a temple of
Manibhadra in the city which served as a place for determining
whether husbands and wives had been unfaithful. '* Such a practice
must have been particularly relevant in the case of travelling
merchants who had to absent themselves for long periods.

The Aranyaka Parva describes the plight of a group of
merchants attacked by wild elephants in a jungle. Many are killed
and much merchandise is ruined. The survivors ask themselves
why it happened. They come to the conclusion that it was because
the Mahayaksa Manibhadra and Kubera were not worshipped.'®
They further state that they did not perform pija of the vighnakartas

--- Page 148 ---
LORD OF TRADE 149
(creators of obstacles) at the outset. These vighnakartas represented
the various evils and obstacles that could beset those setting out
on long, perilous journeys. That is why the worship of the guardians
of the quarters was considered important. The twenty-fourth
chapter of the Lalitavistara and the Mahavastu describe the meeting
of the Buddha with two merchants. The chapter concludes with a
benedictory hymn, in which the protection of the four quarters is
invoked for itinerant merchants.!’? According to these two texts,
each quarter is represented by a group of seven naksatras, one of
the Buddhist lokapalas and one Brahmanical lokapala. If Kubera
was the guardian of the northern quarter for the Buddhists, the
latter considered Manibhadra to be his Brahmanical equivalent. "*
The Vinayakas of the Manava Grhya Sutra were similar in concept
to the vighnakartas in that they represented the numerous ills that
threatened every category and age-group of society. They were
eventually identified with the vighnakartas.

Initially, Manibhadra was an insignificant deity in the
Brahmanical context. This was probably due to the fact that traders
and their activities were looked down upon. According to the
Vayu Purana a merchant is among the’ persons who cannot be
invited to a sraddha (ceremony performed in honour of the dead).
It is said that, ‘what is given to a trader is not beneficial here or
hereafter.... That which is given to a merchant or an artisan devoid
of virtue becomes lost; a merchant despises (underrates) the
commodities while purchasing and praises (the same) while selling.
Hence a merchant, the abode of untruth, does not deserve
(invitation to ) a Sraddha.’ Again, according to the Vayu Purana,
‘In this yuga, people will have wading propensity. By false measures,
the buyers will be deceived of their due share in the commodities’. *°
One reason for this attitude was because many of the wealthy
traders and merchants were Buddhists or Jainas. Since they did
not patronize the brahmanas, the latter felt cheated of the privileges
and wealth they had received from this community in the past.

Manibhadra’s association with the trading class is suggested
in some of the vaisya professions and caste names which carry the
epithet ‘mani’ (jewel). The Smrtzs and Dharma Sastras refer to a
caste, the Manikara, who were believed to be the offspring of a
clandestine union between a ksafriya male and a vaisya female.
Members of this caste gained their livelihood by working on beads,

--- Page 149 ---
150 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

by perforating pearls and dealing in coral and conches. According
to the Sutasamhita, however, they were the clandestine offspring
of a vaisya male from a vaisya female.”!

Eventually, Manibhadra came to be associated direcuy with
wealth rather than with protection from dangers during business
travels. He is invoked as Dhanesvara in the Milamata Purana which
states that one becomes rich by the mere sight of him.” Since the
Nilamata reflects beliefs and practices in Kashmir between
approximately the seventh and ninth centuries aD it is clear that
Manibhadra appears to have taken on the role of Kubera who
perhaps did not have a regular cult. In the Karpuracanta Bhana of
Vatsaraja (twelfth/thirteenth centuries aD),’* Manibhadra is
described as the giver of victory in gambling, which confirms his
position as the bestower of wealth.”*

Like Manibhadra, Kubera, too, was often depicted holding
a money bag. Several Gupta images of Kubera have been found in
Rajasthan where he is depicted as a pot-bellied deity holding a
money bag in one hand and a cup in the other.” Sometimes the
cup is replaced by a round object as is the case of a Jaina sculpture
discovered at Bansi and dated to about the seventh/eighth century
AD. At Bhinmal there is a sculpture of a four armed Kubera in the
famous temple of Varaha-Ghanasyama. It depicts the deity holding
a purse like object in the upper two hands.” An elephant stands
to his left. The concept of prosperity and plenty is determined
largely by the ecology of a place. In Rajasthan, where water is
scarce, the image of Kubera is often found near step-wells. One
such sculpture was found on a brick platform in front of the step-
well inside the Candinath temple at Bhinmal (c. seventh/eighth
centuries AD).”’

Unlike Manibhadra who is usually invoked alone, Kubera
appears to have been closely associated with Laksmi, the goddess
of wealth and prosperity. The Mahabharata describes Laksmi as
being present in the abode of Kubera.” Several sculptures of the
Kusana period provide evidence of the worship of Laksmi together
with that of Kubera.” This is not surprising. Originally, Laksmi
was a non-Vedic goddess connected with vegetation and fertility.
She was popular with agriculturists and herdsmen. As trade became
an important activity and prosperity took on different connotations,
even traders came to worship her. The Buddhist sources reflect
this association between Sri or Laksmi and the merchant

--- Page 150 ---
LORD OF TRADE 15]
community. Their names often contain the prefix Sri and these
names are very common in the Buddhist votive inscriptions of the
second/first century Bc.”

The affiliation between Laksmi and traders is further borne
out by some ancient coins, such as the negama series of the inscribed
coins of Taxila. Negama corresponds to the ‘traders’ or ‘market
merchant guild quarter of a city’. In any case, it indicates mercantile
money tokens issued by traders (second century Bc).*' On the
obverse of some of these coins a female figure is depicted with a
lotus in the right hand. Her pose is similar to that of the Laksmi
on the coins of Mathura and elsewhere, although she does not
stand on a lotus. Among the coins of Mathura, dated between
900-50 Bc and included as tribal coins, the standing figure of a
goddess holding a lotus in her uplifted right hand appears on the
obverse. She is quite clearly meant to represent Laksmi. On the
reverse are depicted three elephants with riders holding goads.*
These, evidently, represent merchants.** The traditional symbol of
the merchant class was the elephant goad. It probably signified
the travels of merchants and the transport of large-scale
merchandise which often must have taken place on elephant back.

Sri was first accepted into the Vedic pantheon and
associated with Indra. Like her, the latter, too, was the bestower of
rain, fertility and abundance. Just as Parvati came to represent the
various Mother Goddesses, so also Laksmi absorbed within her
the cult of the several goddesses of fertility and prosperity. She
was associated with Indra, then with Kubera. On rare occasions
she was associated with Manibhadra but in the company of Kubera.
In the seventh hymn of the Sri-Siukta the worshipper implores the
goddess to come to him with Devagakha (Kubera), Kirti and Mani.™

Ganapati’s association with Kubera and Laksmi begins
from around the late fifth/early sixth centuries. There are numer-
ous examples of images from Mathura where Gajalaksm1 is shown
flanked by the pot-bellied figures of Ganapati and Kubera.”
Mathura was one of the main cenwes of trade with the western
countries. Jaina merchants had concentrated in this region since
Satavahana times, generously subsidising the erection of Jaina
monasteries and temples.® In Rajasthan, a sculpture from Abaneri
(now preserved at the archaeological museum at Amber) presents
Ganapati, Gajalaksmi and Kubera seated in a row. Kubera holds
what appears to be a cup of wine in his right hand and a female

--- Page 151 ---
152 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

figure holding a flask in her hands can be seen by his side. This
relief is dated to the eighth century.” It is possible that these early
statues of Ganapati with Laksmi and Kubera are Jaina ones.
Probably, at this stage, Ganapati is not directly associated with
wealth but only appears as the remover of obstacles for the
acquisition of riches. This is confirmed by the Sakrai Stone
Inscription, (Ap 642-3)* found in the region of Jaipur, Rajasthan.
It records the construction of a pavilion (mandapa) in front of the
goddess Sankara by an association or a committee of eleven
bankers. The initial portion of this inscription invokes the blessings
of three deities: Ganapati, Candika and Dhanada. The invocation
to Ganapati does not in any way associate him with trade or wealth
as such. He is merely invoked to bestow blessings. It is Candika
who is invoked to shower prosperity and Dhanada to confer
affluence.

It is significant that the earliest inscription where Ganapati
is invoked before any other deity is by the merchant community.
As mentioned earlier, the placation of the vighnakartas at the outset
of a journey was an old practice performed by merchants and
caravan leaders. Ganapati-Vinayaka gradually came to represent
all forms of vighnakartas and was, therefore, readily worshipped
before any other deity by the mercantile community. He is not
generally referred to in inscriptions before the eighth century. On
the rare occasions when he is, it is either to mark the setting up of
his image along with that of Siva or he is invoked after Siva before
the main text of the inscripuon. The eighth century Bhairavakonda
Inscription of Vikramaditya (Andhra Pradesh), refers to the setting
up of images of Dandisvara, Ganapati and Nandisvara.*® Another
inscription from Baijnath in Kangra invokes Siva, Gajasya, Skanda,
Nandi and Virabhadra. Even after the ninth century there is no
cpigraphical evidence of Ganapati being systematically invoked
before other deities. More often than not, Siva or Visnu are invoked
first.“” Most inscriptions are in the name of kings and members of
the nobility and Siva and Visnu were the two most popular deities
with these categories. This makes the seventh century Sakrai Stone
Inscription all the more significant. In at least one region, that of
modern Rajasthan, Ganapati was invoked before other deities by a
group of bankers. Neither Siva nor Visnu are mentioned. The
three deities in question, Ganapati, Candika and Kubera were
evidently more popular with this community.

--- Page 152 ---
LORD OF TRADE 153
From the little evidence available, it would appear that
Ganapati acquired this important position, initially, with specific
families of bankers who were possibly, Jainas. In the case of the
Sakrai Stone Inscription, it is worth noting that the bankers belong
to two families—Dhusara and Dharkkata. The surname Dhisara is
still well-known in Rajasthan, but persons bearing this surname
call themselves Bhargava brahmanas, though they are generally
believed to have been originally banias (traders/shopkeepers). In
this inscription, Mandana Dhusara, one of the members of the
temple supervision committee is called a sresthi which clearly makes
him a vaisya. The name Dharkkata has survived in the slightly
altered form Dhakad, a sub-division of the Osvals.*’ The object of
the inscription is to record the construction of a mandapa in front
of the goddess Sankara. The wordings of the inscription suggest
that the pavilion was intended to receive images of various
secondary deities by the side of the principal divinity that was
Sankaradevi. Possibly, what was dedicated by the Sresthins was not a
bare pavilion but a pavilion with images of various gods, including
those of the three invoked in the inscription, each properly
installed in its respective niche.” It is also likely that the wealthy
and more resourceful merchants and bankers installed deities
which were dear to them in various existing temples. At Osian
there are two eleventh century images of Ganapati carved along
with Kubera on the doorsills of small Jaina shrines that stand in
the foreground of the Mahavira temple.* At the main shrine
of the temple of Pippalada Mata at Osian ( Jodhpur District,
Rajasthan), huge sculptures of Ganapati and Kubera are placed
close to that of Mahisamardini.** Here Mahisamardini replaces
Candika of the Sakrai Stone Inscription.

By the ninth century in Rajasthan, Ganapati is specifically
associated with trade and prosperity. The Ghatiyala Inscription of
Pratihara Kakkuka® (ap 861) records the establishment of a hatta
(market) and mahajanas (traders) at Rohimsaka (identified with
Ghatiyala) and Maddodara (identified with Mandor). According
to the insription, the Ghatiyala region had been deserted because
of its being unsafe on account of the Abhiras. Kakkuka conquered
the area and established markets in the villages of Rohimsaka and
Maddodara. Brahmanas, ksatriyas and vaisyas were settled there by
him. The inscription is engraved on a column, not far from an old
ruined Jaina structure, now called Mata-ki-sal, about 35 km. from

--- Page 153 ---
154 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Jodhpur. It begins with an obeisance to Vinayaka. No other deity
is mentioned. The column itself is surmounted by a quadruple
image of Ganapati facing the cardinal directions. This is the first
time that four images of Ganapati are represented back to back.
He evidently represents protection of the four quarters. It is
significant that in this context only Vinayaka is invoked. Clearly,
the deity was associated with material prosperity. It is also likely
that he was a popular deity with the trading class, otherwise his
image would not be installed in such a prominent position in a
newly founded market centre. Possibly, it is because Kakkuka relied
on the wealth generated by merchants and trade, that he accepted
the establishment of the image of this deity, normally not associated
with royal houses and the upper two castes. Elsewhere, images of
Ganapati during this period appear essenually in shrines or for
purposes of worship. Here the deity appears to have greater
protective powers as the guardian yaksas of old.

The Ghatiyala Pillar Inscription was written by a Maga
brahmana. The Maga were originally foreigners who were associated
with sun worship. They had been regarded in the early centuries
of the Christian era with some suspicion from the point of view of
ritual status. It is evident that by the time of this inscription they
had established their bona fides even as the rulers they served
had. The Pratiharas of Mandor, who rose to prominence sometime
in the eighth century, claimed descent from the ksatnya wife of a
brahmana implying brahma-ksatra status. They claimed links with
Laksmana who acted as the pratthara (doorkeeper) of Rama.“ In
fact, they were descended from Gurjara (shepherd) stock. It is
possible that in the course of their rise to political prominence,
this family may have been served by the Maga, themselves ritually
low in Brahmanical hierarchy. As the family came into power the
ritual status of the Maga serving them also improved.

Maga is another name for the Sakadvipiya brahmanas.
These brahmanas are known as sevaks in the region of Jodhpur and
most of them are religious dependants of the Osval Sravakas. Some
of the merchants setuled in Maddodara and Rohimsaka by Kakkuka
may well have been Jainas. Perhaps one reason for the deity’s
early importance in this region is because this area was a stronghold
of Jainism and the Jainas were a prosperous trading community.
In a region where there was economic prosperity and where the
merchant class was powerful, their influence must have been

--- Page 154 ---
LORD OF TRADE 155
considerable. The period between approximately the fourth/fifth
century and the tenth century is generally looked upon as one
when trade and urban centres declined, when coins became scarce
and when self-sufficient economies developed in most regions of
the subcontinent. The Ghatiyala Pillar inscription provides an
example to the contrary. Mandor and Rohimsaka were among the
few places which actually witnessed a more advanced economy as
a result of Pratthara Kakkuka’s conquest. Vinayaka was the deity
chosen to preside over this newly founded prosperity.

Another inscription dated ap 960 from the region of Alwar,
Rajasthan, records the grant of the village Vyaghrapataka for the
purpose of defraying the expenses of performing rituals and
maintenance of a Siva temple established by a certain Mathanadeva,
who claims to belong to the Gujarapratihara lineage.’ This name
does not appear in any other inscription or source and, possibly,
Mathanadeva was a feudatory or subordinate of Vijayapaladeva
who he refers to and who was king of Kanauj. The inscription
records that certain additional taxes or tolls gathered from the
various sources of revenue would be used for the temple as also
for the shrine or image of Vinayaka which was set up close by.
This inscription is addressed to the inhabitants of the village which
include merchants (vanzk). Further, there is reference to markets
(hatta) in the village. What is significant is that the Vinavaka shrine
is given sufficient importance in this region. It is true the deity is
part of a Saiva temple but special provisions for his shrine may
have been the consequence of the importance he already enjoyed
with the trading community which had the inclination and the
means of paying the various taxes or tolls for its maintenance.

A comparison between the ongins of Manibhadra, Kubera
and Ganapati would enable a better understanding of why Ganapati
is closely linked to them and eventually takes on their role. All
three were yaksas and the elephant deity was originally also a naga
deity. The yaksas, like the nagas, are the traditional guardians of
treasure. The term mani signifies jewel and, according to traditional
belief, only the snake and the elephant carry a jewel within them. *
The sacred elephant represented fertility and prosperity. Its cult
was linked to that of the goddess. When Laksmi became the
archetype of all goddesses of plenty, the sacred elephant, in its
evolved form of Ganapati-Vinayaka, also came to be associated
with her. If Laksmi has her abhiseka performed by elephants,

--- Page 155 ---
156 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Ganapati too, in Tantric texts, has his abhiseka performed by the
eight diggajas. Instead of water, they pour jewels and wealth upon
him." Ganapati’s naga origin associates him with water and, indeed,
many of his statues, like those of Kubera, have been found near
step wells or along rivers.” Laksmi’s origin, in traditional literature,
is also from the waters. Manibhadra is represented as one of the
principal yaksas in the Jaina context. In Jaina cosmography he
occupies the position of a chief and is thus called Indra, along
with Parnabhadra.*’ Kubera has been conceived by the Svetambara
Jainas, as a deity, who rides a man, bears gems and a club. He is
considered to be the treasurer of Indra.*’ Kubera is also the
attendant yaksa of the nineteenth Jina, Malli. The ensign of this
yaksa is the pot.* Similarly, it is as Matanga, the yaksa of Mahavira,
that the prototype of Ganapati-Vinayaka is present in the Jaina
pantheon.” There is also a yaksa called Mahayaksa who is the yaksa
of the second Tirthankara Ajita.** Sometimes the epithet Mahayaksa
is applied to Ganapati himself as in the case of the Ganapat-
mantrasadhana in the Digambara text Vidyanusasana.”®

Manibhadra conunued to be popular in Rajasthan and
Gujarat during the early medieval period. He was particularly vene-
rated by the Tapa gaccha of the Svetambara Jainas, formed in
Mewar in the thirteenth century. The followers of this gaccha
installed images of Manibhadra Vira in Jaina shrines erected by
them.” Vastupala, the chief minister at the Calukya court, was
favourably inclined towards this gaccha. Such patronage would have
helped Manibhadra’s worship gain importance.

There are two late sculptures, one from Prabhasa Patan
and the other from Diva in Saurashtra which depict Manibhadra
as riding an elephant with three trunks. Manibhadra himself has
the face of an elephant and he bears the mace, the goad, the
snake, and holds one hand in varada-mudra.* Almost all the images
of this deity are crude or spoiled by application of oil and red
lead-oxide. These sculptures are all recent and appear to have
litde or no historical basis. They, nevertheless, highlight some
popular conceptions of the deity. The elephant head links him to
Ganapati and to the Jaina yaksa Parsva who is also elephant-headed
and who attends upon the twenty-third Jina, Parsvanatha, in the
Svetambara tradition.” Sometimes Parsva’s elephant head has only
one tusk, making him similar to Ganapati.” The association
between Parsvanatha and Manibhadra is suggested even by the

--- Page 156 ---
LORD OF TRADE 157
Ramayana. According to this epic, Manibhadra’s name was
Parsvamauli. He acquired this epithet because his crown had
slipped to one side on being struck by the mace of Ravana when
he fought the latter.°' Manibhadra’s elephant vadhana associates
him with Kubera, Laksmi and Ganapati. Kubera is often shown
with an elephant mount and Laksmi's association with the
elephants is explicit in her form as Gajalaksmi. An image from
Osian depicts Ganapati riding an elephant.” This appears to be
the only representation of its kind (although there is a reference
to Ganapati riding on the elephant in one of the Puranas).® There
is another Jaina image of Ganapati from Nadlai, Rajasthan (twelfth
century) where he rides a ram. This vehicle is sometimes associated
with Kubera. Manibhadra, Parsva, Ganapati and Kubera share some
common characteristics in the region of modern Gujarat and
Rajasthan, which suggests that all four were associated with similar
functions. Parsva, himself, could never develop an independent
cult because he was an attendant deity and the Tirthankaras
remained the principal figures of worship in the Jaina context.
However, Manibhadra appears to have been as popular as Ganapau
among certain sections of Jaina traders and merchants. Kubera is
the one who eventually appears to have receded into the
background. Although his image appears in temple sculpture, he
does not seem to have enjoyed the same popularity as the other
two deities after the tenth century.

Manibhadra is invoked both by the Svetambara and the
Digambara sects. He is mentioned in the Digambara Vidyanusasana
also. In the present day context, Manibhadra is the tutelary deity
of the Osval Jainas who originated from Osian.” Ganapati is
worshipped by most Jainas and he appears to have taken over
certain functions of Kubera. Several images of Kubera dating to
the seventh and eighth centuries aD have been found near step-
wells. From the sixteenth century, inscriptions in step-wells invoke
Ganapati. One such inscription, dated aD 1547, was found on a
stone in a step-well called GaneSa-bavadi at Toda-Raising in the
Jaipur District of Rajasthan.” The inscription invokes the grace of
the god Ganeéa. Next follows a verse containing an adoration to
the god Vighnavinasana (destroyer of obstacles) praised as the
Supreme Being. The object of the inscription is to record the
construction of the step-well. A series of names are given. They,
evidently, do not belong to royalty otherwise it would have been

--- Page 157 ---
158 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

stated. It is likely that they represent wealthy land-owners or
merchants. There are two other inscriptions engraved on a pillar
in the corner of a step-well and on a stone slab built into the wall
of the same well in Rampura village, Mandasor district, Madhya
Pradesh. The date corresponds to ap 1607. They record the con-
struction of the step-well by someone who is stated to be from the
Sresthi gotra and the vaisya caste. Further, the grandfather of the
author of the inscription is said to be a Jaina. The second inscrip-
tion begins with a passage invoking Ganesa and Bharati.®’ Over
the centuries, Ganapati had become the deity representing pros-
perity specifically associated with the vaisya caste.

Images of Ganapati in Jaina temples of Rajasthan and
Gujarat speak of the importance of this deity within the Jaina
community. It is likely that since the Jainas were a powerful trading
community, any deity popular with the community would even-
tually find a place in the Jaina pantheon. An image of Ganapau
was found in the pitha of the Neminatha temple at Kumbharia
(AD 1126), and another in the Mahavira temple at Kanthkot
(AD 1280). They are both small images. In the Neminatha temple,
Ganapati is present in one of a series of niches, which also contain
images of Saraswati, Laksmi, vidyddevis and yaksis. Images of
Ganapati are, likewise, found in the Jaina temples at Idar, Patan,
Varakhana, Somanatha-Patan and other places. A temple at
Kumbharia, North Gujarat, also contains an image of Ganapati
carved on its rear wall. He is invoked along with Saraswati in one
of the Jaina inscripuons at the Temple of Neminatha. No other
deity figures in the invocation.” The Osvals and the Dharkatas are
mentioned in the inscription as two of the local communities that
could perform the festival celebrated on the anniversary of the
consecration of the temple.’! There appears to be a constant asso-
ciation between the Osvals, the Dharkatas and the deity Ganapati.
Even today, Ganapati is an important deity for the Svetambara
community of western India and is propitiated at different
auspicious occasions.

The flourishing Jaina community in Gujarat and Rajasthan
also built temples to Ganapati. The GaneSar Inscription of VS 1291
(AD 1235) refers to the construction of new temples and the repair
of old ones by the chief minister of the Calukyas, Vastupaéla’
and his brother Tejahpala. One such temple was made for the
God Ganesvara in the Ganauli village (near Dholka, Ahmedabad

--- Page 158 ---
LORD OF TRADE 159
District).”? Diskalkar who discusses this inscription feels that
‘Ganesvara’ probably refers to Siva. However, in view of the fact
that Ganapati was an established deity among the Jainas and had
his own temples during this period, it is likely that this temple
was, indeed, built for him.

Tibetan Buddhist texts also contain references to Ganapati
as the lord of wealth. These texts are translations of Indian originals
which have been lost and which were written and translated into
Tibetan between approximately the eighth and eleventh centuries
AD. Ganapati is often referred to as ‘Great God of Wealth’.” There
are prayers offered to him for the purpose of finding wealth without
effort, without the necessity of making a profit and for obtaining
power over the wealth of the world.” He is invoked as the ‘King of
Jewels’.”” The image of Mahaganapati made from ‘gold’ is said
to ensure wealth in the house where it rests. A rain of jewels is
believed to fall on the land where a golden Ganapati resides. Even
the lord of wealth, Vaisravana, is said to serve and honour the
owner of a golden Ganapati.”° Although the Buddhist Tantric texts
do not provide evidence of Ganapati being specifically the lord of
trade, they confirm that he had come to be looked upon as the
deity that conferred material wealth.

Eventually, Ganapati’s association with the trading
community finds reflection in the Puranas. According to the Brahma
Purana, Ganapati says that those who worship him will never
experience poverty.”’ According to the Brahmanda Purana, success
in all tasks is certain for those who worship Gajanana before
undertaking a ydtra (journey) and conducting vanyya (business
trade).”* Even the goad which Ganapati carries in his hand, is a
symbol of the vaisya class. Ganapati’s various functions are evident
in the names of his consorts and his sons. His two consorts are
described variously as Siddhi and Buddhi, Rddhi and Buddhi, or
Rddhi and Siddhi. Rddhi, however, is often referred to as the wife
of Kubera.” Their names represent the benefits accrued by his
worship. Buddhi means intelligence, siddhi signifies success and
rddhi, prosperity. The two sons are Labha (profit) and Ksema
(prosperity) .

Ganapati’s association with traders in the Brahmanical
context first takes place in the far South from about the tenth
century onwards. During this period, under Cola rule, merchants
played a major role in the economic, social and religious life of

--- Page 159 ---
160 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

the region. By the close of the ninth century ab, temple centres
and the surrounding brahmadeyas (land granted to brahmanas) had
emerged as nuclei of urban growth. The tenth century onwards is
a period characterized by the emergence of market centres
(nagaram) in response to the marketing needs of the nadus. Large-
scale commercial activity led to the establishment of a network of
market centres.*? The Colas, with their expansionist ambitions
patronized traders and commercial enterprises. It is against this
background that a variety of forms of Ganapati appear and each is
associated with a specific category of town or village.

In the Agamas, there is a definite association between
Ganapati and traders. It is specifically stated that his images may
be placed in shops, amongst other places.*' The Ajitagama refers
to a form of Ganapati known as Laksmi Ganapati.® It is described
as being white, ten-handed and seated with two devis (goddesses).
Among the attributes he holds are a bowl of jewels, the kalpalata
(wish-fulfilling creeper) and a kalasa ( jar) overflowing with nectar.
He holds one hand in the varada mudra (boon granting gesture).
This image recalls that of Gajalaksmi. The latter is flanked on
either side by an elephant even as Ganapati is by two devis. The
overflowing kalasa recalls the water poured by the elephants for
the abhisekha of Laksmi. Even the white colour is suggestive of
Laksmi. This is the first ime we come across such a close and
direct association between Ganapati and the Goddess of Fortune.
This form is recommended for towns which have shops and
different classes of people. In other texts the description of Laksmi
Ganapat is somewhat different. According to Aghorasivacarya in
his Knyakramadyoti, the image should have eight hands and is to
be depicted with a single goddess. The kalasa and the kalpalata
remain the same. However, it is stated that water should be shown
to be flowing trom the proboscis."* According to the Mantra-
mahodadhi, the imagc is said to have four hands, one of which
holds the cakra (disc) a distinct Vaisnava attribute. The goddess
Laksmi is described as embracing Ganapati with one arm and
holding a lotus in the other. The name of the goddess itself and
the emphasis on the flowing proboscis and kalasa, leave no doubt
that it is intended to be the same Laksmi who had come to be
regarded as the consort of Visnu and who was looked upon as the
bestower of wealth and prosperity. It is likely that the form of
Laksmi Ganapau described in the Ajitagama is the older one which

--- Page 160 ---
LORD OF TRADE 161
later became modified, because the existing images of this variety,
depict Ganapati with just one goddess. Such is the case with the
stone image of Laksmi Ganapati in the Visvanathasvam1 Temple
at Tenkasi which is known to have been built by a Pandya king,
Arikesari Parakrama Pandyadeva, in ap 1446. Another explanation
could be that different versions of the same concept existed. The
Mayamata, a treatise on architecture dated to about the seventh or
eighth century AD, describes only one form of Ganapati.*° The
form of Laksmi Ganapati, therefore, evolved after the ninth century
and it appears to have been restricted essentially to the region of
modern Tamil Nadu.

According to the Svayambhuvagama, Ganapati with two
Saktis may be installed in a nagara.*”’ A nagara is described in the
Mayamata as a town situated in forested country with houses for
all classes of people and with shops as well.” According to the
Diptagama, which is probably later than the Mayamata, a nagara, is
peopled by various castes and craftsmen and has shops.” The
Svayambhuvagama does not mention any name for this particular
form of Ganapati. According to the Ajitagama, however, the only
form of Ganapati with two Saktis or devis is that of Laksmi Ganapati.
In the case of Haridra Ganapati the two devis are categorically
stated to be his wives (darah).°° Therefore, we may presume that
the Svayambhuvadgama does indeed imply the form of Laksmi
Ganapati. Since it was considered appropriate for this kind of
habitation, it shows that not only was trade important, but that
Ganapati and Laksmi were the presiding deities of this activity.

The Svayambhuvagama further states that Laksmi Ganapati
and Vijaya Ganapati may be installed in a pura.” According to
Mayamaia, a pura is the same as a nagara. The Diptagama describes
the pura as being inhabited by all classes of people, but weavers
appear to be the main and specialised craftsmen.” I have not
come across the description of Vijaya Ganapati in the sources
that I have consulted. It was perhaps a localised form. The
Svayambhuvagama recommends the installation of Ucchista
Ganapati and Rakta Ganapati in a pattana. The Mayamata describes
a pattana as a town where products from other countries are to be
found. It is inhabited by people of all classes. There are shops and
an abundance of merchandise such as precious stones, grains,
fine cloth and perfumes. It is situated by the sea and extends
along the coast.°® According to the Adipurana written by a

--- Page 161 ---
162 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Digambara monk of Manyakheta (Malkhed, Gulbarga District,
Karnataka), a paftana is a place where people use sea-faring boats
for transport.” Evidently, the pattana must have been the residence
of various religious communities and of foreign traders as well.
The Ajitagama describes both Ucchista Ganapati and Rakta
Ganapati without saktis.° In the first case he holds a bunch of
paddy and a pomegranate which would make him appear as a
deity associated with agricultural wealth. In the second case he
holds a mango in one of his four hands. The mango fruit has
sexual overtones and, coupled with the epithet rakta (red), is
suggestive of a fertility deity.

It is quite likely that these forms of Ganapati had popular
appeal and were particularly important for the non-Brahmanical
castes and communities that contributed in a significant manner
to the generation of wealth under the Colas. In some other texts,
however, the description of Ucchista Ganapati and Rakta Ganapati
is different. Whereas the Knyakramadyoti's descripuon of Ucchista
Ganapati tallies with that of the Ajitagama, that of the Mantra-
maharnava describes it as accompanied by a devi in a pose suggestive
of attempted coition.” According to the Uttara Kamikagama, the
nude devi is seated on his lap and one of his hands is touching her
private parts.”” Since most images of Ucchista Ganapati depict
him with a goddess on his lap, it is likely that the description in
the Ajztagama belongs to an earlier period when the influence of
Tantric practices was not so widespread. The Ucchista Ganapati of
the Ajitagama appears without any Tantric attributes and I wonder
whether the epithet Ucchista in this case was the result of his
being worshipped by communities looked down upon by the
authors of the Agamas, such as the Jainas, for example. Even though
Sivaism became the religion of the kings after the conversion
from Jainism of the Pallava Mahendravarman, Jaina merchants
and traders must have continued to function in the market
centres, Since, at least, some Jaina traders of western India had
adopted the worship of Ganapati in western India from as early as
the seventh century, the practice may have found its way to the
south. ,

This brings us to the question as to when the cult of
Ganapati appeared in the south. From the evidence available, it
would appear that it became popular in the Tamil region, in the
post seventh century period, in the context of Sivaism. There is no

--- Page 162 ---
LORD OF TRADE 163
mention of Vinayaka in the literature of the pre-Pallava period
nor any evidence of his images. The earliest references to Ganapati
appear to be in the hymns of the seventh century Saiva Saints,
Appar and Sambandar.® However, the deity does not appear to
be well known at this period, because he is not systematically
evoked in the hymns of the other saints. Nor is he mentioned in
all the hymns of Appar and Sambandar. In the Tévaram hymns,
Siva’s ganas remain vague and undifferentiated. The goddess
represents the gentle, feminine side of the lord permanently united
with him in his form as Ardhan§arisvara. Siva in the Tevaram is
rarely portrayed as the householder of the Puranas. The god's
wife and his two children are no more than shadowy figures in his
personal history.” There is only one mention of Ganapati in the
Tévaram, where Siruttondar refers to the pot-bellied Ganapati as
one of the two sons of Siva.’ Siruttondar is believed to have lived
at the end of the seventh and the beginning of the eighth centuries.
There is also a traditional belief that the worship of Ganapati was
brought to the Tamil country from Vatapi (Badami), capital of
the Calukyas, by Siruttondar. According to the Periya Purana,
Siruttondar, before becoming a Siva bhakta, had been a commander
under the Pallavas when they invaded Vatapi. Tradition has it that
the image of Vatapi Ganapati presently at Thirucchengattankudi,
was brought to the Tamil region by him.'”

The earliest epigraphical reference to Ganapati and his
sculptural representations in south India date to the eighth
century.'” In fact, the form of Ganapati is not found among the
numerous icons of the time of the Pallava kings Mahendravarman
I (ap 600-30) and Narasimhavarman I Mamalla (ap 630-68). The
Somaskanda (Siva with Uma and Skanda) images represent the
essential part of Pallava Sivaism around ap 700. If Vinayaka had
been considered a part of Siva’s family, it is unlikely that he would
not have been represented along with Siva, Uma and Skanda who
constitute this image.

Mahendravarman I (ap 590-630), after his conversion from
Jainism to Sivaism, undertook the construction of Brahmanical
temples. Images of Ganapati have been found in temples built
by Mahendravarman, such as the Cave Temples at Vallam
(Viluppuram, Ramasamy District), the temple which is famous as
the Ucchi-Pillaiyar temple today (Tiruchchirappalli District) and
at the Sikhari-Pallavesvaram cave-temple at Melacheri (South Arcot

--- Page 163 ---
164 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

District). However, these images are generally accepted as being
later additions, most probably during the later part of the Pallava
period when the cult was better known.’ The Ucchi-Pillaiyar
temple which is a famous Ganapati temple today, had, according
to inscriptions, originally been a shrine of Siva and Parvati.'* Prior
to that it had been a Jaina shrine. Similarly, the rock-cut monument
known as the Ganesa temple at Mamallapuram, was excavated on
the orders of Paramesvara I (ap 670-700) and it was originally a
Siva temple.!°

Perhaps one reason why Ganapati does not appear in
early Sivaism in the south is because when Puranic Sivaism spread
in the region he could not be identified with any of the earlier
indigenous gods unlike Siva, Durga and Skanda who were identified
with Alamar Selvam, Korravai and Muruga respectively.’ The Siva
of the Nayanars is different from the Puranic Siva. He is closely
associated with the Tamil region, language ‘and culture and
acquires a distinct Tamil identity. It is only in the Agamas that
Ganapati figures as a member of the Saiva pantheon where he has
sections devoted to his worship and ritual. These portions of the
Agamas appear to have been compiled during the Cola period.
The Cola kings invited many Saiva brahmanas from the north to
settle in their kingdom. Possibly, the importance given to Ganapati
in the Agamas is a result of their influence. There are also several
epigraphical references to him and his shrines. In the Brhadisvara
temple at Thanjavur (AD 1000), a record menuons that 150 plantain
fruits were offered daily to the god.'” The earliest and perhaps
the most famous of the Vinayaka temples of south India is the one
at Tiruvalamjuli on the Kaveri about 10 kilometers away from
Kumbhakonam in Thanjavur district (Tamil Nadu). It dates to
betore the eleventh century. The Vinayaka of this place is called
‘Sveta Vinayaka’ (white Vinayaka).'"

It is hard to imagine that Ganapati was completely
unknown in the south until his first icons appear or when the
Nayanars first refer to him. The Visnukundins and the Calukyas
who were the northern neighbours of the Pallavas had adopted
his worship by the sixth century. He had become a part of
Mahayana Buddhism from at least the end of the fifth/early sixth
century. Jaina traders in western India invoke him from as early as
the seventh century. Jainism and Mahayana Buddhism flourished
in south India prior to the conversion of Mahendravarman. Even

--- Page 164 ---
LORD OF TRADE 165
after that, it is unlikely that the two communities disappeared
altogether. The relative decline of trade and communication
networks between the fourth/fifth centuries and the ninth/tenth
centuries does not presuppose the total disappearance of inter-
regional movement of commodities, ideas and people. The mouf
of the early prototype of Ganapati, the elephant headed yaksa or
gana, appears in the Ramanuja-mandapa, a Saiva shrine, at
Mahabalipuram.'” This temple belongs to the period of
Paramesvaravarman I (ap 670-700). In the depiction of a bhutagana
frieze, there is an elephant headed gana occupying the central
place, perhaps indicating that he is the head of the gana.''’ This
theme of a group of gana, including an elephant-headed one,
carrying a garland, is an old one. It is present at Amaravati and at
the Kantaka Celinga Stipa at Sri Lanka in the second century AD.
It was an old Buddhist motif, and its appearance here in the south
is not surprising. From Hsuan Tsang, who visited the Pallava
country during the ume of Narasimhavarman (AD 630-8), we know
that Mahayana Buddhism was in a flourishing condition in this
region. Buddhist art traditions were obviously borrowed for
decorating Brahmanical shrines.

Appar and Sambandar describe a version of the Puranic
Gajasura myth according to which Siva created Ganapati for the
purpose of destroying Gajasura.''' Nagaswamy suggests that since
Appar refers to this myth it was already well known. 2 This appears
possible in view of what I have said earlier. Ganapati was known
but did not become popular. He could not be identified with a
local deity. Puranic Sivaism was rejected by adherents to the bhakti
ideal as it was synonymous with Brahmanical beliefs and practices.
The bhakti ideal developed in a situation of conflict, presumably
as a protest against the ritual exclusiveness of the brahmanas and
as a challenge to Jaina and Buddhist dominance. It sought to
redefine Sivaism or Visnuism in more popular, but increasingly
sectarian, terms. Bhakti hymns were popularized by the Colas
through tempie rituals and grants for such rituals and the
construction of temples in the centres associated with the bhakti
hymns." The cult of the Siva linga became the primary cult in
these temples. However, the Colas settled many northern brahmanas
in their kingdom and associated them with the temple rituals. It
was probably partly as a result of their influence that the cult of
Ganapati developed in a big way.

--- Page 165 ---
166 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

It is also possible that various forms of Ganapati existed at
a local level among some communities and these were subsequently
adopted by the Agamas. Religious literature does not reflect all
existing beliefs and practices. In certain standard texts of Agamic
ritual such as the Somasambhupaddhati which belongs to the eleventh
century, none of the numerous forms of Ganapati are mentioned.
As ‘Vinayaka’ he figures as one of eight duarapdlas'' (guardians of
the threshold) of Siva. As ‘Ganapati’' or ‘Vighnanayaka’!!® or
‘Lambodara’!”’ he is a deity in his own right, to be worshipped
before the guru, as part of Siva's pantheon. The fact that the dif-
ferent forms exist in only a few texts would show that they were
popular with only certain sections of society. Why would the Agamas
include such forms or create new ones? Probably, they represent
an effort at syncretism to ensure that Sivaism remained the primary
religion. Just as the Puranas adopted a variety of deities and
rituals associated with regional and ethnic groups making them
part of the entourages of Siva or Visnu, and using them to
propagate the Brahmanical world-view, the Agamas, too, appear
to have synthesized the beliefs and rituals of cross-secuons of society
in the region. One such category was that of the traders and
merchants. As they became more affluent and powerful, their
support for the state became indispensable. Royal patronage was
reflected through religious recognition of their deities by texts of
the local ‘high tradition’. Within this framework, deities repre-
senting the aspirations of various categories of society were
accommodated. In this manner, conflicting and divergent groups
were united under the common umbrella of Sivaism.

The process by which new iconographical forms are
created can be clearly illustrated by the example of the
Brahmadhirayar. It is a special icon which was created under Cola
rule. It represents the brahmanas who served as commanders of
the imperial army, especially under Rajaraja I, Rajendra I and his
successors, disunguishing themselves in every war. They were given
the tite Brahmadhiraja, i.e. king among brahmanas. Several of
these images were set up in the temples as devotees of the lord. '"8
These icons of the Brahmadhirayar have a shape and stature similar
to that of Ganapati. They are sparsely dressed, with little jewellery
and are depicted with short, plump bodies and pronounced bellies.
One wonders why, as military commanders, they were depicted
with such a form. Since the concept of these generals was new, an

--- Page 166 ---
LORD OF TRADE 167
iconographical type had to be found. Ganapati, perhaps,
represented, at a spiritual level, what these generals symbolised at
the material level. Both were Ganapatis. One served Siva and the
other served the King. Both are examples of supreme valour and
devotion but lower in hierarchy to Siva and the King. It is tempting
to see such an idea behind the choice of an iconographical form
for the Brahmadhirayar. Similarly, if Ganapati acquires numerous
forms it is because he represents a variety of things to the various
categories of society. As some of these categories became more
influential and since they patronized temples and provided funds
for their maintenance, their deities also found a place in the
temples and in the religious literature on which temple-ritual was
based. All over the south, the king was equated with Visnu and
Siva. The Siva of the Agamas had his human counterpart in the
Cola king. By extension, the secondary deities in his pantheon
were associated with the lower orders of society. There is a second
parallel between Ganapati and officers of the Cola king. The deity
has been popularly known as Pillaiyar (son or noble child) in
Tami} Nadu. This term was also the tide of princes of the Cola
family. After about ap 1150 it became an honorific title for officers
occupying a senior position in the Cola administration. '

Cola conquests of northern territories in the present day
regions of south Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh led to the
developments of nagarams and the growth of urban activities in
these regions from about the tenth-eleventh centuries.’ Guild
activities spread to the Andhra and Karnataka region in the wake
of the Cola conquests. After the twelfth century, Ganapati appears
in inscriptions of the merchant community in Karnataka. A stone
inscription set up near the Mulesingesvara temple (Nagamangala
taluk, Belur district), Karnataka, and dated ap 1296, constitutes a
charter of agreement entered into between the mahajanas of several
villages. The only deity invoked is ‘Ganadhipati’.'?) Another
inscription on a stone set up near the sluice on the bund of a
large tank at Byadarahalli (Hassan taluk, Hassan district), dated
ap 1341, states that a lady purchased a site from the mahajanas of
Bédarahalli and gota tank excavated. The mahdajanas made a grant
of land towards the upkeep of the tank.!?2 Here, again, only
‘Ganadhipati’ is invoked.'* An inscription on the wall near the
southern entrance of the Hoysalesvara temple, dated ap 1287,
records an endowment made by a messenger of the deity Indeya

--- Page 167 ---
168 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Benaka (Vinayaka) from his salary. A part of the salary was to be
lent for interest and the latter was to be paid on the occasion of
the festival of Bhadrapada suddha chauthi for covering the expenses
of the celebration.'** What is significant is that monetary tran-
sactions are associated with this deity. There are other references
in the inscriptions of this region to Ganapati being ‘the cause
of continual wealth’'® (fourteenth century), ‘the cause of un-
obstructed prosperity’'?® (fourteenth century) and ‘abundant
prosperity’!®’ (fifteenth century), and as the one who gives ‘eternal
prosperity’! (fifteenth century). An inscription on a lamp-post
opposite the ruined Anjaneya temple at Gumballi (Yalanduru,
Mysore district) records the setting up of a lamp-pillar by a sculptor.
Obeisance is made to Ganadhipati alone.’ Another inscription
from Ratnapura (Hunasur, Mysore district), records a charter laying
down the punishments to be awarded for crimes committed
and fines levied upon the tenants in the village, including those
that may settle down in the future. There is no reference to any
ruler and the only deity invoked is Ganadhipati. The inscripion is
dated ap 1417. A sixteenth century inscription from Alakere
(Yalanduru, Mysore district), records a grant of lands to a number
of mahajanas of Alakere and Benskere, free from several taxes for
the merit of his master by the chief minister of the Vijayanagar
ruler, Krsnaraya (aD 1519).'” Only Ganapati is invoked. Normally
grants in the name of Krsnaraya and other kings of Vijayanagar
invoke Sambhu, Varaha and Ganapati.'*' It is also quite clear that
in royal inscriptions it is insufficient to invoke Ganapati alone,
even though he may be invoked first. In matters that concern
other people, mainly traders, invocation to this deity alone is
considered appropriate.

In the ninth century, Pratihara Kakkuka established a town
and a quadruple image of Ganapati was installed to ensure
prosperity. Several centuries later, a similar phenomenon occurs
in the region of modern Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. An
incripuon dated ap 1289 records the gifting of a village called
Marpadiga by the minister of the Kakatiya king, Rudradeva, to a
brahmana scholar named Viddanacarya. The latter renamed the
village Vinayakapura.'” In Karnataka, a stone inscription from
Sankalapura (Bellary district) records the grant of Sankalapura
village to a temple of Ganapati. The village was renamed Kota-
Vinayakapura (Vinayaka in the Fort), after its presiding deity, and

--- Page 168 ---
LORD OF TRADE 169
converted into a town with a newly constructed tank. There is
reference to worship, repairs, offerings, all entertainment and car
festivals being fully provided for. This inscription is dated ap 1513
and the slab which bears the inscription has the figure of Ganapati
engraved on it with the sun to his right and a crescent to his
left.'88 This confirms Ganapati’s association with material well-being
for why else would a place be named after him if it was not to
ensure prosperity. In all these cases, no other deity is menuoned
in the inscriptions.

One of the more recent forms of Ganapati is that of
Rnamocaka Ganapati (he who removes debts) which is mentioned
in the Sritattvanidhi, a text compiled by Krsnaraja Wodeyar IV,
king of Mysore, towards the end of the nineteenth century.’™ This
form is also represented on the prakara wall of the Nanjundesvara
temple near Mysore which dates to about ap 1850. In this case it is
referred to as Rnavimocana Ganapati. This form appears to be
limited to the region of Mysore and is eloquent testimony to
Ganapati’s association with any kind of money transaction.

Even in the Ganesa Purana, there is an indirect reference
to Ganapati being associated with traders. King Somakanta, who is
suffering from leprosy, is told by the sage Bhrgu that the cause of
his illness can be found in his previous life. He had been a vaisya
and was reckless and given to killing brahmanas. In his old age,
however, he had become penitent and attempted to give away his
ill-gotten wealth to brahmanas but they refused to accept it. So,
instead, he spent his fortune refurbishing an abandoned Ganapati
temple and then died soon after.'* Whatever else be the imphi-
cations of this story, the association of rich merchants with Ganapati
temples is evident.

By the fourteenth century, there is inscriptional evidence
of Ganapati being the principal deity of the merchant community
in other parts of south India as well. According to the Kottayam
plate of Vira Raghava,’” the ttle ‘Manigramam’ was conferred on
a certain merchant. It implied specific honours and rights. The
inscription then enumerates the sources of income available to
the grantee as lord of the city (of Kodungular, near Cochin). The
inscription begins with an invocation for prosperity and with an
adoration of Mahaganapati. No other deity is mentioned. The
invocation of Ganapati was considered adequate, and appears to
have been a form for all such organisations. Manigramams were

--- Page 169 ---
170 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

trading corporations and seem to have existed since the early
centuries of the Christian era.’*? We know from inscriptional
evidence that this guild of traders was present at the port of Quilon,
on the Kerala coast, as early as the ninth or early tenth centuries'™
and that its members functioned both at coastal sites and at
townships in the interior.

Ganapati’s rise in the Puranic pantheon coincides with a
period considered as one of decline in trade and feudalization of
Indian society and economy. Whereas from the Brahmanical point
of view this deity is only one of many members of Siva’s entourage,
for the trading community he appears to acquire a definite role
and raison d’étre. This development takes place in a region where
economic activity continued to be important and within a
community, that of the Jainas, where it was the principal
occupation. The period from approximately the tenth century
onwards is marked by the crystallisation of new networks of
exchange, the formation of trade guilds and a resurgence of money
production and circulation. South India under the Colas was in
the forefront of this resurgence and it was during this period that
Ganapati became associated with the traders in the region as well.
Whereas in the context of the royal cult of Siva, he remains either
a duGrapala of Siva, or the Lord of Obstacles, for certain com-
munities such as those of the traders and merchants he was the
principal deity associated with their functions and transactions. It
is possible that with major transformations taking place during
this time, a new deity, relevant to the changed scenario, was
required. Ganapati fitted this role and acquired numerous forms
and attributes influenced by the villages and towns in which they
developed. He was associated with earthy needs and, therefore,
became the primary deity of those whose purpose in life was to
generate wealth.

NOTES

1. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, |.4.12 in S. Radhakrishnan’s The Principal
Upanisads, pp. 149-333. Refer to p. 169.

2. R.N. Misra, Yaksha Cult and Iconography, p. 81.

3. Mahabharata , Sabha Parva, 21.9.

4. El, Vol. XXVIII, No. 51 pp. 328-31.

5. R.N. Misra, op. cit., p. 43. He cites from the Mahdmayizri, 1.31.

--- Page 170 ---
LORD OF TRADE 17]
6. Swami Dwarikadas Shastri, Trans. and ed., Milindapanha Pali
(original text with Hindi translation), p. 191.
7. Santi Parva, 263.15-28.
8. D.C. Sircar, Select Insenptions, Vol. I, pp. 92-3.
9. M.B. Garde, ‘The Site of Padmavati’, ASJAR, 1915-16, p. 106.
10. Ananda Coomaraswamy, Yaksas, Part I, p. 28.
11. Ef, Vol. XVIII, No. 20, pp. 158-9.
12. EI, Vol. XXIX, No. 23, pp. 169-74.
13. J.N. Samaddar, ‘Industrial and Trading Organisation in Ancient
India’, J/BORS, Vol. VII, Part 4, 1921, pp. 35-54.
14. D.D. Kosambi, Myth and Reality, p. 103.
15. N.M. Penzer, ed., Kathasantsagar, Vol. I, p. 162.
16. Mahabharata, Appendices 10.60-2; 11.524; 12.14-6. In Geeta Press
__ edn., Aranyaka Parva, 65.22-3.

17. J.P. Vogel, Indian Serpent Lore, p. 10.

18. Ibid.

19. Vayu Purana, I1.i1.21.39-42a.

20. Ibid., 1.58.51.

21. P.V. Kane, History of Dharmasastra, Vol. I, Pt. I, p. 90.

22. Nilamata Purana, 1043-4.

23. Maurice Winternitz, Htstory of Indian Literature, Vol. III, pp. 279-
80.

24. R.N. Misra, op. cit., p. 82.

25. R.C. Agrawala, ‘Some Interesting Sculptures of Yaksas and Kubera
from Rajasthan’, J/HQ, Sep. 1957, pp. 201-7.

26. Ibid.

27. Ibid., see p. 203.

28. Sabha Parva, 10.19.

29. R.C. Agrawala, op. cit., pp. 102-3.

30. Suvira Jaiswal, The Ongin and Development of Vaisnavism, p. 97.

31. John Allan, Catalogue of the Coins of Ancent India, ‘Introduction’,
Pp. CXXVi.

32. Ibid., pp. 173-6.

33. According to the description of the funeral rites in the Grhya
Sutras, the corpse is laid on a black antelope’s skin. In the case of
a vaisya, his goad (in that of a brahmana his staff, and of a ksatriya,
his bow) is taken from his hand, broken and cast on the pyre.
Quoted in A.A. Macdonell, A History of Sansknit Literature, p. 256.

34. Ibid., p. 102.

35. V.S. Agrawala, ‘Brahma, Visnu and Siva, etc. in Mathura Art’,
JUPHS, Vol. XXII, 1949, pp. 150-1. The author considers these
images to belong to the Gupta Art of Mathura.

36. N.R. Guseva, Jainism, pp. 56-7.

--- Page 171 ---
172 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

37. R.C. Agrawala, ‘Sculptures from Abaneri’, Lalit Kala, Nos.1-2, 1955-
6, pp. 130-5.

38. EI, Vol. XXVII, No. 7, pp. 27-33.

39. EI,Vol. XXXIII, No. 13, pp. 79-81.

40. In the Koni inscription of Kalachuri Prithvideva II (KE. 930)
Ganapati is invoked after Siva, Nandi and Saraswati (See EI,
Vol. XXVII, No. 45, pp. 276-87); An inscription from Ranod or
Narod (AD 1026), about seventy five kilometers south of Narwar
begins with an invocation to Siva, followed by one to Vinayaka,
Saraswati and then to Siva again (EI, Vol. I, No. XLI, pp. 351-61).
The Bhera-Ghat stone inscription of Narasimha (Kalachuri) Year
907 begins with an invocation to Siva then to the moon and this is
followed by an eulogy of Siva; only then is Ganapati invoked as
the remover of abstacles (V.V Mirashi, ed., Inscriptions of the
Kalachuri-Chedi Era, C/I, Vol. IV, Pt. I, No. 60, pp. 312-21); the
Ratanpur Stone Inscription of the Kalachuri king Prithvideva II
(AD 1149-50) begins with an invocation to Rudra followed by one
to Ganapati (C/I, Vol. IV, Pt. 2, No. 93, pp. 483-8); in the Dhureti
plates of Trailokyamalla of about AD 1212, Ganapati is invoked
directly after Siva (CII, Vol. IV, Pt. I, No. 72, pp. 369-74; in Bengal,
the Barrackpur grant of Vijayasena’s thirty-second year (eleventh/
twelfth centuries AD) refers to the reign of the Sena dynasty and
invokes Siva first and makes reference to Karttikeya and Ganapati
(EI, Vol. XV, No. 15, pp. 278-86). See also Ganapesvaram
inscription of the time of Ganapati (AD 1231) in E/, Vol. III,
No. 15, pp. 82-93.

41. EI, Vol. XXVII, No. 7, p. 29.

42. Ibid., p. 28.

43. Maruti Nandan Tiwari and Kamal Giri, ‘Images of Ganega in
Jainism’ in Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God,
pp. 101-14.

44. R.C. Agrawala, ‘Some Interesting Sculptures of Yaksas and Kubera
from Rajasthan’, p. 203.

45. ET, Vol. IX, No. 38, pp. 277-81.

46. B.D. Chattopadhyaya, ‘Origin of the Rajputs: The Political,
Economic and Social Processes in Early Medieval Rajasthan’, JHR,
Vol. III, No. 1, pp. 59-82.

47. EI, Vol. Ill, pp. 263-7.

48. Garuda Purana, 1.69.1-3.

49. lsdénasivagurudevapadhati, Vol. 2, 16.55-7, p. 19.

50. V.S. Agrawala, ‘Brahma, Visnu and Siva, etc. in Mathura Art’,
JUPHS, op. cit.

51. R.N. Misra, op. cit., p. 82.

--- Page 172 ---
LORD OF TRADE 173

52. R.P. Hingorani, Jaina Iconography in Rupamandana, p. 113.

53. Ibid., pp. 12-13.

54. Ibid., p. 13.

55. Ibid., p. 12.

56. U.P. Shah, ‘Minor Jaina Deities’, JO/B, Vol. 32, pp. 82-98. See
particularly, p. 92.

57. Ibid., p. 97.

58. Ibid., p. 98, fn. 87. It is not stated how late these sculptures are,
but they are certainly post fourteenth century. However, they reflect
ideas and associations that belong to a much earlier period.
Manibhadra is depicted in this manner even in some contemporary
representations.

59. Maruti Nandan Tiwari and Kamal Giri, op. cit., p. 105.

60. Ibid.

61. R.N. Misra, op. cit., p. 80; Ramayana, Uttarakanda, 15.1415.

62. Maruti Nandan Tiwari and Kamal Giri, op. cit., p. 103.

63. Skanda Purana, 1.i.10.29-30.

64. U.P. Shah, op. cit., p. 98.

65. Ibid., p. 98.

66. EI, Vol. XXX, pp. 190-7.

67. El, Vol. XXXVI, pp. 121-30.

68. Harihar Singh, Jaina Temples in Western India, p. 23.

69. U.P. Shah, op. cit., p. 92.

70. EI, Vol. VII, No. 21, pp. 200-19. See, in particular, p. 208, v. 2.

71. Ibid., p. 206. See Part II of the inscriptions w. 9-25, pp. 219-20.

72. D.B. Diskalkar, ‘Some Unpublished Inscriptions of Vastupala’ in
ABORI, Vol. 9, Pts. 1-4, 1927-8, pp. 179-81. See also footnote on
p. 179.

73. Christopher Wilkinson, ‘The Tantric Ganeéa’, in Robert L. Brown,
ed., op. cit., pp. 265, 261.

74. Ibid., p. 258.

75. Ibid., p. 268.

76. Ibid., p. 246.

77. Brahma Purana, IV.44.19-25.

78. Brahmanda Purana, I1.iii.42.42-4.

79, Padma Purana, 1.17.100-18.

80. R. Champakalakshmi, ‘State and Economy: South India, ¢. AD
400-1300’, in Romila Thapar, ed., Recent Perspectives of Early Indian
History, pp. 266-308.

81. Uttara-Kamikagama, 45.1-8. Cited as a footnote in the cri. edn. of
the Rauravottaragama, Chap. 9, p. 29, fn. 3.

82. Ajitagama, Vol. III, 55.13.

83. T.A. Gopinatha Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, Vol. 1, Pt. I, p. 53.

--- Page 173 ---
174 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

84. Ibid.

85. Ibid., p. 64.

86. Bruno Dagens, trans., Mayamata: An Indian Treatise on Housing
Architecture and Iconography, p. 354. The form described is called
Ganadhipa and he has no Saki.

87. Quoted from the Svayambhuvagama in Apitagama, Vol. III, p. 6,
fn. 73.

88. Bruno Dagens, op. cit, p. 40.

89. Diptagama, Transcript No. 15, Chap. 78., sloka 37. The reference
in the published edition is 1.1.37.

90. Ayttagama, Vol. III.55.18.

91. Quoted in Ajitagama, Vol. III, p. 6, fn. 73.

92. Diptagama, 78.42.

93. Bruno Dagens, op. cit., p. 40.

94. R.N. Nandi, Social Roots of Religion in India, p. 24.

95. Ayitagama, Vol. III, 55.9-10.

96. T.A. Gopinatha Rao, op. cit., p. 54.

97. Ibid.

98. R. Nagaswamy, Siva Bhakti, p. 200.

99. Indira Viswanathan Peterson, Poems to Siva, p. 101.

100. Ibid., p 233.

101. R. Nagaswamy, op. cit., p. 200.

102. See the Kasakkudi Plates in S//, Vol. IJ, pp. 365-6. Vinayaka is just
mentioned in the invocation after six other deities. However,
Ganapati is not systematically invoked in other inscriptions of
Nandivarman II. Most often only Siva or Visnu are mentioned.
See Pullur Plates of Nandivarman, (E/, Vol. XXXVI, No. 20,
pp. 14452), the Pattattalmangalam plates (£/, Vol. XVIII, p. 120),
or the Udayendiram grant (S//, Vol. II, pp. 365-6), all dating to
the eighth century.

103. KR. Srinivasan, Cave Temples of the Pallavas, pp. 61, 79 and 88.

104. Ibid., pp. 79 and 88.

105. R. Gopalan, Hrstory of the Pallavas of Kanchi, p. 107.

106. R. Champakalakshmi, ‘Ideology and the State in South India’,
Mamidipudi Venkatarangaiah Memorial Lecture -1, Andhra Pradesh
History Congress, Srisailam, 1989.

107. R. Nagaswamy, Masterpieces of Early South Indian Bronzes, p. 136.

108. G.S. Ghurye, Gods and Men, p. 79.

109. This shrine was originally a Saiva shrine. After the influence of
such religious reformers as Ramanujacarya, the Saiva sculptures
in the interiors of several Saiva temples were destroyed and
replaced by Vaisnava images. Some of the decorative friezes,
however, remained. In the case of the Ramanuja- mandapa, an old

--- Page 174 ---
LORD OF TRADE 175

Saiva inscription remained intact on the floor which indicates the
original nature of the shrine. See A.H. Longhurst, Pallava
Architecture, Pt. Il, pp. 5-6.

110. KR. Srinivasan, op. cit., p. 176.

111. R. Nagaswamy, Siva Bhakti, p. 200.

112. Ibid.

113. R. Champakalakshmi, ‘Ideology and the State in South India’,
op. cit.

114. Somasambhupaddhat, Pt. Il, pp. 47 and 334.

115. Ibid., pp. 334, 342.

116. Ibid., p. 111.

117. Ibid.

118. R. Nagaswamy, Masterpieces of Early South Indian Bronzes, p. 117.

119. Y. Subbarayalu, ‘The Cola State’, Studies in History, Vol. IV, No. 2,
1982, pp. 265-306.

120. R. Champakalakshmi, ‘State and Economy: South India, ¢ AD
400-1300’, in Romila Thapar, ed., op. cit.

121. EC, Vol. 7, No. 82, pp. 498-9.

122. Ibid., Vol. 8, No. 206, p. 698.

123. Ibid.,Vol. 8, No. 206, p. 698-9.

124. Ibid., Vol. 9, No. 266, p. 698.

125. Ibid., Vol. 5, No. 256, p. 998; Vol. 8, No. 87, p. 493.

126. Ibid., Vol. 8, No. 115, p. 641.

127. Ibid., Vol. 6, No. 25, p. 616.

128. Ibid., Vol. 9, No. 576, p. 854.

129. Ibid., Vol. 4, No. 188, p. 779.

130. Ibid., Vol. 4, No 168, p. 772.

131. Ibid., Vol. 3, No. 113, p. 669; Vol. 5, No. 105, p. 800; Vol. 5,
No. 225, p. 984; Vol. 6, No. 99, p. 480; Vol. 6, No. 26, p. 619;
Vol. 7, No. 134, p. 523; Vol. 7, No. 7, p. 553. There are numerous
such examples.

132. EA, Vol. IV, pp. 109-17.

133. El, Vol. IV, pp 266-9.

134. Gudrun Buhnemann, Forms of Ganeéa, pp. 19, 45.

135. Ganesa Purana, Upasana Khanda, 7 and 8.

136. EI, Vol. IV, No. 41, pp. 290-7.

137. Meera Abraham, Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India,
p- 29.

138. Ibid., p. 13.

--- Page 175 ---
CHAPTER 6

The Ganapatyas
Little is known of the Ganapatyas, a sect worshipping Ganapati as
their special deity. Scholars who mention them! base their
information essentially on a text of the medieval period, the
Sankaravijaya of Anandagiri. This text is in the form of a debate
between the Saiva philosopher Sankaracharya (eighth/ninth
century AD) and the heads of several religious sects, including
those of the Ganapatyas, who oppose his philosophy of Advaita
Vedanta. The text mentions six sects of Ganapatyas: those of
Ucchista Ganapati and Heramba Ganapati which appear to have
been closely related and are clubbed together; and those of Haridra
Ganapati, Mahaganapati, Samtana, Navanita and Svarna Ganapati.’
Each sect is described as worshipping Ganapati under a different
name, in a somewhat different form and with a differently worded
mantra. Moreover, members of each sect are described as having
their arms and foreheads branded with the symbol of the sect.

What remains unexplained is why Ganapati became the
focus of sectarian worship when other deities such as Kubera,
Skanda or the various na@gas remained secondary divinities. Even
Hanuman, another therianthropic deity, as closely associated with
Rama and Sita as Ganapati is with Siva and Parvati, did not aquire
his own sect. Secondly, where and when did these sects evolve and
what were the categories of society associated with them? Were
the differences between the various subsects limited only to form,
name and mantra or were they more significant?

In the introduction, while discussing the sources, I have
explained why I situate the Sankaravijaya between the tenth and
eleventh centuries ap. Therefore, a preliminary discussion on the
status of the worship of Ganapati in this period is useful. By the
tenth century the deity had become important in many regions of
the country. Epigraphical references confirm the existence of
shrines and temples to him in the region of modern Rajasthan

--- Page 176 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 177
and Gujarat.* While some appear next to Siva temples suggesting
that Ganapati was an important but secondary deity within the
Saiva context, others were temples in pavcayatana complexes.”
Pancayatana puja is believed to have been introduced by
Sankaracarya and appears to have been widely accepted by the
tenth century. In this context Ganapati appears as a deity in his
own right. The Saraswati Purana (Calukyan period) refers to tirthas
and shrines of many deities on the Sahasralinga lake, including
those of Vinayaka.®

In Uttar Pradesh, some early images of Ganapati have
been found at Baijnath on the Sarayu river in the Kumaon region
where the ruins of several old temples exist. They belong to the
reign of the local Katyuri dynasty of the ninth and tenth centuries.’
In all likelihood they were housed in their own shrines or temples.
In the Puranas there are references to firthas associated with
Ganapati in the region of Uttar Pradesh, such as the Avighna
tirtha, on the northern banks of the river Gautami,® and the
Vighnaraja firtha on the river Yamuna, near Mathura.° In central
India, a stone inscription of ap 1181-2 refers to the temples of
Tunta Ganapati and Heramba Ganapati both in the region of
modern Madhya Pradesh.’° Since there does not appear to be a
form known as Tunta Ganapati in the sacred texts, Tunta was
probably the name of the village or locality where the temple was
built.

In the region of Maharashtra, Ganapati is invoked
systematically at the beginning of nearly every inscription of the
Silahdara dynasty between the ninth and eleventh centuries AD.
Although Siva was the tutelary deity of this royal family, it was
evidently considered important to invoke Ganapati in his capacity
as remover of obstacles at the outset of all understakings. '' Similarly,
in a grant made by a member of the Modha family, Ganapati is
invoked first.!2 The Modhas were a local brahmana ruling family
who probably owed allegiance to some contemporary Silahara ruler.
In the grants of the Silaharas and the Modhas there is no reference
to Karttikeya which shows that in some regions Ganapati was clearly
the more important of Siva’s two sons. Although the inscriptions
do not indicate whether Ganapati had any temples dedicated to
him in the region of Maharashtra, it is reasonable to suppose that
they did exist. Silahara rule extended over parts of modern
Karnataka as well, including the Konkan area, and that is where

--- Page 177 ---
178 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

some of the oldest Ganapati temples exist. It is unlikely that
religious traditions popular in one part of the Silahara kingdom
were unknown in other parts.

The Mahaganapati temple at Gokarna in the Uttar
Kannada district, Karnataka, is one of the most famous old Ganapati
temples. Tradition has it that it dates from the time of the early
Kadambas (fifth-sixth century AD) a major royal family whose power
extended over a large part of modern Karnataka and also parts of
Goa and Maharashtra. Gokarna is a Saiva firtha and the principal
temple at the site is that of Mahabalesvara (Siva). However, the
Mahaganapati temple close by, houses an image which is also very
old and appears to be of early Kadamba workmanship. The deity
has only two arms and is in a standing position. It is very similar to
the images in some other old temples such as the Ganapati temple
at Uppinapattan'’® and that at Idagunji in the same district. The
latter is mentioned as Idakunja and Kunjavana and also Idugunjige
in an inscription from the same place dated ap 1348.’ These
temples, too, are believed to exist from early Kadamba times
although the structure has been renovated several times. It is not
clear whether the images were part of Saiva temples initially or
whether they had their own shrines from an early period. Since
Ganapati becomes important only after the sixth century, these
temples, as also that at Gokarna, probably date to the late sixth
century/seventh century at the earliest. All these images in
Karnataka are extremely simple (plate 1). They are depicted with
no jewellery and no crown and are in striking contrast to the

. more ornate forms that evolved subsequently. By the tenth century,
images of Ganapati with two hands are rare and four hands are
the most common representation. Several images in the Ganapati
temples at Gokarna stand on a sndanadroni (photo 3). This feature
is found on some late seventh/early eighth century Ganapati statues
from Vietnam and Thailand” and it is likely that it was borrowed
from earlier Indian statues.

In Kurnool district of modern Andhra Pradesh, an eighth
century inscription records the setting up of images of Dandiévara,
Ganapati and Nandisvara.'® It is not known whether all the three
were housed in the same temple or whether Ganapati had a shrine
of his own. A tenth century inscription from the Guntur district of
Andhra Pradesh refers to the Vindyakotsava (festival of Vinayaka)
being celebrated in a village called Kakumranu.'’ The utsav appears

--- Page 178 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 179
to be associated with the feast celebrating the commence.nent of
the sowing season. In the Tamil region Ganapati had become an
intrinsic part of the royal cult of Siva. The Agamas, many of which
belong to this period, contain sections on his worship and
associated rituals.

Thus by the tenth century there is definite evidence of
Ganapati being worshipped in various parts of the country. He
appears to have been popular with at least three royal families:
the Kadambas, Silaharas and Colas. Since these families adhered
to Brahmanical norms, the cult of Ganapati propagated by them
was probably a strictly Brahmanical one. Since what royalty does is
immitated by the lower orders of society, the worship of the
Brahmanical Ganapati became specially popular in the region of
modern Karnataka, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu by the tenth
century. The deity was also associated with festivities in connection
with agricultural rites and so must have been a deity of the
agricultural classes as well. The latter would have had their own
ritual specialists responsible for conducting these festivities. Where
Ganapati temples existed, a category of priests must have emerged
who were mainly, if not solely, associated with his worship. This,
most likely, led to the gradual creation of myths associated with
specific temples and to a greater number of rituals in order to
attract a larger clientele. Against this background, it is worthwhile
examining the texiual tradition in order to understand the nature
of the Ganapatya sects that appeared by about the ninth century.

The Sammoha Tantra (thirteenth/fourteenth centuries Ap) '8
refers to a Ganapa Tantrika tradition in both the northern and
southern class of Tantras.'? It mentions five cults of the Ganapatyas
and lists the extant body of Ganapatya literature which consists of
fifty Tantras, twenty-five Upatantras, two Puranas and a long list of
what seem to be smaller works.” The five cults probably signify
five sects, rather than five forms of Ganapati because by the
fourteenth century there were numerous forms of the deity. The
Agamas refer to as many as twelve”! and sixteen forms.”

From the Sammoha Tantra, it is reasonable to conclude
that by the fourteenth century the Ganapatyas were established in
various parts of the country and that their literature was essenually
Tantric. Since very few Tantric texts devoted to Ganapati are known
it is apparent that most of this literature has either been lost or
remains undiscovered. The Tibetan Buddhist canon contains about

--- Page 179 ---
180 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

thirty Tantric texts devoted exclusively to Ganapati.** Many of these
are translations of Indian originals and bear the names of their
Indian authors and translators.*4 This would indicate that possibly
some of the Ganapatya sects evolved within the Buddhist context.
Others were off-shoots of the Saivas since many Saiva Tantras and
Agamas have sections devoted to Ganapati where he is worshipped
independently of Siva and his entourage. In fact, the forms of
Ganapati worshipped by some Ganapatya sects, such as Ucchista
Ganapati or Haridra Ganapati, are described in detail in the
Agamas.”** The two Puranas mentioned by the Sammoha Tantra
evidently refer to the Mudgala and Ganesa Puranas since these are
the only two known Puranas that are devoted exclusively to
Ganapati. They represent a third tradition outside the Buddhist
and Saiva frameworks, that of the Smartas. This third category is
associated with the period subsequent to the Sankaravijaya.

I shall, therefore, begin with a discussion on the evolution
of Ganapati in the Buddhist and Saiva contexts; against this
background, an analysis of the Ganapatya sects mentioned in the
Sankaravijaya becomes relevant; finally, I shall examine the Smadrta
Ganapatyas.

GANAPATI AND BUDDHISM
Ganapati worship appears to have been accepted into Buddhism
trom at least as early as the sixth century ap. At the Buddhist caves
of Aurangabad, a recently discovered cave located between Caves
5 and 6 contains, as its major icon, an image of Ganapati. He is at
the centre rear of the cave. On his right are the seven mothers
with Siva. On his left are Durga and two Buddha images. The cave
is dated to the second half of the sixth century.** Brown interprets
this image as Ganapati in his capacity as remover of obstacles to
further worship in the site as a whole as well as a focus for the
fulfilment of specifically mundane desires. However, if the deity
was looked upon as the remover of obstacles, the image of Ganapati
should have figured in a very prominent part of the site whereby
visitors would have to first pay homage to him before proceeding
to the other caves. Possibly, Ganapati had some other significance
in the Buddhist context. What is striking is his association with
Siva and Durga but in a more important position than both of
them. There is also a small Ganapati on the doorframe at Cave 3

--- Page 180 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 181
at Aurangabad which dates to the second half of the fifth century.”
It is not certain whether at this early stage Ganapati had the same
significance in both the Brahmanical and Buddhist contexts.

There is a bas-relief of Ganapati in the Buddhist grotto-
temple of Kung-hsien, China, dated ap 53] which depicts the deity
seated cross-legged with a lotus in his uplifted right hand and
what is referred to as a ‘cintaman?’ in his left hand which rests on
his lap. An inscription in Chinese characters refers to him as the
‘Spirit King of Elephants’. He is depicted in the company of nine
deities : the Spirit Kings of the Nagas, of the Wind, of Peals, of
Fire, of Trees, of Mountains, of Fishes, of Lions and of Birds. ** It is
significant that he is not referred to as Vinayaka or by any other
epithet associated with him in the Brahmanical context. As Getty
points out, this image of Ganapati was evidently based on a model
brought from India as the elephant was little known in China at
that epoch. Possibly, the elephant-headed deity, in the Buddhist
context, did not have the negative connotation that it had acquired
in the Brahmanical religion duc to his association with the obstacle
causing Vinayakas. Eventually, however, he acquired some of the
powers of the Brahmanical Ganapati, such as the ability to remove
obstacles and grant success.

Textual references to Ganapati in the Buddhist context
only appear after the eighth century or so. Unfortunately, most
Buddhist texts housed in the monasteries and learning centres of
Nalanda or Vikramaégila were probably destroyed during the
succeeding Afghan and Turkish invasions from the tenth century.
Some of these works had, however, been translated and taken to
other regions such as Tibet, Nepal and China prior to this period.
It is in the Buddhist canons of these countries that many such
texts are preserved. Fifteen of the thirty Ganapatya texts preserved
in the Tibetan canon have been translated into English by
Wilkinson.” These are vital for understanding the evolution of
Ganapati within the Buddhist fold in the early medieval period.

Although it is difficult to date the Tibetan Ganapatya texts
exactly, they can be situated between the eighth and eleventh
centuries on the basis of the names of their authors and translators.
The names include those of the most well known Indian Buddhist
teachers of the period: Amoghavajra (eighth century AD);
Dipankarasrijnana (eleventh century AD); Dombiheruka (eighth
century ap), king of Magadha,; Nagarjuna of Nalanda (seventh or

--- Page 181 ---
182 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

eighth centuries AD); Sri Dipankarabhadra (late eighth and early
ninth centuries aD); Vairocana of Kosala and Gayadhara of Gaya
(both eleventh century ap).*” These works reflect beliefs and
practices at the monasteries of Nalanda and Vikramasila.

In some of the Buddhist Ganapatya texts, certain deities
are invoked before the worship of Ganapati. In one case homage is
paid to Avalokitesvara before Ganapati.*’ At other times it is to
Vajradakini® or Vajrapani® or to all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.*
There are other texts, however, where no other deity is mentioned
and which are only concerned with the preparation of Ganapati’s
images and mandalas,* the instructions about the nature of his
worship, the mantras to be recited and the powers that are acquired
thereby. A mantra called the Essence of Ganapati is described
which, if recited by the devotee at the outset of any worship or
activity, is considered to be equivalent to a homage to the Blessed
Buddhas with flowers and incense.** The worship of Ganapati is
said to lead to the fulfilment of all desires and the removal of all
hindrances. Besides being invoked as the Lord of Obstacles,*’ the
Buddhist Ganapati is also referred to as ‘the noble Ganapati of
Wisdom’* the ‘Great God of Wealth’®? and the ‘Great Compas-
sionate Ganapati’.*° Whereas the Brahmanical Ganapati is also
associated with wealth and wisdom, the concept of a lord of
compassion is purely Buddhist.

In the Tibetan Buddhist texts Ganapati’s zoomorphic past
is evident. He is referred to as the ‘chief of elephant-trunked
ones’.*! He is described as having three faces, that of a monkey, a
rat and an elephant. He is also said to manifest in a monkey's
body.*? Monkey fat,* heart and hair are prescribed for some of
the rituals in the worship of Ganapati along with elephant hair“
and the meatless shoulder blade of an elephant.** Even his consort
is said to have the tace of a monkey. * Ganapati himself is said to
manifest in a monkey’s body to generate coarse awareness.” The
association with the monkey links Ganapati to the elephant deity
of Kapisa because kapi signifies both ‘elephant’ and ‘monkey’ and
Kapisa, therefore, signifies both Elephant Lord and Monkey Lord.
The association between the elephant and the monkey appears to
have some significance in the Saiva context as well. In a Siva
temple in Cintamani (Kolar District, Karnataka), the doorway to
the temple has the figure of an elephant to the left and that of a
monkey to the right.“ The Skanda Purana also refers to a three-

--- Page 182 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 183
headed Ganapati with the face of a monkey, an elephant and a
lion in place of the rat of the Buddhist version.“ I do not know
what the significance of the monkey and the lion is in this case.
However, even in the contemporary context, Hanuman and the
Heramba form of Ganapati represent an association with these
two animals. Hanuman nearly always has a niche in Ganapati
temples in some regions such as Maharashtra and the Heramba
form of Ganapati has a lion mount.

The Tibetan Buddhist texts distinguish between the
Buddhist Ganapati and the evil Vinayaka of the Brahmanical
tradition. One text called the Vinayaka Graha Nirmocana describes
the symptoms of Vinayaka possession and prescribes the rites for
ridding oneself of this demon.” This description is evidently
derived from the Manava Grhya Sitra with small variations.”! The
text makes no reference to the physical form of Vinayaka who is
distinct from the Buddhist Ganapati. The latter only removes
obstacles and does not create them. He is worshipped after invoking
other Buddhist deities and in one case it is stated that Ganapati
‘the supreme king of all elemental spirits who is truly loving to
practitioners’ should be invoked after worshipping the guru and
the Buddha. In the Brahmanical tradition, Ganapati is supposed
to be invoked first.

The Buddhist Tantric Ganapati has two aspects to his
personality, the wrathful one and the peaceful one. In the former
case, he is described as ‘having the heart of a Buddha and the
head of an animal’. The wrathful form of Ganapati has many
characteristics and attributes of Bhairava-Siva. He is described as
wearing a garment made from the skin of a tiger holding a flaming
vajra (a thunderbolt which is the weapon of Indra) and skull. He
wears a garland of skulls which otherwise is only associated with
Siva? His body is either red or blue.*! In his peaceful aspect
Ganapati is associated with the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara. He is
referred to as the ‘Great Compassionate One’.* Bodhisattvas are,
by definition, markedly responsive to the needs of humans by
virtue of their compassionate nature and Ganapati acquires this
quality in the Buddhist context. He is referred to as the ‘Emanation
of the Most Noble Avalokitesvara’* and as one who is manifested

in the heart of Avalokitesvara.*” In one hymn Ganapati is described
as being white and bearing in his four hands a radish, an axe, a
trident and a skull. He bears the image of Amitabha on his head. ™*

--- Page 183 ---
184 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

This form is similar to that of Avalokitesvara who is also often
represented with the effigy of Amitabha in his crown since he is
an accolyte of Amitabha.” Similarly, in his form as Simhanada,
Avalokitesvara is often represented holding a trident or a human
skull and his body is white.”

This syncretic Ganapati who acquires the attributes of both
Siva and the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara is also well known in Japan.
According to some Japanese texts a dual form of Ganapati, known
as Kangi-ten, is looked upon as the son of Siva and Aryavalokitesvara
(another name for Avalokitesvara) in his feminine form which is
identical to that of Uma, wife of Siva. Ganapati is, therefore,
believed to have two natures, masculine and feminine, symbolising
the union of Brahmanism and Buddhism or, perhaps, Sivaism and
Buddhism. In Japan, this Tantric form of Ganapati is represented
by two elephant headed human figures, male and female,
embracing. The female aspect is considered to be a metamorphosis
assumed by Avalokitesvara while the male part is supposed to be a
metamorphosis of Mahavairocana or of Siva. The two figures
together represent the unity between the devotee and the Buddha.
This dual form of Ganapau was introduced into Japan from China
where it was known as Kuan-shi-tien. According to the Chinese it
symbolised the union of sky and carth.*' This form probably came
into existence in China in the eighth century and Subhakarasimha,
who visited China, translated into Chinese a ritual for the worship
of Ganapati in this form.” It is not known whether this text was
brought to China by Subhakarasimha from India in the eighth
century or whether it had been brought to China carlier.

The idea that the dual Ganapati represents a union
between Buddhism and Brahmanism/Sivaism is also implicit in
the Ganapatihrdaya mantra which forms part of the Tibetan texts.
Here Ganapati plays the role of a mediator between Buddhist and
non-Buddhist traditions. By using the mantra contained in the
text, non-Buddhist ceremonies can be transformed into Buddhist
ones. The presumed author of this text is the Buddha himself."
Perhaps, those who sought a syncretism of Buddhism and Sivaism
chose to worship Ganapati as the symbol of this syncretism.

In several Buddhist Tantras there appears to be a
syncretism between the Buddha and Siva. There are Buddhist
Tantras with ades such as Vajrabhairava or Buddhakapala which
point to a certain Buddha-Siva melding. At other times the

--- Page 184 ---
THE GANAPATYAS. 185
syncretism is between Siva and one of the Bodhisattvas. A brass
sculpture of the early medieval period in the collection of the
Ashutosh Museum, University of Calcutta, depicts the composite
Siva-Lokesvara (Avalokitesvara) as a two-armed ithyphallic god
holding a skull and a trident. He bears the tiny seated figure of
the Dhyani-Buddha Amitabha on top of his jatamukuta (crest of
matted hair) and has two standing male figures on either side.“
This strange combination of Mahayana doctrines with the worship
of Siva has its parallel in Champa, Java, Sumatra, Nepal and Tibet
during the same period. Taranatha (sixteenth/seventeenth century
AD) asserts that it was in the Vikramasila and Jagaddala Universities
founded by the Pala kings (between eighth and eleventh centuries
AD in the region of modern Bengal and Bihar) that Tantrayana
Buddhism was fully developed and that it was from these centres
that missionaries went to preach in Tibet and Nepal.” It would
appear that Siva was initially associated with the Buddha or with
the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara in certain Buddhist Tantras. Later,
in some regions, Ganapati became the symbol of this syncretism.
Elsewhere he was looked upon as a purely Buddhist deity having
some of the characteristics of the Buddha and none of Siva. Getty
describes three images of Ganapati, one Cham (eighth century),
one Khmer (fourteenth century) and one Burmese (undated)
where he is represented in the characteristic pose of the Buddha
with some of the typical features of the Buddha such as the
protruberance between the eyes (which is distinct from a third
eye) and the right arm in the bhimisparsa mudra (earth-touching
pose), one of the well-known attitudes of the Buddha.’® The
statues suggest that the elephant-headed deity came to represent
some of the concepts associated with the Buddha without ever
actually being identified with him.

It is possible that in some areas or at least in some
monasteries in the regions of modern West Bengal and Bihar,
Ganapati was worshipped in some of the esoteric forms described
above. Even if some of the forms evolved in China or Japan, the
idea of this syncretism probably came from India. This suggestion
may be unacceptable to those scholars who insist on a clear and
precise textual reference to such a phenomenon. Yet, from what I
have discussed earlier, this idea sometimes appears implicit in the
Tibetan Buddhist texts. Besides, actual religious practice often
takes liberties with notions stated in religious texts. Take, for

--- Page 185 ---
186 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

example, the case of Avalokitesvara who has numerous forms. In
Japan there is a tradition amongst a fairly large section of people
or in certain religious congregations where this Bodhisattva 1s
represented in some feminine forms.®’ Even in China he is
sometimes conceived of in the feminine form although such a
notion is non-existent in the Buddhist canons of these counwies.
The number of forms in which devotees may conceive of their
chosen deity are infinite depending on their needs and aspirations.
Many syncretic forms are the products of popular belief which,
unlike the Buddhist cannon, are not fixed.

The Buddhist Ganapatya texts are associated with the last
creative phase of Indian Buddhism under Pala rule. This period
witnessed a changing social order when the influence of bhakti
and Tantrism led to the inclusion of popular cults and practices
in both the Buddhist and Brahmanical religions. Sidras and women
could be initiated into these new forms of ritual and worship.
Ganapati represented the perfect blend of a Brahmanical, Buddhist
and folk deity who was equated with universally common needs
and desires. He became the symbol of a new phase of religious
belief which sought a rapprochement between the Sanskritic and
non-Sansknitc traditions. If several texts were devoted to his worship
alone it is possible that a section of persons chose to worship him
to the exclusion of other deities. His powers are described as
being so great that the devotee can have all his wishes granted,
acquire health, wealth, learning and get compassion in time of
need. Would there be any requirement then for the worship of
another deity?

GANAPATI AND SIVAISM
Like the Buddhist Tantric texts, the Saiva Tantras and Agamas
contain whole sections devoted to Ganapati where he figures as
an independent god. These texts represent a tradition which is
non-Brahmanical and, often, anti-Brahmanical. Certain Saiva sects
which drew inspiration from these traditions were looked down
upon by the brahmanas of the Smarta tradition.

Ganapati has three different roles in the Agamas. He is,
on the one hand, worshipped briefly, before any worship of Siva
begins, so that he may remove obstacles. He is also one of the
eight ganas who constitute the dvarapalas (guardians) of Siva’s

--- Page 186 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 187
shrine.® At the same time, in certain texts, he has sections devoted
to his worship alone.” The former two roles are, undoubtedly, the
influence of the northern bradhmanas who were settled in the South
by the Cola kings. They represent those aspects of the Agamas
that are in line with Puranic traditions. The third aspect of Ganapati
appears to have evolved in the far south. The sections in the
Agamas describing Ganapati’s independent worship must have
developed from about the tenth century. Sivaism had begun to
enjoy royal patronage in the Tamil country from the seventh
century when the Pallava king Mahendravarman I was converted
from Jainism to Sivaism. The Colas built several famous Siva
temples. Initially, Ganapati’s images were installed in these temples.
Subsequently, he acquired his own shrines within the temples.
He, therefore, came to require rituals of his own. At a later stage,
he acquired independent temples. The Agamas refer to temples
of Ganapati where he is the principal deity with attendant deities
of his own. Details regarding the location, architecture and form
of deity to be installed in the different kinds of temples are also
described.”’ Ultimately, this may have resulted in his being
worshipped to the exclusion of other deities, by a category of
people. ;

As an independent deity in the Agamas, Ganapati acquires
utsavas of his own.” He is associated with the harvest, because
sowing takes place three or five days before his festival.” His vahana
is also worshipped which is not the case in the Buddhist Tantras.”4
He is worshipped with Saiva mantras such as the Mrtyunjaya mantra.”
Worship of the linga”® as also offerings of flesh” form part of his
ritual. The radish which often figures as an attribute of the Buddhist
Ganapati is absent in the Agamas (as also in the Puranas). The
Ganapati festival culminates with the immersion of the deity’s
image in water.” This represents a significant difference between
the rituals of Siva and those of Ganapati which, are very similar
otherwise.

Unlike the Buddhist Tantras where Ganapati has a limited
number of forms, in the Agamas he acquires numerous forms.”
These are not found in the Mahapuranas and, therefore, appear
to have evolved within the framework of Sivaism mainly in the
Tamil region. They represent the various dimensions of Ganapati’s
personality. As Bala Ganapati, he fulfils the role of son of Siva and
Parvati.” Bhakti Ganapati symbolises the important phenomenon

--- Page 187 ---
188 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

of bhakti. Vijaya Ganapati is suggestive of the Puranic Ganapati
who, as Siva’s chief gana, ensures victory at all levels. Nrtta Ganapati
or Pingala Ganapati are close in concept to Siva himself. Other
forms such as Sakti Ganapati or Rakta Ganapati are evidently
Tantric.*! There is another Brahmanical form, that of Laksmi
Ganapati, which is depicted with two devis. It is obviously the reverse
of the Gajalaksmi concept where Laksmi is flanked by two
elephants.” There is even a form called Krodha Ganapati which
may have been borrowed from the wrathful aspect of the Buddhist
Ganapati.**

Some of these forms continue to be worshipped today in
independent temples of Ganapati in the South. At the Paficamukha
Heramba Ganapati temple at Mahalaksmi layout, Bangalore, I
obtained an interesting insight into a concept which must have
existed centuries ago in some Ganapati temples. The pujan (priest),
Shankar Narain Shastri, considered Ganapati to be an ‘ avatara’ of
Siva. In Chapter IV, I have said that some of the early images of
Ganapati suggest that in a few regions, particularly in the early
stages, the elephant-headed deity was looked upon as a form of
Siva. This thesis does not appear wholly unacceptable when
considered in the light of some contemporary perceptions of
Ganapati. Although no text might say so, the priest serving in the
Pancamukha Heramba Ganapati temple firmly believes this to be
so. These beliefs must be looked at from the point of view of the
laity and the priesthood to whom they are relevant. In a society
where access to sacred texts is limited to very few and where the
oral tradition remains important what the priest believes has greater
influence on the laity than what is stated in sacred literature.

Against this background it is worth analysing the Ganapatya
sects described in the Sankaravijaya in order to determine whether
they were really independent sects or wherther they were offshoots
of the Buddhists and Saivas.

THE GANAPATYA SECTS

THE SECT OF HERAMBA GANAPATI
As discussed in Chapter IV, Heramba signifies ‘buffalo’ and this
form of Ganapati combines in himself aspects of both Siva and
Durga. The epithet ‘Heramba’ was eventually associated with the

--- Page 188 ---
THE GANAPATYAS_ 189
Buddha as well. According to the Sabdakalpadruma,“ Heramba is
synonymous with some Tantric forms of the Buddha such as
Heruka, Chakrasamvara, Vajrakapali, Vajratika, Deva, Nisumbhi
and Sasigekhara. Heruka, also signifies an attendant of Siva.* In
other words, Heramba is synonymous with the syncretic form of
Buddha/Siva-Kapala.

In the Sankaravijaya, Heramba is visualized as embracing
his Sakti who is seated on his left thigh.®° However, the Devt Rahasya,
a Kashmiri text, describes Heramba Ganapati as a young boy, a
kumara.8? Even the Ajitagama® and the Tantrasara” (the latter
quotes from the Sdaradatilaka Tantra, a Kashmiri text of the tenth
or eleventh century AD) describe him without a Sakti. Clearly, the
Heramba Ganapatyas described in the Sankaravijaya followed a
tradition distinct to that described in the Kashmiri and south
Indian Tantras and Agamas. Was it Buddhist influence which led
to this form acquiring a Sakti like some of the Tantric Buddhist
forms which also bear the epithet Heramba?

The iconographical form of Heramba Ganapati as
described in the Agamas also suggests Buddhist influence. His five
heads are representative of the concept of five Dhyani Buddhas of
Mahayana Buddhism. His mount, the lion, is parallel to the lion-
throne of the Buddha who manifests himself in the form of the
five Dhyani Buddhas. According to the Ajitagama,” Heramba is
white (like the elephant representing the Buddha’s conception or
like the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara). Five is also an important
number in Brahmanism and Siva, too, is associated with five.
However, the fact that this form of Ganapati was initially looked
down upon in the Agamas would point to it being associated with
things that were anti-Saiva. It was recommended as being
appropriate in a kheta.*! The Diptagama defines a kheta as a village
inhabited by sidras.? Possibly, some worshippers of Heramba
Ganapati were Buddhists or Buddhists and Saivas at the same time
and were, therefore, looked down upon. It is significant that this
form of Ganapati appears in places (Kashmir and the Tamil region)
where a flourishing Buddhism was eventually replaced by a
resurgent Sivaism. Consequently, there are positive indications of
borrowing between the two faiths. The sect of Heramba Ganapati
probably existed in both Kashmir and the Tamil region.

It is difficult to determine at what stage the Heramba
aspect of Ganapati acquired its particular iconographic form. The

--- Page 189 ---
190 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

earliest reference to a five headed form of the diety, seated on a
lion and referred to as Heramba, is found in the Kashmiri text
Saradatilaka Tantra. Since the iconographical form of Heramba
Ganapati was already established in the tenth/eleventh centuries,
and since he is described in the Agamas it would appear that this
form of the deity must have had a following, at least, by the end of
the ninth century. I referred earlier to a twelfth century inscription
recording the erection of a temple to Heramba Ganapati in Madhya
Pradesh.” It is possible that it was built by adherents to the sect of
Heramba Ganapati.

THE SECT OF UCCHISTA GANAPATI
Ucchista Ganapati, according to the Sankaravijaya, is to be
meditated upon as having four arms, three eyes, bearing the
pasa (rope), ankusa (goad) and gada (mace). One hand is held in
the abhaya mudra (freedom from fear position). The tip of his
trunk descends into the goddess’ yoni (vulva).** According to the
Sankaravijaya, Ucchista’s cult is also known as Hairamba and I
wonder whether the association between the Herambas and
Ucchistas was essentially because they were associated with certain
categories of society who were looked down upon by those who
conformed to Brahmanical norms of worship and who did not
accept these esoteric forms. When the esoteric forms were finally
recognized it was with some modifications.

The Pranatosini describes Ucchista Gananatha as the
boyhood of Heramba® whereas the Devi Rahasya states the
contrary.”” Saiva texts such as the Isanasivagurudevapaddhati describe
Ucchista Ganapati without a Sakti. In some of the later Tantric
texts, however, Ucchista Candali is described as the sakti of Ucchista
Ganapati although the Sankaravijaya does not mention the name
of the devi.’ According to the Pranatosini, Ucchista Candali is a
form of Matangi.” Candali and Matangi were goddesses of the
Candalas and Matangas both originally aboriginal tribes who were
eventually converted into a low caste.'” The practices of this sect
were evidenuy Tantric and later texts associated this form of the
deity with the goddesses of the lower orders of society.

The term Ucchista indicates a cultic practice of eating
left-over food as part of the religious discipline of a deity. There
are Saiva cults with similar practices.'"' The term by itself is

--- Page 190 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 191
derogatory. The Mahapuranas make no mention of: this form of
Ganapati. The members of this sect were evidently of low-caste or
from rival religious sects. Since the earliest reference to Ucchista
Ganapati appears to be in the Agamas, this particular sect could
not have come into existence before the end of the eighth century,
at the earliest. It is more likely that it evolved in the ninth century,
probably around the same time as the sect of Heramba Ganapati,
since both are said to be closely related. The Svayambhuvagama
recommends this form of Ganapati in pattans.'” The Diptagama
defines a pattan as a town where there is international trade and
where various communities reside.’ Since the Buddhists in the
region of modern Tamil Nadu resided mainly in coastal towns in
the early medieval period it is possible that this deity was venerated
by some Buddhists and other sects. It may have also been popular
with the trading communities in a region where internal and
external trade flourished.

THE SECT OF MAHAGANAPATI
There is a certain uniformity of concept and form in the description
of Mahaganapati in the Agamas, Tantras and in the Sankaravijaya.
The differences between this form of the deity in the Buddhist
and Brahmanical contexts are minor.

The earliest texts devoted to Mahaganapati such as the
Mahaganapati Tantra form part of the Tibetan Buddhist canon.
Ganapati is described as the ‘world-benefitting god of gods whose
worship brings accomplishment’.'** Whereas in the Buddhist
context he is said to be white in colour with four hands,’ the
Brahmanical texts such as the [sdnasivagurudevapaddhati,’” the
Prapancasara Tantra” and the Sankaravijaya' describe him as being
red with ten or twelve arms. In both cases, he is accompanied by
his Sakti. In the Buddhist text, she is not described but merely
stated to be present in the mandala of Mahaganapati.'”

The sect of Ganapatyas worshipping Mahaganapati
described in the Sankaravijaya appear to have evolved from within
the Brahmanical tradition. They claim to follow the Sruti and
consider that Mahaganapati symbolises the trinity—Brahma, Visnu
and Siva. They also appear to be adherents of the dualistic school
of philosophy since they maintain that mukti (liberation from the
cycle of birth and death) is not merging with the Brahman but

--- Page 191 ---
192 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

staying forever in the same loka (world) as their god.'!° It is likely
that they were off-shoots of the Pasupata Saivas or Agamic Saivas
since both schools are dualistic.

The members of this sect appear to have been brahmanas,
for in the Sankaravijaya, Sankara is described as condemning the
fact that they felt the need to brand themselves with the symbol of
the sect. He goes on to state that a brahmana needs no symbols.
He distinguishes himself from other categories of society by the
fact of his birth in a brahmana family, by the observation of the
samskaras (sacraments) stipulated in the Vedas and of the four
asramas.

In the Saiva Agamas Mahaganapati appears as one of the
sixteen forms of the deity!!! and has temples dedicated to him.
This form was considered specially appropriate for installation in
a kubjaka, but it could also be installed in all places.''? According
to the Diptagama, a kuljaka is a village bordering a kheta. The
latter, as stated earlier is a village inhabited by sudras.''* Possibly,
the brahmana members of this sect were low castes who claimed
brahmana status because of the ritual functions they performed in
the Ganapati temples and who chose this deity in preference to
Siva in order to escape the secondary position they may have
occupied in the hierarchy of Siva temple priests. This sect probably
came into existence around the same time as the sects of Heramba
and Ucchista Ganapati.

THE SECT OF HARIDRA GANAPATI
According to the Sankaravijaya, the followers of Haridra Ganapau
do not worship the Sakti. The deity is described as being dressed
in yellow with yellow yajnopavita (sacred thread), having four arms
and three eyes. The head of the sect recites a mantra from the
Krsna Yajur Veda.''* This sect appears to be a purely Brahmanical
one and, like the sect of Mahaganapati, it probably came into
existence around the tenth century.

In the Ajitagama, Haridra Ganapati is described as a
turmeric coloured elephant flanked by two wives. The word ‘wives’
is specifically used (dardyugalam).''® These wives are distinct to
saktis. This form appears closest in concept to the Ganapati of the
Mudgala and Ganesa Puranas where he is always flanked by his
wives, Siddhi and Buddhi.''° In these two Puranas they appear as

--- Page 192 ---
THE GANAPATYAS. 193
an intrinsic part of Ganapati''’? and do not require any special
rituals associated with Sakti worship. The Ajitagama recommends
that this form of Ganapati be installed in capital cities. ''? It probably
became popular with a section of the population in the cities and
gradually a sect devoted to it came into existence. Yellow is the
traditional colour of the vaisya varna. Since Haridra Ganapati is
specially recommended for capital cities it probably became
popular with a growing category of wealthy clientele and gradually
came to be projected as an independent deity.

THE SECTS OF NAVANITA, SVARNA AND SAMTANA GANAPATI
Navanita, Svarna and Samtana Ganapati appear to be clubbed
together as one in the Sankaravijaya.'!'® They were obviously closely
related. Their followers did not worship the Sakti, wore turmeric
and claimed to follow Vedic rites only. These sects, too, appear to
have been limited to the far South.'”? According to the Ajttagama,
Svarna Ganapati is described as being white as gold and without a
sakti."2! Although the Sankaravijaya states that these three forms
are described in the Saiva Agamas,'” the names of Navanita and
Samtana Ganapati do not appear in the Agamas that I have
consulted nor do they appear in the traditional lists of sixteen or
thirty-two Ganapatis available in the Tantras nor in the list of fifty
six Vinayakas of Kasi. However, a mantra of Navanita-Ganapati
from the Parvamnaya occurs in the Srividyaratnakara.'®

Navanita Ganapati recalls the child Krsna and his myths
about stealing butter. Samtina Ganapati reminds one of Samtana
Gopala, a form of Krsna worshipped to obtain offspring. Possibly,
both these forms were popular with the Vaisnavas who also
worshipped Ganapati and who may, in some cases, have identified
him with the Vaisnava deities. This suggestion becomes more
plausible if one understands some aspects of the contemporary
worship of Ganapati. There are Ganapati temples today where the
officiants are Vaisnava and where the deity is looked upon as a
form of Visnu although I do not know of any text where this is
stated. One such temple is the Anegudde Sri Vinayaka temple,
Kumbhasi, in the Dakshin Kannada District, Karnataka. The
officiants are Vaisnava brahmanas of the Madhava sect. The head
priest (pramukha pujari) who I met insisted that the Ganapati in
this temple was considered to be a manifestation of Visnu. The

--- Page 193 ---
194 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
priest also distinguished between Ganapati in general who is a
deity in his own right and this particular image.

Ganapati is the only Saiva deity who is worshipped by the
Vaisnavas. He is sometimes referred to as Gaja Alvar, the thirteenth
Alvar of the Vaisnava bhakti tradition of the south.'** It is not
relevant whether this is mentioned in the sacred texts. Nor does it
matter whether all Vaisnavas accept it or not. The fact is that in
some temples this is what the priests believe and what some of the
laity agree with. Such beliefs are easily accepted by the Hindu
mind which sees the unity behind the diversity and can readily
accept seemingly disparate and contradictory concepts as different
forms of the one and only.

This tendency to syncretize has been present throughout
the centuries. There is a nineteenth century scroll of drawings of
Ganapati prepared by artists attached to the Mysore Palace in the
nineteenth century. One of these forms is referred to as Simha
Ganapati and it is depicted as a deity with the composite head of a
lion and an elephant having eight arms.'” It is evidently a
syncretism between Ganapati and the Narasimha form of Visnu.
This same form is also represented on the side wall of the modern
Pancamukha Heramba Ganapati temple at the Mahalaksmi layout,
Bangalore. Where Simha Ganapati is mentioned in some Tantric
texts such as the Sritattvanidhi he is simply described as having the
face of a lion with an elephant’s trunk.'”* No mention is made of
the Narasimha form of Visnu. In the modern Sri Siddhi Buddhi
Vinayaka temple at Sarojini Nagar, New Delhi, however, Simha
Ganapati is merely depicted as Ganapati riding on a lion and is
distinct from the Heramba form only in that the latter has five
heads (plate 2). He forms one of a group of thirty four Ganapatis
that decorate the sides of the hall for special pijas and utsavas
next to the main temple. There is, on the other hand, in this
same temple a form called Vaisnava Ganapati which depicts the
deity as blue in colour (like Krsna) (plate 3). In three of his hands
he holds the sankha (conch) the cakra (disc) and the gada (mace),
all typically Vaisnava attributes. The fourth hand is held in abhaya
mudra. These descriptions illustrate that a process of syncretism
has constantly been taking place and that it varies in degree
between regions and temples.

Just as the various village goddesses are considered to be
forms of Parvati, similarly, in some temples, the priests and the

--- Page 194 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 195
laity believe that Ganapati represents a form of the major deities
Siva or Visnu. There are also forms of Ganapati in temple sculptures
which do not appear to be described in any text. Rama Ganapati
is an example. It is one of thirty two forms depicted on the top
parapet of the prakara wall (north-west corner) of the
Nanhjundesvara Temple dedicated to Siva in Nafjungid, not far
from Mysore. This wall dates to about ap 1850.'”” There is another
form known as Subrahmanya Ganapati described in the Vidyarnava
Tantra.'*®> Why would these forms emerge if they did not seek to
identify or at least create a link between Ganapati and Rama or
Ganapati and Subrahmanya? Perhaps, they emerged in those
temples or villages where both deities were popular and the
message they conveyed was either that both were at par, or that
both represented traits and characteristics that complemented each
other or, perhaps, that both were forms of each other. The
Anegudda Ganapati temple in Karnataka has recently been
renovated and has a new facade which is ornate with various
Ganapatis in the niches. The motifs include an image of Ganapati
with the child Krnsa on his lap. Such an image is again one that I
have not come across in any text. The motifs have been made by
craftsmen (silpis) from Shimoga and are claimed to be based on
some sacred text. Since sacred texts are numerous and since most
people have no access to them, anything can be claimed to have
its origin in ‘sacred texts’ and will be accepted by the public and
most priests as well. ;

Strict Vaisnavas and Saivas may not accept these
interpretations. Yet, in the region itself the local priesthood has
created its own tradition. Often the deity acquires a name decided
upon by the local priest and not because it conforms to any
particular type. Major temples built by kings or rich landowners
and merchants may have had images that were made in strict
accordance with the Silpasastras. However, this would not have
been the case in small temples which made do with local craftsmen
or with images believed to be svayambhu. There is a modern temple
at Amdalli on the border of Karwar taluk, North Kannada District,
Karnataka, called the Sri Vira Ganapati temple. Here the murtt 1s
believed to be svayambhi. About ten years ago a Customs Officer
noticed a stone along the highway that had the shape of an
elephant’s head without arms and attributes. So a temple was
constructed over the stone. The priest who was appointed by the

--- Page 195 ---
196 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

local community decided that the image should be named Sri
Vira Ganapati. According to the Agamas, Vira Ganapati has
numerous attributes whereas this image has none. Yet that was
what the priest decided and it was readily accepted by everyone
concerned. Samtana and Navanita Ganapati must have also been
named in such a way after the wishes of some priests and their
laity who wished to see in Ganapati what they admired and loved
in Krsna. Eventually, they may have considered themselves as a
separate subsect. This subsect also probably came into existence
around the tenth century.

At this point, it would be relevant to ask to what extent
were the Ganapatyas really sects in the true sense of the word. A
sect generally implies a specific doctrine, a priesthood and an ex-
clusive laity. Strictly speaking, very few Hindu sects have ever had
an exclusive laity. In early medieval India a person could be both
a Vaisnava, a Sakta or Tanwik as well as a Yogin. A well known
example is the medieval Vaisnava poet, Vidyapati (c. ap 1400)
whose devotional songs to Radha and Krsna are sung even today.
Besides these devotional songs he wrote the Sivasarvasara, Durga-
bhakttarangint and a Tantrik work, so that he may be called a
Vaisnava, a Saiva, a Sakta and a Tantrik.'? In the case of the six
Ganapatya sects described in the Sankaravijaya, even if they had a
priesthood, it is unlikely that they had an exclusive laity and they
do not appear to have had any specific doctrine.

The heads of the so-called sects of Ganapatyas described
in the Sankaravijaya are referred to as Mahaganapatimatavadi
and Haridraganapatimatavadi'” (propagators of the doctrine of
Mahaganapati or Haridra Ganapati) or as updasakas (worshippers)
of Ucchista, Navanita, Svarna and Samtana Ganapati.'*! This implies
that these so-called heads were, in fact, only devotees of this form
of Ganapati and preached about him. They do not appear to have
had any specific doctrine but based their rituals and beliefs on
certain sections of the Saiva Agamas and the Buddhist Tantras
and may have also followed some Vaisnava traditions. Possibly,
they were associated, in some cases, with the lower orders of society
who would not have been as strict as the brahmana community
about the distinction between different religious sects. Since the
sections on Ganapati in the Agamas form part of the Saiva doctrine
and cult there was nothing distinct or new about the practices of
these sects. The essential difference between the Ganapatya sects

--- Page 196 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 197
of the Sankaravijaya is that some, such as those of Heramba and
Ucchista Ganapati were Tantric and were influenced by Buddhism
whereas the other four were not. The former two sects also appear
to have had a following outside south India. Perhaps one reason
why no matha of the Ganapatyas could develop was because they
did not enjoy royal patronage. In the South, the Cola kings and
the prosperous merchants extended patronage to both Vaisnava
and Saiva temples. Since Ganapati was part of the Saiva cult he
was not considered independent of Siva. So the small village and
urban temples devoted to him remained limited local features. In
the towns, particularly, the temples devoted to Ganapati had to
share the laity with the other more important temples of Visnu
and Siva.

Since in the fourteenth century the Sammoha Tantra speaks
of five different cults of the Ganapatyas, they must have existed
for several centuries. However, it is likely that some of these sects
may have faded away gradually while others were increasingly
influenced by and identified with the Smarta Ganapatyas. The
reasons why they faded away were because: they do not appear to
have had any influential brahmanas or royalty amongst their
followers; they had nothing new to offer; the Tantrik and esoteric
rites of two of these sects were shunned by many; Buddhism was
completely replaced by a resurgent Sivaism in the South during
the Cola period and the powerful bhakti movement with Siva and
Visnu as the principal deities must have attracted a large number
of devotees from among the common folk; and finally, Ganapati
as the son of Siva was an intrinsic part of Sivaism and could not be
accepted by the majority of people as superior to, or independent
of Siva.

GANAPATI AND THE SMARTA TRADITION
The pancayatana form of worship introduced by Sankaracarya was
accepted by the Smarta sects. The monistic philosophy preached
by Sankara made it possible to choose one of these as the principal
deity and manifestation of the Brahman (all-pervading soul and
spirit of the universe) and, at the same time, worship the other
four deities as different forms of the same Brahman. Once Ganapati
was accepted as one of the five principal deities of Brahmanism it
was a matter of time before a category of brahmanas chose to

--- Page 197 ---
198 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
worship him as their principal deity. This is the tradition reflected
in the Mudgala and Ganesa Puranas.

One might ask why Ganapati was included in the
pancdyatana and thereby equated with the major Puranic deities.
Possibly, one reason was because he was already popular with
some Buddhist and Saiva sects having been identified as an aspect
of the Buddha and Siva or the symbol of the syncretism between
the two. Granting him an important position in the Brahmanical
framework was one way of coping with rival sects. It was in the
interest of the brahmanas to sustain a large clientele on which
their livelihood depended and, at the same time, ensure the
prevalence of the traditional Brahmanical norms as spelt out in
the Smrti. Another reason may have been because Ganapati, as the
creator and remover of obstacles, could be associated with all
rituals and deities. Equally important was the fact that the concept
of Ganapati was present in the Vedas (it is an epithet used for
Brhaspati,'®? Indra'*> and Rudra.)'* It was, therefore, easy to link
the elephant-headed deity to the Vedas and, thereby, confer on
him the standing of an ancient deity of the Vedic tradition. This
was not the case with Kubera, Hanuman or the nagas. Although
they were associated with major gods, they were never identified
with them. Therefore, they remained separate and secondary
figures.

In content, both the Mudgala and the Ganesa Puranas have
much in common, showing a basic coherence in belief and practice.
They are the products of Smarta brahmanas and while they reflect
the influences of the Tantras and the Agamas, they strictly adhere
to Brahmanical norms. They appear to have constituted the only
independent sect of Ganapatyas in the sense that they were not
offshoots of other sects. They appear to have come into existence
around the eleventh or twelfth century and belong to a period
later than the Sankaravijaya.

_ The Ganapatyas lay stress on the pancayatana form of puja
where Siva, Visnu, Durga and Surya are equally important, in that
they are considered different forms of Ganapati. However, it is
Ganapati who is the source of all such manifestations. Most of the
forms of Ganapati worshipped by the sects described in the
Sankaravijaya are not mentioned in these Puranas. The Ganesa
and the Mudgala Puranas are monistic works and are not in conflict
with Sankaracharya’s philosophy of Advaita Vedanta. Anandagiri’s

--- Page 198 ---
THE GANAPATYAS_ 199

sects had a particular symbol each, such as the elephant trunk or
the elephant tusk, branded on the devotee’s forehead or shoulder.
These two sectarian Puranas make no mention of such a practice.
According to the Mudgala Purana,'** any person of any caste can
receive diksa (initiation) to the status of a Ganapatya. However
diksa can only be given by brahmanas. Once initiated, if a member
leaves the sect, it is stated that he will face obstacles everywhere.
In order to be initiated, a Asatriya must give up the use of arms, a
vaisya must cease to practice trade and a sudra must give up violence
and other lowly activities. In addition, after initiation, the Ganapatya
must perform his daily duues as stipulated in the Agamas and
Vedas. He has to smear sandal paste in twelve places on the body —
head, forehead, both ears, neck, arms, heart, stomach, navel, both
hips and back. Preferably, he should cover the whole body with
red sandalpaste, taken from a statue of Ganapati which has been
smeared with it. The Ganapatya must wear around the arms and
neck malas (rosaries) of Sami seeds (Sami is the name of a tree) or
the seeds of the mandar tree (the coral tree).'° If these are not
available then even the vidruma (coral) or aksa (a shrub which
produces brown seeds used for making rosaries) seeds will do. It is
essential for him to observe the vrata (a vow taken and observed
for the fulfilment of specific desires) on the two main caturthis, (in
the months of bhddrapada and magha), visit the ksetra (sacred site)
of Ganapati, and also recite and preach about Ganapati. A
Ganapatya is also permitted to observe the vratas and visit the
firthas of other deities. Elsewhere it is stated that Ganapati is to be
worshipped only by yogis. This is because he is synonymous with
Brahman and the latter can only be achieved through yoga and
yogis alone are well established in yoga.'*’ In this case yoga is
synonymous with sdnti, a tranquil state of mind. From this it would
appear that a Ganapatya was essentially a sanydsi (a renouncer)
even though this is not specifically stated.

To show the importance of their deity, the Smaria
Ganapatyas had to create a mythology for him distinct to that
found in the Mahapuranas. They had to justify his position as an
equal of Visnu, Siva or the Devi, because even if the pancayatana
form of puja had come into existence, these other deities were
still more important. They had to elaborate a distinct theology for
Ganapati and, at the same time, stress its antiquity. They sought to
establish a special iconographical form for this deity, to distinguish

--- Page 199 ---
200 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
it from that of the other sects. These objectives were achieved in
varlous ways.

The Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas appropriate whole myths
from the Mahapuranas with the difference that Ganapati is the
central figure in place of Siva, Visnu or Durga. Take, for instance,
the myth of Gajasura. In the Mahapuranas, Siva destroys this asura
and then wears his skin. In the Mudgala Purana, it is Ganapau who
destroys Gajasura.'* Mahisasura is killed by Ganapati in his form
as Sakti.'® Like Krsna, Ganapati acquires a childhood which is
vividly described. He becomes the mind-born son of Brahma.'®
He is depicted as the five year old son of Sesa.'*! Some new myths
are created. Dasaratha is able to obtain sons only after worshipping
Ganapati.'*? Vyasa is able to compile the Vedas and the Puranas
after doing likewise.'*? Other deities are shown in an inferior
position. Indra is used as a messenger of Ganapati,'* or he is
swallowed by Ganapati and inside his stomach sees the whole
universe and many brahmandas (cosmic eggs). Then he is humbled
and worships Ganapati.'* Like the other gods, he acquires an
abode of his own called Svananda. '*°

Ganapati borrows aspects and attributes of other Puranic
deities. Like Visnu, he acquires eight incarnations. These are
Vakratunda, Ekadanta, Mahodara, Gajanana, Lambodara, Vikata,
Vighnaraja and Dhumravarna.'” As in the case of the avataras of
Visnu, each manifests itself for a specific purpose. Ganapati’s
incarnations destroy eight different demons ( Matsara, Mada, Moha,
Lobha, Krodha, Kama, Manmata and Ahamkara) who are nothing
but the personification of negative tendencies. He is present in
the four yugas in different forms. In Arta Yuga he is called Vinayaka
and is the son of Kasyap. His vehicle is the lion and he is said to
be as brilliant as the sun, and has eight arms. In Treta Yuga he is
known as Mayuresvar, he sits on a peacock, is the colour of
moonlight and becomes the son of Siva. He has six arms. In Dvapara
Yuga he rides a mouse, is four-armed and is called Gajanana. He is
the son of Varenya (Sun) and is red in colour. In Kali Yuga, he
rides a horse, is the colour of smoke and is two-armed. He is
worshipped as GaneSa. He gives siddhi in all ages.'™

Ganapati acquires mantras of his own: one, four, five, six,
eight, ten, twelve, sixteen, eighteen or twenty eight syllable
mantras.’ The Ganesa and Mudgala Purdnas admit that they follow
what is prescribed in the Tantras, Puranas, Agamas and Vedas.

--- Page 200 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 20]
But the Rg Vedic mahdmantra, Gananam tva Ganapatim havamahe is
considered superior to all the Agamic ones.' There are repeated
references to the fact that the Agamas are the sources of the
Ganapatya mantras, nyasas, mudras and much else.'*! Ganapati is
regarded as the source of the Vedas!*? and he is identified with
the Vedic sacrifice’ and is called yajnapati.®4 He acquires a
Kilakastotra,'** Sahasranamastotra'® enunciated by Siva and even a
Gita where he expounds upon jndna yoga, karma yoga and ksetra
uiveka to King Varenya.!*’

The typical form of Ganapati in these sectarian Puranas is
with his two consorts: Siddhi on his left and Buddhi on his right. '%8
All three together are said to constitute Ganapati.’ However,
Ganapati has a female form as well. There is an episode described
in the Mudgala Purana where Ganapati appears before Brahma in
the form of Sakti. She claims to be Ganeéga.'™ This suggests that
Ganapati is both masculine and feminine. The devotee conceives
of him as he wishes. There is also an ardhanan (half male half
female) form described in the Mudgala Purana and referred to as
Sakti Vinayaka. It is stated that Sakti forms the left side of Ganeéa.
Both of them together constitute Brahman which is synonymous
with Svananda, the abode of Ganapati.'*' No such icon has so far
come to light. However, from inscriptional evidence we know that
such a form existed in the eleventh century. A verse in the
Halayudhastotra inscribed in aD 1063 on the AmreSvara temple at
Mandhata in the East Nimar District, Madhya Pradesh, states that,
competing with the ardhnarisvara form of his father Siva, Ganapati
assumed the same form.'® This form of Ganapati represents the
recognition of and the concession made to Sakti worship in general.
Such a form is also described in the sixteenth century Silparatna of
Sri Kumara. A passage in this text describes Sakti Ganapati as
having the head of an elephant with the lower body of a youthful
female with corpulent belly, heavy breasts and beautiful hips, who
is endowed with two proboscises and ten arms.'® The Silparatna
describes the iconography of Sakti Ganapati under the heading
misramurtayah (composite images) along with several other well-
known syncretistic image-types such as Ardhanarisvara, Laksmi-
Narayana or Hari-Hara.'™ Is is distinct to the other composite images
in that the body is completely feminine with breasts and feminine
hips, and only the head remains that of Ganapati and, therefore,
is masculine.

--- Page 201 ---
202 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

In the Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas, Ganapati’s trunk is
consistently described as hanging straight down and being as firm
as a rod (Sundadanda).'® It is as though a deliberate attempt is
being made to distinguish him from the other iconographical
forms where his trunk turns either to the left or to the right. This
constant reference to Ganapati’s trunk as being straight as a rod
has a connotation which he does not have elsewhere. The danda
brings to mind the club that Lakulisa often holds. In fact Lakulisa
means the holder of the club. The /aguda or club is an offensive
weapon. Its association with a religious preacher was evidently
aimed at holding out a threat to the followers of rival sects. In
peninsular India where the chief rivals of the Saivite order were
the Jainas, images of Lakulisa show him in a militant attitude. '® In
other places where there was not such conflict as in Rajasthan and
Gujarat he appears in a more pacific attitude. I am tempted to see
in the straight and taut trunk of Ganapati the expression of a
certain firmness of attitude among the Smarta devotees of Ganapati.
Were they trying to depict the firm resolve and the discipline
required of a Ganapatya or were they trying to assert the Smarta
form of worship over narrow sectarian forms?

A new way of bowing to Ganapati is introduced in these
texts. The rss and gods are described as crossing arms, holding
their ears and touching their heads to the feet of Ganapati.'* The
latter states that this method of paying obeisance to him must be
followed by all people since it pleases him.'™ This is still the
traditional way of bowing to Ganapati in Maharashtra and all over
the south, except that the devotee does not actually touch his
head to the feet of the deity who is at a distance in his shrine.
They either cross arms to hold the ears and bow several times or
turn around usually three, five or seven times. The ritual of immers-
ing the image of Ganapati in water at the end of the Vindyaka
caturthi-vrata takes on a new feature in that it is permanent,'™
unlike in the Agamas, where the image is immersed for a prescribed
period and then brought back to the temple.

The Smarta Ganapatyas appear as a sect similar to those of
various Saiva or Vaisnava sects. They created a specific doctrine
for themselves even if they borrowed freely from the Puranas,
Agamas and Tanwas. They introduced new forms, myths and rituals
for their deity. A distinct philosophy was also expounded in their
works.' They were strictly Brahmanical in their rituals. There are

--- Page 202 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 203
no offerings to Ganapati which include flesh of any kind. Nor is
the Tantric influence of the pavicamakaras evident. The Ganapatya
Puranas reflect the changing material milieu of the early medieval
period. The religion is opened to the lower castes but a strict
hierarchy is still maintained. A sudra is neither permitted to recite
a Sloka of Ganapati nor perform homa. He only has the right to
recite the néma-mantra.'”' There are myths of how a Sidra visiting
GaneSa’s ksetra acquired intelligence and knowledge and of another
sudra who died in this ksetra and attained Svananda.'” Likewise,
even a Canddla can reach Svananda.'” Animals, too, have the
possibility of being born as GaneéSas if they bathe in the Ganesa
kunda (tank).'”

The Smarta Ganapatyas appear to have been associated
with Varanasi, present day Maharashtra and parts of Karnataka
and Andhra Pradesh.'” Kasi and Mayurespur or Moregaon appear
to be specially sacred.' The river Narmada is considered the
most sacred of rivers and the red stones found in it are believed to
represent Ganapati.'” The Ganesa Purana mentions Cintamanipura
or Kadambapura in Vidarba, as also Siddhiksetra,'” Ganesapura,
Puspakapura and Mayuresvara.'” Only a few of these places can
be identified. Kadambapura is identified with the village Kalamb
(Yeotmal District), Maharashtra, which is referred to as
Kadambgirigrama in a copper plate grant of the fifth century ap.
There is an old underground temple of Cintamani in the village
but its date is uncertain.'® Siddhiksetra may be Siddhatek which is
the site of one of the astavindyaka temples. The concept of eight
Vinayakas and eight sacred places’! appears to have been
established by them. Indeed the astavindyaka shrines are among
the most famous of Ganapati tirthas today. They all lie within a
radius of about a hundred kilometres from Pune at Moregaon,
Siddhatek, Pali, Mahad, Theur, Lenyadri, Ojhar and Ranjangaon.
In addition, the temple at Cincvad (near Pune) is also very
important as it is here that the shrine associated with Moraya
Gosavi is located.

It is generally accepted that the astavinayaka temples rose
to prominence during Peshwa times (seventeenth to nineteenth
century). Although the temple structures date to Peshwa times,
the sites themselves must have been considered sacred from an
earlier period. The svayambhu murtis that are worshipped in each
of these places do not depict Siddhi and Buddhi. Where painted

--- Page 203 ---
204 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

images or metal icons of the latter exist they have only recently
been placed and in some cases they are not even present. Yet
according to the Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas Siddhi and Buddhi
are an intrinsic part of Ganapati. Even the temple priests in these
eight spots accept that Ganapati is married to them and that he is
nota brahmacarin. On the basis of textual references and epigraphs,
it is certain that Ganapati was being worshipped with Siddhi and
Buddhi, at least, by the twelfth century. Somesvaramalla (king of
the Kalyana branch of the Calukya family, aD 1126-38) refers to
Ganapati in his work Manasollasa or Abhilashitarthacintamani as
being accompanied by Siddhi and Buddhi and invokes him at the
beginning of his work as the one who fulfils all desires and scatters
away all obstacles.” It is possible, therefore, that the sites of the
Astavinayaka temples were associated with Ganapati before the
twelfth century. At these shrines, Ganapati must have initially been
worshipped as a brahmacann before the traditon of his wives,
popularised by the Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas, became
established. Besides, none of the images of Ganapati at these
shrines is depicted with the trunk straight. It turns either right or
left. Yet the two Puranas refer to the straight trunk of Ganapati.
It is only in the arti to Ganapati composed by Ramadas—a
seventeenth century Vaisnava brahmana saint who is believed to
have been the preceptor of Sivaji, the founder of the Maratha
empire—and which is sung in many Ganapati temples in
Maharashua is there reference to the straight trunk of Ganapati. '®
Possibly, he chose this form because of the firmness of resolve
that it appears to symbolise.

Another reason for supposing that the astavinayaka sites
are older than Peshwa times is because Moraya Gosavi who is
believed to be the first of a dynasty of eight incarnations of Ganapati
at Cincvad, near Pune, was associated with some of these sites
prior to the rise of the Peshwas. According to the hagiological
tradition at Moregaon and Cincvad, Moraya’s father and mother
came on pilgrimage to Moregaon and settled there. The father,
Vamanbhatta, performed penance at this place in order to obtain
a son. Because of his prolonged penance Ganapati finally appeared
before him and agreed to incarnate as his son. This son was Moraya
Gosavi. It was at Theur that Gosavi had his first experience of the
highest state of consciouness. Later, he moved to a small shrine at
Cincvad. Gosavi underwent jivansamadhi (entombment while alive)

--- Page 204 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 205
in a chamber beneath the shrine and thereby passed out of visible
existence in aD 1651. Devotees believe he attained moksa from
rebirth and that his presence continues to endow the shrine with
sacred significance.

If Gosavi could have been accepted as an incarnation of
Ganapati, the cult of the deity must have already been well-
established in the region. I have mentioned earlier how from the
ninth century onwards Ganapati is almost systematically invoked
first in the epigraphs of the Silaharas who ruled over parts of
Maharashtra and the Konkan area of Karnataka. Mukundaraja, a
sectarian Saiva from Maharashtra (late twelfth century) and author
of a philosophic treatise named Vivekasindhu also begins his work
with obeisance to Sri Ganeéa.'* These examples point to a growing
tradition in Maharashtra where Ganapati was invoked at the
beginning of all undertakings by brdhmanas and kings. This
phenomenon finds its culmination in the Jndnesvant (AD 1290)
when the Maharashtrian poet-saint, Jfanesvara, idenufies Ganapati
with the supreme Brahman. Perhaps one reason why there is no
epigraphical reference to Ganapati temples in Maharashtra is
because after the thirteenth century Muslim rule was established
in the Deccan. The region first passed under the Delhi Sultanates
and then under the Bahamanis. Therefore, there was no royal
patronage for Hindu temples nor the associated epigraphs which
constitute an important source of information for the historian.
Mughal supremacy in the Deccan ended with the death of
Aurangzeb in ap 1707 when the Marathas took control under
Shahu, the grandson of Sivaji. Thereafter, the Astvinayaka temples
rapidly rise to prominence in the time of the Peshwas. Further
south, where the Vijayanagar empire stemmed the tde of Muslim
conquest for more than two hundred years, there is continuous
reference to Ganapati in the royal and other inscriptions of the
period. In ap 1565 Vijayanagar was destroyed by the combined
power of the Muslim rulers of Anmadnagar, Golkonda and Bijapur.
This does not mean that the worship of the deity came to an end
or that traditions ceased to exist. It is just that some of the more
important temples in this region fell into neglect because of a
lack of royal patronage but beliefs and traditions survived. Even
today, Ganapati is specially popular in Karnataka.

The Peshwas were Konkanastha brahmanas (from the
Konkan area) and Ganapati was an important deity in this region

--- Page 205 ---
206 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

from as early as the seventh or eighth century, borne out by the
Ganapati temples at Gokarna and Idagunji. They were evidently
Smartas because they built temples to several other deities. Ganapau,
however, was their family deity. The Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas
probably acquired substantial additions during this period. Since
the lower orders of society imitate the higher orders, visiting these
temples must have received an impetus. The Peshwas and some of
their Maratha contemporaries further spread the cult by building
new temples to Ganapati in different parts of their territory. Some
of the well-known Ganapati temples in Maharashtra such as
Dasabhuja Ganapati and the Siddhi Vinayaka temple at Pune were
built by the Peshwas. The latter are also associated with the Sri
Siddhi Vinayaka Mahaganapati temple at Titwala about seventy
kilometres from Bombay and the Ganapati temple at Satara. In
Cuttack, Orissa, there is a Varada Gananatha temple which was
built in the time of the Marathas. Sri Raghuji Bhonsale, a contem-
porary and opponent of Peshwa Bajirao and his son, Nana Saheb,
is said to have given the land for this temple, and the means for
building it,'® when his troops occupied Orissa in 1741-2.'*

The Smarta Ganapatyas probably flourished over a fairly
large region for several centuries. Their relative importance in
Maharashtra is because of the tradition established by Gosavi and
also because of the subsequent patronage of the astvinayaka and
other Ganapat shrines by the Peshwas. Their contribution to the
religious life of the regions associated with them can only be
evaluated by a study of the perceptions of Ganapati as also his
worship in the contemporary context.

NOTES

1. Paul B. Courtright, Ganesa: Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings,
p. 218; M.K Dhavalikar, ‘Ganesa: Myth and Reality’ in Robert
L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God, p. 49; Alice Getty,
Ganesa, p. 20.

2. N. Veezhinathan, ed., Sri Sankaravijaya of Anandagin, pp. 81-91.

3. EI, Vol. III, No. 36, pp. 263-7.

4. EI, Vol. XXVI, No. 27 D, pp. 212-7.

5. B.N. Sharma, ‘Abhisekha in Indian Art’, JO/B, Vol. 21 (1971-2),
p. 10.

6. Kantilal F. Sompura, The Structural Temples of Gujarat, p- 90.

--- Page 206 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 207

7. Aschwin de Lippe, Indian Medieval Sculpture, p. 15.

8. Brahma Purana, IV.44.1-2.

9. Varaha Purana, 11.154.29-30.

10. V.V. Mirashi, ed., Inscriptions of the Kalachun-Chedi Era, ‘Kharod
Stone Inscription of Ratnadeva III: Chedi Year 933’, CII, Vol. IV,

Pt. 2, No. 100, pp. 533-43.

11. El, Vol. Ill, No. 37, pp. 267-76; CII, Vol. VI, 1977, pp. 36-44 and
pp. 44-54; EI, Vol. XXXII, pp. 63-8; E/, Vol. XII, No. 31, pp. 265-7;
EI, Vol. XXIII, No. 45,pp 269-81.

12. El, Vol. XXXII, No. 5, pp. 71-6.

13. Gazetteer of India, Karnataka State, Uttara Kannada District, p. 970.

14. Ibid., p. 929.

15. Robert L. Brown, ‘Ganega in Southeast Asian Art’, in Robert L.
Brown, ed., op. cit., pp. 171-233. See in particular p. 177.

16. El, Vol. XXXII, No. 13, pp. 79-81.

17. EA, Vol. II], pp. 16-27.

18. For the dating of this and some other Tantras see
N.N. Bhattacharya, History of Sakta Religion, p. 123. See also
P.C. Bagchi, ‘The Evolution of the Tantras’ in The Cultural Heritage
of India, IV, pp. 211-66.

19. H. Mitra, Ganapati, p. 97.

20. P.C. Bagchi, op. cit., p. 222.

21. Sankaravijaya, p. 87.

22. Ajitagama, Vol. II, Kriyapada, 55.1-19; Vindyakavratakalpadi, p. 21.
The latter is quoted from the Kriyapada of the Svayambhuvagama.

23. Christopher Wilkinson, ‘The Tantric Ganega: Texts Preserved in
the Tibetan Canon’, in Robert Brown, ed., Ganesh, pp. 235-76.

24. H.Mitra, op. cit., p. 43.

25. Ajitagama, Vol. III, 55.9 and 18.

26. Robert L. Brown, ed., op. cit., see ‘Introduction’, p. 8.

27. Ibid., fn. 24 on p. 18 of ‘Introduction’.

28. Alice Getty, op. cit., pp. 68-9.

29. Christopher Wilkinson, ‘The Tantric GaneSa’ in Robert L. Brown,
ed., op. cit., pp. 235-76.

30. For the list of these texts along with the authors and translators,
see Wilkinson, ‘The Tantric Ganeéa’, pp. 236-8. For the dates of
these authors/ translators see H. Mitra, op. cit., p. 43.

31. Christopher Wilkinson, op. cit., pp. 259, 265, 266.

32. Ibid., pp. 251, 253, 258.

33. Ibid., p. 255.

34. Ibid., p. 268. ;

35. The word ‘mandala’ literally means ‘a circle’ or ‘centre’. In fact
the mandala consists of a series of circles drawn within a square.

--- Page 207 ---
208 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
The diagram is usually drawn on the ground by means of colourd
threads or coloured rice powder and the various divinities of the
Tantric pantheon are arranged therein. The mandala represents a
microcosm and at the same time a symbolic pantheon.

36. Ibid., p. 242.

37. Ibid., p. 251.

38. Ibid., p. 254.

39. Ibid., p. 261.

40. Ibid., p. 265.

41. Ibid., p. 268.

42. Ibid., pp. 256, 257 and 267. (The texts in question are the Ganapati
Sadhana Daridira Nidhiprada Nama, the Sn Ajna Vinivarta Ganapat
Sadhanam and the Ganapati Stotra.)

43. Ibid., p. 248.

44. Ibid., p. 256.

45. Ibid., p. 264.

46. Ibid., p. 257.

47. Ibid., p. 267.

48. Gazetteer of Mysore State, Kolar District, p. 532.

49. Skanda Purana, Venkateshwar Steam Press edn., Kasi Khanda,
11.57.82.

50. ChristopherWilkinson, op. cit., p. 255.

51. Manava Grhya Sutra, 11.14.

52. Ibid., p. 262.

53. Ibid., p. 252.

54. Ibid., pp. 252 and 259.

55. Ibid., p. 260.

56. Ibid., p. 266.

57. Ibid., p. 262.

58. Ibid., p. 262.

59. Louis Frederic, Les Dieux du Bouddhisme, p. 156.

60. Ibid., p. 157.

61. Ibid., pp. 267-8.

62. Alice Getty, op. cit., p. 74.

63. Christopher Wilkinson, op. cit., p. 241.

64. J.N. Banerjea, The Development of Hindu Iconography, p. 547.

65. B.R. Chatterjee, /ndian Cultural Influence in Cambodia, pp. 241 and
263.

66. Alice Getty, op. cit., pp. 52 and 53.

67. Louis Frederic, op. cit., p. 153.

68. Mrgendragama, IiI.36; Somasambhupaddhati, Vol. I, p. 334.

69. Mrgendragama, IIl.22b, p. 52; Somasambhupaddhati, Vol. II, p. 632.

70. Rauravottaragama, chap. 1X, pp. 29-36; Ajitagama, Vol. II, chap. 49.

--- Page 208 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 209

71. Quoted from the Svayambuvagama in Ajitagama, Vol. III, p. 6, fn. 73.

72. Svayambhuvagama, 58.4.

73. Tbid., 58.39.

74. Ibid., 58.42.

75. Ibid., 58.72.

76. Ibid.,58.75; Vindyakavratakalpadi, p. 21, quoted from the Karanagama.

77. Svayambhuvagama, 58.106.

78. Ibid., 58.10. In the Agamas this immersion is not permanent, as
after a prescribed period, the image is taken out of the water and
brought back to the temple.

79. Vindyakavratakalpadi, pp. 27-8. Quoted from the Svayambhuvagama,
See also Ajitagama, Vol. III, 55.1.

80. Ajitagama, Vol. III, 55.3.

81. Ibid., Vol. III, 55.6 and 10.

82. Ibid., Vol. III, 55.13.

83. Karanagama, 1.57.58a; 60.64a. Quoted in Ajitagama, Vol. II,
Kriyapada, p. 156, fn. 5.

84. Sabdakalpadruma, Vol. II, p. 550.

85. V.S. Apte, The Practical Sansknit-English Dictionary, p. 1031.

86. Sankaravijaya, chap. 15, pp. 87-8.

87. Devi Rahasya, See Parisistas V.iii.30, p. 545.

88. Ajitagama, Vol. III, 55.12.

89. Pratapaditya Pal, Hindu Religion and Iconology, p. 127.

90. Ajitagama, Vol. III, 55.12.

91. Quoted from the Svayambhuvagama in the context of Vindyaka
Sthapana in Ajitagama, Vol. Ill, p. 6, see fn.

92. Diptagama, 78.40. This reference pertains to the version of the
Diptagama in Transcript No. 15 in the library of the FIP. At the
time that I consulted it the critical edition of this text was under
preparation. It has since been published by this same Institute
and the reference in the published edition is 1.40.

93. Mahakala is another form of Siva that was worshipped by the
Kapalikas. He is described as having excessively red eyes on account
of heavy drinking and he sits upon a simhasana. Cited by T.A.
Gopinatha Rao, op. cit., Vol. II, Pt. I, pp. 201-2.

94. CII, Vol. IV, Pt. II, No. 100, pp. 533-4.

95. Sankaravijaya, chap. 15, p. 87.

96. Pranatosini, p. 611.

97. Devi Rahasya, Parisistas v.iii.30, p. 545.

98. Pratapaditya Pal, op. cit., p. 7 of ‘Introduction’.

99. Pranatosini, p. 489.

100. V.N. Jha, ‘Varnasamkara in the Dharma Sutras: Theory and
Practice’, /ESHO, Vol. 13, nos. 1-3, 1970, pp. 273-88.

--- Page 209 ---
210 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

101. Sukumari Bhattacharji, The Indian Theogany, p. 184.

102. Quoted in Ayitagama, Vol. III, p. 6, fn. 73.

103. Diptagama, 78.38.

104. Christopher Wilkinson, op. cit., p. 243.

105. Ibid., p. 244.

106. Isanasivagurudevapaddhat: , 11.16.1-16.

107. Prapaficasara Tantra, XVII.2, 8-9, 14-18.

108. Sankaravijaya, p. 82.

109. Christopher Wilkinson, op. cit., p. 247.

110. Sankaravijaya, pp. 82-3.

111. Ayjttagama, Vol. III, 55.16; Vinayakavratakalpadi, p. 27.

112. Ayitagama, Vol. III, p. 6, fn. 73. Quoted from the Svayambuvagama.

113. Diptagama, 78.40.

114. Sankaravijaya, pp. 85-7

115. Ayjitagama, Vol. III, 55.18.

116. Mudgala Purana, V1.9.8; Ganesa Purana, I1.125.39; 11.6.24; 1131.9.

117. Mudgala Purana, VIII.43.26-7 and Ganesa Purana, II.130.22.

118. Ayjitagama, Vol. III, p. 6, fn. 73. Quoted from the Svayambhuvagama.

119. Sankaravijaya, chap. 18, pp. 90-1.

120. Suvarna Ganapati’s description appears in Ajitagama, Vol. III, 55.14.

121. Ibid., 55.15.

122. Sankaravijaya, p. 87.

123. Gudrun Buhnemann, Forms of Ganesa, p. 26.

124. Told to me by the priest of the Ganapati temple at the Madya
Kailash Temple complex, Madras. Several devotees who were
present at this time also confirmed this.

125. S.K. Ramachandra Rao, ed., Ganapati: (32 drawings from a
nineteenth century Scroll), p. 25.

126. Gudrun Buhnemann, op. cit., pp. 18-20.

127. Ibid., p. 21.

128. Ibid., p. 29.

129. ALK. Majumdar, Bhakti Renaissance, p. 59.

130. Sankaravijaya, p. 85.

131. Ibid., pp. 87 and 90.

132. Rg Veda, I1.23.1. Quoted by R.C. Hazra in ‘Ganapati-Worship and
the Upapuranas Dealing with it’, JGJhRI, Vol. 5, 1948, pp. 263-76.

133. Ibid., X.112.9. Quoted by R.C. Hazra, op. cit.

134. Tatttinya Samhita, IV.1.2.2 and Vajasaneyi Samhita, 11.15 and 22.30.
Quoted by R.C.Hazra, op. cit.

135. Mudgala Purana, V.24.

136. V.S. Apte, The Practical Sansknit-English Dictionary, p. 743.

137. Mudgala Purana, 1.20.28-30.

138. Ibid., 11.33.

--- Page 210 ---
THE GANAPATYAS 21]

139. Ibid., V.11.

140. Ibid., 1.43.11-12.

141. Ibid., V.19.6.

142. Ibid., 111.26.27-8.

143. Ibid., 11.34.1-6.

144. Ibid., 1.43.38-9.

145. Ibid., I1.56.38-9.

146. Ibid., III.51.25; Ganesa Purana, Krida Khanda, I1.50.3.

147. Mudgala Purana, 1.20.412.

148. Ganesa Purana, Krida Khanda, II.1.18-21.

149. Mudgala Purana, 1.32.49; 1.40.21; 11.56.26; II1.26.12; VIII.40.1.
GaneSa Purana, Upasana Khanda, 1.11.4; 1.11.10; 1.20.29; 1.50.5;
1.51.28.

150. Ganesa Purdna, Upasana Khanda, I.36.19-20.

151. Ibid., 1.11.3; 1.12.9 and 1.69.8.

152. Ibid., 1.51.73.

153. Ibid., 1.46.110.

154. Ibid., 1.46.103.

155. Mudgala Purana, V.45.1.

156. Ganesa Purana, Upasana Khanda, 1.46.

157. Ibid., Krida Khanda, II.138-48.

158. Mudgala Purana, V1.9.8; Ganesa Purana, Krida Khanda, I1.125.39;
11.6.24; I1.31.9. There are numerous such examples in the two
Puranas.

159. Mudgala Purana, VIII.43.26-7 and Ganesa Purana, Krida Khanda,
II.130-22.

160. Mudgala Purana, V.13.33-5.

161. Ibid., 5.15.

162. Samaresh Bandhyopadhyay, ‘A Note on Ganapati’, JOIB, Vol. 21,
1971-2 pp. 328-30.

163. P.K. Agrawala, ‘A Note on Ardhanari Ganapati’ in Studies in Indian
Iconography, pp. 155-8.

164. Samaresh Bandhyopadhyay, op. cit., pp. 328-30.

165. Ganesa Purana, Upasana Khanda, 1.66.17, Krida Khanda, IT.40.23;
11.50.56; 11.125.33. Mudgala Purana, V.45. There are numerous
such examples.

166. R.N. Nandi, Social Roots of Religion in Ancient India, pp. 102-4.

167. Mudgala Purana, 11.33.43.

168. Ibid., 11.33.44.

169. Ganesa‘ Purana, Upasana Khanda, 1.50.32-3.

170. For a discussion on aspects of the philosophy of the Mudgala
Purana see Phyllis Granoff ‘Ganesa as Metaphor: The Mudgala
Purana’, in Robert Brown, ed., Ganesh, pp. 85-100.

--- Page 211 ---
212 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
171. Mudgala Purana, V.24.6.
172. Ibid., VI.12.
173. Ibid., VI.23.28.
174. Ibid., VI.26.2.
175. Ibid., V.23.14.
176. Ibid., III.21.28.
177. Ibid., IV.47.56-9.
178. Ganesa Purana, Upasana Khanda, I.18.2.
179. Ibid., 1.82.
180. Maharashtra State Gazetteer, Yeotmal District, p. 703.
181. Mudgala Purana, III.21.32.
182. G.S. Ghurye, Gods and Men, p. 73.
183. Kashinatha Sastri Joshi, Sdratha Puja Samgraha, p. 152.
184. G.S.Ghurye, op. cit., p. 73.
185. Ramavatara Gupta, Ganesa Mahima, p. 164.
187. Stewart Gordon, The Marathas, p. 132.

--- Page 212 ---
AY
&
yy THE GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE
GANAPATYA SECTS
\ ®
we oN ieg
a,4 e HMIR 0 100 200 300 400 800
[es a Cen Son Snes
Kdomelerns
ITS .
& - &
a  _-UTTAR_ PRADESH Lz
t cenga R. 1
9 ae "ee " \
bs 4 Veramefia
4 MADHYA PRADESH BIHAR ny
ee RISSA 3 ram my
+ ORI
. . a® a ee
a &
c MAHARASHTRA ‘
Codevan p
r a
s Bengal uf
Arabian Sea Te, < . by Bey of Beng
tA NOHRA
e RADESH
ray
Len, © Buxcran GEpepetyas
aa 4 —_ Sava Gilnapetyes
a 4/\TAMIL NADU a Smarte Glinapatyes
A “|
INDIAN OCEAN
Map 3. Refers to the Sects and Subsects mentioned In Chapter VI.

--- Page 213 ---
CHAPTER 7

Legacy of the Ganapatyas
To understand the legacy of the traditions discussed in the
preceding chapter, I visited several Ganapati temples in the regions
that had been associated with the Saiva devotees of Ganapati and
the Smarta Ganapatyas.' The Ganapatya off-shoots of Buddhism
did not survive and have, therefore, left no trace in India. By the
tenth century, Buddhist influence had declined in India. Buddhism
was mainly concentrated in large monasteries such as Nalanda
and Vikraméila in the region of modern West Bengal and Bihar.
With the Turkish and Afghan invasions, these monasteries were
sacked, libraries burnt and monks put to the sword. The survivors
fled to Nepal and Tibet taking their beliefs and practices with
them.

My fieldwork was undertaken with the intention of
examining the extent to which religious texts and traditions
associated with the Ganapatyas since the early medieval period
(between approximately the eighth and thirteenth centuries AD)
continue to be valid today. In other words, do they influence the
attitudes of the priesthood, the ritual in the temples and the beliefs
of the laity? To what extent are traditions in the old and modern
temples similar? What are the new dimensions to the personality
of Ganapati and how have they evolved? What social and political
changes have caused new traditions to be established? If certain
beliefs persist what are the reasons for their popularity? Similarly,
what are the ambiguities that remain in Ganapati’s personality?
The ideas expressed in this chapter reflect some of the beliefs of
those who I consider to be the real upholders of the Ganapatya
tradition: the priests in the Ganapati temples; the laity who visit
these temples; the more learned devotee who performs various
rituals for Ganapati in his home and who has access to sacred
texts because of his knowledge of Sanskrit and/or regional
languages; and the numerous people who may not go to temples

--- Page 214 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 215
nor read any text but who are firm believers in the manifold
powers of Ganapati.

To begin with, it is relevant to understand what the term
‘Ganapatya’ signifies today. In Maharashva itself there are varying
perceptions of the term. At Pen, an elderly resident of the village
whose family has manufactured Ganapati statues since the 1880s,
claims that a Ganapatya is someone who does regular pija to
Ganapati, including arati (waving of lights before the image). Most
people in that respect are not Ganapatyas. They keep the deity’s
image on the family altar along with those of other deities. However
special puja for him is limited to the days of the Ganapati festivals.
These are the Vinayaka caturthi in the Suklapaksa (the fourth day
of the waxing moon) of the month of bhadrapada (August/
September) and the Ganesa jayantt (GaneSa’s birthday) celebrated
on the caturthi of the krsnapaksa (fourth day of the waning moon)
in the month of magha (January/February). An elderly devotee at
the Dasgabhuja Ganapati temple, Pune, felt that a Ganapatya was
one whose ista devata (personal deity) was Ganapati but who
worshipped all the other deities as well. Others felt that a Ganapatya
is one who worships Ganapati alone and does not visit the temples
of other deities.

At most Ganapati temples today, the priests do not
consider themselves to be Ganapatyas. In their view, a Ganapatya
is a priest who performs the worship of Ganapati. He does worship
other deities as well but only in the temple of Ganapati. In their
opinion the only such Ganapatyas are the priests at the Ganapati
temples at Moregaon, Cincvad, Sidhatek and Theur which are all
governed by the same trust based at Cincvad, near Pune. In fact,
there was a similarity of perception among the priests in these
temples. At Theur, the pramukha pujari felt that Ganapati is Siva’s
son only in myth. He may have taken birth from Parvati, Siva, or
from both, but is not a lesser god for that. He looked upon
Ganapati as the source of all creation. At Sidhatek, the priest
believed that Ganapati is Om, the symbol of the Brahman and
source of creation. He was present even when Siva and Parvati
were married and is only their mind born son. At Moregaon, they
accepted that Ganapati is Siva’s son but in only one kalpa. These
perceptions are all based on the Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas. In
some of the astavinayaka shrines, such as Ojhar, where the priests’
forefathers have served the temple for several generations they

--- Page 215 ---
2916 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

consider themselves Ganapatyas for they have never been officiants
in the temple of another deity. However, in other places such as
at Ranjangaon where the head priest had been appointed not too
long ago, he just considered himself a DeSastha Rgvedi brahmana
and had never thought about what the term Ganapatya signified.
At Titwala, the priests and trustees considered themselves simply
as Ganapati pujaris. At the Siddhi Vinayaka temple, Bombay, the
priests regarded themselves as Hindu brahmanas who could perform
pitja of other deities in other temples as well. In Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Varanasi and Kerala there is no such concept of a Ganapatya
even though there are several temples where Ganapati is the
principal or the only deity. However, individual priests have their
own perceptions of the deity they serve. At the Sri Vira Ganapati
Temple, Amdalli, Karnataka, the priest, a Smarta, felt that Ganapati
is all deities rolled into one. This idea is, in fact, propounded by
the Ganapatya Puranas. However, he did not consider himself a
Ganapatya but insisted that he was a Smarta. What is clear is that
not one person felt that a Ganapatya was synonymous with a sanyast
which is the idea conveyed in the Mudgala Purana and which I
have discussed at length in the preceding chapter.

In Maharashtra, tradition has stressed the unity of the
astavinayaka shrines. If a pilgrim wants the full benefit of a visit
to these sacred sites he must visit them all in turn. However, it
is evident that all eight are not visited equally frequently. Some
like Sidhatek are remote, the road is poor and the visit entails a
fairly long walk and a ferry crossing of the Bhima river. In this
small village, made up mainly of poor farmers, there are days
when hardly any one comes for the daily a@rati. Others, like
Moregaon, are well appointed and frequently visited. The rituals
in these eight temples is also not entirely similar. This is because
all the shrines are not run by the same trust. Except for
Moregaon, Sidhatek and Theur which are administered by the
trust based at Cincvad, the others have a separate trust each. At
Lenyadri, unlike the other shrines, there is no full-time brahmana
appointed in the temple. Consequently, some of the rituals which
can only be performed by a brahmana such as the abhiseka (ritual
bathing) and the offering of naivedya (food) take place only
once in fifteen days when a brahmana specially comes for that
purpose from Junnar, a few kilometres away. The laity is, therefore,
attended to by a Gurav who accepts their offerings and performs
the araiz in the morning and evening.

--- Page 216 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 217

The Guravs rank lower than the brahmanas. They are
popularly believed to be the offspring of marriages between
brahmanas and Marathas, a caste which claims ksatriya status. The
Guravs were, traditionally, servants in the temples of the goddess
and are found in Saiva temples as well. They also serve at several
Ganapati temples today. At Moregaon, there are about twenty
Guravs employed whereas at Ojhar or Sidhatek there are none.
The Guravs look after the cleaning, upkeep and decoration of the
temple and accept the offerings brought by the laity during the
day. They are not considered as pujaris in most Brahmanical
temples. However, in several smaller shrines devoted to Ganapati,
where the Gurav is the sole attendant, he is commonly referred to
as the pujdri. In these shrines there is no elaborate ritual. The
Gurav usually comes once a day, does the snana (bathing with
water as opposed to the abhiseka performed with the pancamrtam
or five nectars) of the image and performs a simple puja. At
Cincvad, at the temple built over the samadhi of Moraya Gosavi, a
whole family of Guravs looks after the upkeep of the temple.
When I visited the temple, the wife of the Gurav was accepting the
offerings of the devotees from within the garbhagrha (sanctum
sanctorum). There was no objection to a woman entering the
garbhagrha and attending to the laity. At the Trisunda Ganapati
(Ganapati with three trunks) temple in Pune, the priest is a
Maratha who had performed abhiseka and natvedya and all the
rituals normally associated with brahmanas during the forty-five
years that he had served the temple. He has now been replaced by
a Desastha Rgvedi braéhmana because of his extreme old age.
Whereas in most temples the laity is not permitted to enter the
garbhagrha, at Mahad the garbhagrha has no enclosure and I saw
devotees walk right in, make their offerings personally and touch
the feet of the image. The absence of an intermediary between
the devotee and the principal image in this temple enables a
more intimate contact between the devotee and his god.

The astavindyaka shrines and the other large temples of
Ganapati in Bombay and Pune are serviced by Desastha Rgvedi
brahmanas and Konkanastha Rgevedi brahmanas. The former are
from the Desa region, which is the heartland of Maharashtra
whereas the latter are from the coastal area of the Konkan.
Sometimes a third category of brahmanas are present, the Karadas,
who originate from Karad in Satara District, Maharashtra. They
are all Smartas. At most of these shrines and at the other Ganapati

--- Page 217 ---
218 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

temples the priests are referred to as pujaris, arcakas or, less
frequently, as ksetra upadhyayas. In Maharashtra, except when the
image is in white marble like in some of the newer temples, it is
always coated with thick red sindira and the tradition is ascribed
to the myth in the Mudgala Purana about Ganapati defeating the
asura called Sindira and then smearing himself with his red colour
in order to protect the world.’ The thick coating is prepared by
mixing oil of the bel fruit with sindura which is then pasted on the
image by hand. This is usually done once a month, on the day
before sankasta caturthi (the fourth day of the dark half of each
month, referred to as the ‘dangerous fourth’). Since it takes about
four days to dry, during those days padapuja (washing the feet) of
the image replaces the abhiseka. Even the images of Ganapati in
Varanasi are coated with the same thick layers of sindura. In
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu the images are usually made of black
stone and the only red, in most cases, is the t:laka on the deity’s
forehead. At [dagunji, however, the image of the deity is made of
red sandstone and at Gokarna I saw an image in the usual black
stone covered with sindura. In all these places, the priests apply a
tilaka of sindura on their own foreheads as well. The Ganapatya
Puranas recommend the application of red sandal paste all over
the body by the Ganapatya. However this practice seems to have
died out and it is only the deity, today, that is covered with red.
The priests at the Ganapati temples apply dhasma (ash) all over
the body as in the case of the Saivas. The Mudgala Purana states
that the red stones (jasper) found in the river Narmada represent
Ganapati.* This stone is the equivalent of the salagrama
(ammonites) of Visnu and the linga of Siva. Devotees worship this
stone as representative of the nirdkar (formless) state of the
elephant-headed deity. I have seen such stones on the family altars
of several Maharashtrian brahmana families.

It is well known that Ganapati’s favourite colours are red
and yellow. Yet these are not the only colours in which he is
dressed. At Moregaon, in the shrine over the samadhi (tomb) of
Gosavi, the image was dressed in purple, whereas at the main
temple at Cincvad the image was clothed in deep blue. The priests
are also permitted to wear dhotis of any colour except black. They
are usually dressed in red or yellow dhotis in Maharashtra and
Karnataka and rarely in white. At Gokarna they were dressed in

--- Page 218 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 219
purple. In Tamil Nadu and Kerala, I often saw them dressed in
white. In all cases silk dhotis were considered essential for
performing the puja but this, in fact, was often not the case. Priests
also face financial constraints and, besides, there is often a wide
gap between what is believed to be necessary and what is actually
practised.

There is, by and large, a certain uniformity of worship in
the Brahmanical Ganapati temples in Maharashtra and much of it
conforms to what is prescribed in the Ganapatya Puranas. The
prayers are based mainly on the Rg Veda and include the recitation
of the Purusa siukta, Brahmanaspati sukta and Sri sitkta. This
association of Ganapati with Vedic hymns and ritual is because
the Smarta Ganapatya sect linked the elephant-headed deity with
the concept of Ganapati in the Vedas and thereby conferred on
their chosen deity the sanctity of an ancient deity. The Purusa
siukta is recited because Ganapati is identified as the divine Purusa,
the embodiment of the cosmos. The Mudgala Purana states that
Ganapati is referred to as Brahmanaspati and Brahman in the
Vedas‘ and, therefore, he should be worshipped as stipulated in
the Vedas and the Puranas.® At other times the text recommends
that his worship must be according to the Vedas and the Agamas.®
In fact, in the Ganapati temples in Maharashtra the emphasis is
mainly on the Vedas and on a few Ganapatya works such as the Sri
Ganapati Atharvasirsa or Ganapati Upanisad which is regularly recited
and so is the Ganapati sahasranama which is based on the Ganesa
Purana.’ The Sri Ganapati Atharvasirsa is a relatively late text (about
sixteenth/seventeenth century) and is attributed to the Atharva
Veda.2 The Grati, however, is often sung in Marathi and is the
composition of the seventeenth century Vaisnava saint, Ramadas.
The ritual includes the pancamrtam abhiseka (bathing with five
nectars which include milk, curd, clarified butter, honey and sugar),
sodasopacara (sixteen acts of homage) naivedya and arati. On special
occasions a gana homa is performed. Dirva grass and sami leaves
are specially offered to the deity. They are normally put on
his head. According to mythological tradition, the immortality-
granting amrta was spilled on the durvd grass at the time of the
churning of the ocean. It is believed to be especially favoured
by Ganapati and has its parallel in the ancient kusa grass of the
Vedic sacrifice. The sami tree is referred to in the epics and Puranas

--- Page 219 ---
220 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
as the one from whose wood the sticks for kindling the Vedic fire
were made.?

The Mudgala Purana recommends that all Ganapatyas wear
a string of sami seeds around the neck and, if sami is not available,
then seeds of the mandara tree (the coral tree) or vidruma (coral)
beads.'” It is stated that these are as important for the Ganapatyas
as tulsi (basil) is to the Vaisnavas. This string serves the purpose of
a japa mala (normally 108 beads for repeating the mantra of
Ganapati). Today most priests feel that rudraksa, tulst or even
crystal beads are acceptable for doing japa to Ganapati. Very few
considered that coral or coral coloured seeds were essential.
However, flowers of the mandara tree that are white in colour, are
often offered to Ganapati. The image of the musaka (mouse) is
also present in these temples facing the main image. It is regularly
bathed, sandal paste is applied on its forehead and it is adorned
with flowers. Often, it is coated with sindura like Ganapati. The
mila mantra in most of the temples is Om Gam Ganapataye Namah.

Further north and south of Maharashtra in the regions of
Varanasi and Karnataka, the influence of the Ganapatya tradition
decreases but does not disappear altogether. Karnataka, according
to the Mudgala Purana was a Saiva ksetra."' Evidently the Ganapatyas
in Karnataka had to compete with the older, well established Saiva
sects. According to this text it was here that Rama worshipped Siva
when Sita was abducted by Ravana in order to acquire the power
and skill for killing the demon. He was informed by Siva that he
would have to worship Gajanana in order to succeed in his mission.
By associating Ganapati with the well known epic Ramayana and
with Siva, the Ganapatyas aspired to impress on the people the
benefits of Ganapati worship. In fact, some of the old and better
known Ganapati temples here are in the vicinity of famous Siva
temples. Others are associated with the Vaisnavas.

The Ganapati temples in Karnataka are mainly served by
Smarta brahmanas and the influence of the traditions of Tamil
Nadu and the Saiva Agamas is visible. The priests are referred to
as arcakas and, less frequently, as pujaris. In most of the older
temples, such as at Gokarna and Idagunji, the officiants are Havig
Rgvedi brahmanas. At Gokarna, in addition to the Haviks, there
are also Kota Rgvedi brahmanas. The Haviks are descendants of
brahmanas settled by the Kadamba king Mayuravarman in the
southern part of Uttara Kannada and the northern part of Dakshin

--- Page 220 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 221
Kannada districts. The Kota brahmanas originally came from the
village Kota, about sixty miles south of Mangalore. At Bangalore
several arcakas at the Ganapati temples are Sukla Yajurvedi Smarta
brahmanas. Like in Maharashtra, there are other castes who help
in the upkeep of the temple and participate in the temple ritual.
At Gokarna and Idagunji, the musicians who accompany the
chanting of the drati three times a day are Bhandaris. Below them
are the low-caste Gowdas who are responsible for the cleaning of
the temple. Only the garbhagrha is forbidden to them and it is
maintained solely by the brahmanas. At both Gokarna and
Kurudumale the head priest is an officiant at the Ganapati temple
as well as the Siva temple of the same village. In most of the
Ganapati temples in Karnataka the karmakdanda (ritual) is from
the Vedas but the mantras and stutis (hymns of praise) are from
the Saiva Agamas. In a few temples, however, the ritual is based
entirely on the Saiva Agamas. The Sri Ganapati Atharvasirsa is recited
in some temples and not in others. At Kurudumale, for example,
the priest had not even heard of it. The worship of Ganapati at
Gokarna is very similar to that of Siva. The figure of the elephant-
headed deity has an abhiseka patra on his head. Water pours on
him daylong like it does on the Siva linga. In some of the modern
Ganapati temples in Karnataka the Rudracamakam and the Durga
Sikta are also recited. Normally the Rudracamakam is recited only
in Siva temples. At the Sri Jambu Ganapati temple, Mallesvaram,
Bangalore (so named because the temple is under an old jamun
tree), the priest was proud of the fact that the Rudracamakam was
part of the daily ritual in his temple unlike in most Ganapati
temples. At the Anegudde Sri Vinayaka temple, Kumbhasi, where
the brahmanas are Vaisnavas of the Madhava sect the prayers are
not based on the Saiva Agamas but include the Sri. Ganapati
Atharvasirsa and the Ganapati Sahasranama which are part of the
Smarta Ganapatya tradition. In most of these temples the gana
homa is performed on special occasions such as the festivals of
Ganapati or when a devotee specially requests it. At Idagunji,
however, a gana homa is performed every day. Except in the old
temples where the entire ritual is in Sanskrit, the drati in the
modern temples is usually in Kannada.
Most of the modern Ganapati temples in Karnataka are
pancayatana temples where Ganapati is th. main deity. Since many
of these temples are not big, the other four deities of the

--- Page 221 ---
222 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
pa’cayatana do not necessarily have their own shrines around that
of Ganapati. Often small images are placed in the four corners of
the garbagrha around the central large image of Ganapati. There
are other temples such as the Sri Vinayaka temple, R.T. Nagar,
Bangalore, where there are no images of any deity other than that
of Ganapati. The only other shrine is for the navagrahas. The
trustees of this temple felt that it was the only way to avoid politics
and anyone who came to the temple would only do so to worship
Ganapati and not associate him with the rituals of other deities.
Like in Maharashtra, durva grass is considered essential to
Ganapati worship but Sami leaves gradually lose their importance
as one goes further south. They were considered important in
some temples of the Uttara Kannada district but not in others. At
the Pancamukha Heramba Ganapati temple, Bangalore, Ganapati
is offered bilva leaves which are generally associated only with
Siva. The Heramba form of Ganapati has five faces and, according
to the arcaka, the reason for this is because Ganapati wished to
resemble his father who also has five faces. In most of these temples
the exact ritual and the prayers to be recited are decided upon by
the priest and not by the trustees. This accounts for much liberty
in worship and for the numerous variations between temples. By
and large, however, Ganapati in Karnataka is looked upon as an
intrinsic part of Siva’s pantheon. In addition to the bhasma and
sindura worn by the temple priests in Maharashtra, those in
Karnataka also use candan (sandal paste). The mila mantra in
most of the temples in Karnataka is the same as that in Maharashtra.
Many of the older temples in Karnataka are associated
with their own myths. At the Vaisnava Anegudde Sri Vinayaka
temple, Kumbhasi, myth has it that Bhima, one of the Pandavas,
was defeated by a raksasa named Kumbha. The latter was invincible
because, as a reward for his penance to Siva, he had attained the
boon of not being destroyed by man. Krsna advised Bhima to
propitiate Ganapati in the elephant form and obtain the power to
destroy Kumbhasura. Bhima did as he was instructed and received
a sword from Ganapati with which he was able to overcome
Kumbhasura.'* Hence the name of the village, Kumbha + asi
(sword). The main image of Ganapati is also said to be in the
form of an elephant. However it is so covered with clothing and
flowers that only the trunk is visible. Basically, I’m told, it is a
piece of black stone.

--- Page 222 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 223

In Gokarna which is a famous Saiva tirtha, one of the
smaller Ganapati temples is referred to as the Ketaki Ganapati
temple. Ketaki is a flower of the ketaka plant and there is a myth
associating Ganapati with it in the Siva Purana. According to it,
Visnu and Brahma were once engaged in an argument as to who
was superior. Siva manifested himself before them in the form of
a linga and declared that whoever discovered the top or the bottom
of the linga first would be considered the greatest. Visnu assumed
the form of a boar and descended into the earth in search of the
root. Brahma, in the form of a swan, went in search of the top.
While he was flying up in the sky, he saw a ketaka flower falling
from above. On being asked where it was falling from, the flower
replied that it was from the top of the /inga. Brahma decided to
take the flower and present it to Visnu as proof of his having
reached the top of the linga. He requested the flower to bear
witness to his claim. Visnu accepted defeat but Siva overheard the
conversation and cursed Brahma for having lied, telling him that
he would, as a consequence, have no temple or festival devoted to
him. He also cursed the ketaka flower for having lied, saying that it
would never be used in his worship again. Later, however, Siva
relented and agreed that it could be worn by his attendants and
followers.!3 As far as I know, this is the only temple where Ganapati
is named after this flower and it is appropriate that it should be at
a place where the linga (Mahabalesvara) is the principal object of
worship. Probably, as Siva’s principal attendant Ganapati had the
right to be worshipped with this flower. At the astavinayaka temple
at Ojhar, Maharashwa, the priest rather vehemently said that ketaka
flowers were never used in the worship of Ganapati because they
were specifically associated with Siva. Possibly, this myth originated
in the region of Gokarna and is associated with Ganapati in only
the neighbouring areas.

Both in Maharashtra and Karnataka, Mahaganapati is
especially popular among certain brahmana communities. In
Karnataka he is the kuladevata (family deity) of the Gauda Saraswats.
The Gauda Saraswats are Madhava Vaisnavite Saraswat brahmanas
unlike the Saraswats who are Smartas. Formerly they were the same
community who originated in the Punjab. From there, they
migrated to Kashmir, East Bihar and Goa. When Goa was taken by
the Portuguese, they moved to Malabar, Cochin and Travancore. '*
In Maharashtra, Ganapati is the family deity of many Konkanastha

--- Page 223 ---
224 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

or Citpavan brahmanas. Traditionally, he was the deity of the
Peshwas and the Patwardhans. He is also the grama devata (guardian
deity) of several villages and of cities such as Pune and Ahmedabad.
Yet, among many pujaris of Ganapati temples, their own kuladevata
or ista devata is not Ganapati. At the Ganapati temple on Kasturba
Road, Bangalore, the pujari’s ista devata is Virabhadra (a fierce
form of Siva). At Gokarna, the kuladevata of the Kota brahmanas is
Narasimha (half-man half-lion form of Visnu). At the Mahaganapati
temple at Mallesvaram Circle, Bangalore, the kuldevata of the
pujari’s family is Venkatesvara of Tirupau.

In both Karnataka and Maharashtra, Ganapati is associated,
above all else, with knowledge. His worship was popularized by
brahmanas and since the traditional primary pursuit in the life of
brahmanas was knowledge, and more specifically, spiritual
knowledge, the deity became the lord of wisdom par excellence.
The Mudgala Purana repeatedly stresses this point. In two of his
eight avataras, those of Mahodara and Gajanana, Ganapati is the
said to be the bestower of knowledge and success. '° This knowledge
refers to spiritual knowledge and the various asuras that Ganapati
defeats in his eight different forms are essentially those short-
comings of the character that create obstacles in the path of
spiritual progress and realization. Elsewhere, it is stated that
Ganapati alone gives knowledge to achieve anything and
everything.'® The thirteenth century Maharashtrian poet-saint,
Jnanesvar, also idenufies Ganapati, in the /ndnesvan, with the totality
of the sacred texts and knowledge. This idea is present in the
Padma Purana as well, where the modaka is considered as the symbol
of perfect knowledge. Merely by smelling it, a man can obtain
immortality. He understands the meaning and essence of all sacred
books and becomes adept in all sciences and arts."’ In fact, Ganapati
as the expounder of the Ganesa Gita and the central deity of the
philosophical treatise, the Mudgala Purana, naturally came to be
idenufied with the highest form of knowledge. This idea has
persisted in these regions.

At the Sri Mahaganapati temple, Bangalore, Vidya
Ganapati is the form of the deity which is worshipped on the
sankasta caturthi in June. This is just before schools and colleges
reopen after the long summer break. Devotees raise money to
buy books and stationery for poor children and to pay their school
fees. The image of the deity is decorated with these books and

--- Page 224 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 225
stationery items which are eventually distributed to the poor.
Children in Maharashtra, and in many parts of Karnataka, begin
any learning session with an invocation to Ganapati. The deity’s
role as Lord of Knowledge is also responsible for his being asso-
ciated with Saraswati the goddess of learning. Most people in
Maharashtra know of Rddhi and Buddhi or Siddhi and Buddhi as
Ganapati’s wives. However, many still consider Saraswati to be his
wife because of his association with learning and culture. In
Varanasi, like in many places of the north, although Ganapati is
associated with knowledge he appears to be looked upon more as
the remover of obstacles and the bestower of wealth and well-
being. He is popular with the trading class and is, therefore,
associated more frequently with Laksmi, the goddess of wealth
and prosperity.

Inspite of being a Brahmanical deity, Ganapati was also
traditionally popular with the lower orders of society in the regions
of Maharashtra and Karnataka. According to the Gazetteer of the
Bombay Presidency, Kanara District, published in 1883 (Vol. XV,
Pt. I) even the Mahars, a scheduled caste considered impure by
ordinary Hindus, observed Ganesa caturthi although ‘with no great
care’. There is a story, popular among the Mahars, of how a fair
and handsome Mahar sweeper youth named Ganapati used to be
one of the guards at the Shaniwar Palace in Pune. One of the
ladies of the palace fell in love with him. The affair was discovered
and the Peshwa put the guard to death. The ghost of the dead
man kept appearing to the prince in his dreams and gave him no
peace until he made an effigy of the Mahar in the form of the god
Ganapati and set him up at the eastern entrance to the palace
where all would do obeisance to the Mahar’s name."®

Bal Ganghadhar Tilak, the Maharashtrian nationalist
leader, is responsible for bringing various castes together in the
celebration of the Ganesa caturthi festival. He joined with the
traditional brahmana leaders to reshape the annual festival at the
end of the last century. The purpose was to bridge the gap between
brahmanas and non-brahmanas and between the Congress and the
masses and make a united stand against British rule under the
leadership of the traditional brahmana elites. Unul Tilak’s time
the festival was a private and domestic affair. Tilak was the first to
have large public images of the god installed in mandapas. He
established the practice of submerging collectively all the public

--- Page 225 ---
296 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

images of the god on the tenth day. The setting up of public
images was accompanied by cultural programmes and melas and
topical political songs. This way Tilak encouraged non- brahmanas
to participate actively in the festival and thereby promoted Hindu
solidarity and gave a political character to what had so far been a
purely religious function.'? Ganapati, as the remover of obstacles,
was identified with nationalist aspirations for home rule in the
early part of the twentieth century. In this process, many aspects
of the Brahmanical Ganapati must have trickled down to the masses
and some popular elements absorbed by the Brahmanical elite.
Since then, Ganesa caturthi is the most popular festival in
Maharashtra. Ganapati has truly become a deity of all castes. At
the astavinayaka shrines when the pdalaki (palanquin) carrying the
utsav murti (metal image used for festive occasions) is taken out
on procession during the caturthi celebrations, any Hindu, whatever
be his caste, is entitled to carry it part of the way. At the Siddhi
Vinayaka temple in Bombay, any caste can visit it and have a puja
performed. Several young priests were emphatic about the fact
that because it was a Ganapati temple there could be no caste
restrictions of any kind.

This popularisation of the cult of Ganapati has also
resulted in a variety of images of this deity. At Pen where most of
the Ganapati images for the caturthi celebrations in Maharashtra
are made, I saw some very strange forms of the deity being
prepared. These included Ganapati dressed in western clothes
wearing shoes or riding a motor scooter. Rajbhau Deodhar, a
brahmana, who has the biggest workshop and whose family has
been in the business since before the time of Tilak felt that the
reason for this was that Ganapati had become a deity of the masses.
Each caste and class wanted a distinct form of its own. A group of
fishermen of the koli caste had ordered an image of Ganapati
seated on a fish. Today there are no kings and no royal patronage.
The brahmanas do not have the same influence they once enjoyed.
Hence, people are free to worship Ganapati in any form they
wish. None of the manufacturers at Pen base their work on any
text. Their tradition has been handed down from father to son.
Any image that sells well is copied by other manufacturers in the
same village. The primary concern of all manufacturers is to sell
the maximum number of statues and earn their living. They are
willing to make Ganapati in any way desired by the clients. Hence

--- Page 226 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 227
some of the strange forms of Ganapati. This does not happen with
Siva or Visnu or any of the other gods and goddesses of the
Brahmanical pantheon.

The public celebration of the GaneSsa caturthi is associated
with substantial proportions of a city’s population or with entire
villages whereas the domestic ritual consists of a puja performed
by individuals in their homes. The domestic ceremony commences
with the installation of a clay image of the deity on the family altar
on the day of Ganesa caturthi. The image is then invested with vital
breath (prana pratistha). Ganapati is worshipped and honoured as
a guest in the house with a variety of offerings and with specific
rituals and mantras. The image is kept in the house for a number
of days which range from one to ten depending on the family,
caste, and community. After the prescribed period has passed, a
simple ritual divests the image of its special status. The patron
disperses the prana of the image which reverts back to its prior
condition. The image is then immersed in water. It dissolves quickly
and returns to its original formless state.

In the old temples and in some of the villages, Ganesa
caturthi is still celebrated only in the temple. The duration of
festivities varies from temple to temple. At Cincvad there is no
public celebration other than the one performed at the main
Ganapati temple. The priests at Cincvad, along with thousands of
devotees, go on foot from this shrine to the temple at Moregaon
where Moraya Gosavi received his visions. Arati is performed there.
When the procession returns another elaborate drat is done at
the samadhi temple of Moraya Gosavi. Twenty one stotrams, all
composed in Marathi by Gosavi, are chanted on this occasion. At
Ranjangaon and Ojhar, too, there is no public celebration. In
fact, no resident of these villages generally sets up his own image
at home. The temple is believed to house the Ganapati of every
member of the village and it is there that the festival is collectively
celebrated. The celebration consists of a special puja and a yatra.
No image is specially kept in the temple for eventual visayan
(immersion). At most of the astavindyaka shrines the caturthi is
marked by a procession when the utsav mirti is taken on a palaki
either around the village or in four different directions, each ume
starting from the centre. The procession in four different
directions, like the one at Ojhar, symbolises the purusartha—the
four aims of life—kama, artha, dharma and moksa (pleasure, wealth,

--- Page 227 ---
228 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
religious merit gained through following the Sacred Law, and
liberation from the cycle of birth and death). At Sidhatek, the
festival is marked only by a special puja which lasts for four days
ending on the caturthi. At the Siddhi Vinayaka temple in Bombay,
on the occasion of Ganesa caturthi, a clay image is installed in the
temple and, on the seventh day, it is immersed in the sea. The
yatra is reserved for Ganesa jayanti when a procession accompanies
the utsava miurti carried on a palaki on the caturthi of the krsnapaksa
of the month of mdagha around the Portuguese church area.
Similarly, at Titwala, the procession with the pdalaki takes place
only on Ganesa jayanti and not on Ganesa caturthi when only
mahapuja is performed in the temple.

In most places in Karnataka where the public celebration
of Ganesa caturthi exists, it is a recent phenomenon. The domestic
pija followed by the immersion of the clay image, however, is
similar to that in Maharashtra. The traditional temple celebration,
like in Maharashtra, also centres around a tour in a palanquin or
on a rath (carriage) for the utsava murti of the temple. Here also,
the exact duration and nature of the festivities vary among temples
and between communities. At Gokarna and Idagunji, celebration
consist of a gana homa performed on GaneSsa caturtht. However, at
Gokarna people worship clay images in their homes beginning on
the caturthi and then immerse them on the eighth day. At Idagunji
nobody in the village buys the individual image of Ganapati for
puja and then visayan. Everyone congregates at the main temple
to join in the special prayers offered that day. In this village, like
in some villages that house the astvindyaka shrines in Maharashtra,
it is believed that the image in the temple belongs to everyone
and, therefore, no one needs to have one in the house. At
Kurudumale, a temple which dates mainly to the Vijayanagar
period,” the annual rath yatra takes place a day after the caturthi.
At the Pancamukha Heramba Ganapati temple, Bangalore, clay
images of both Gauri and Ganapati are kept in the temple starting
from the caturthi. After a few days of puja, both are immersed.
Here the presence of Gauri marks a departure from the practice
in Maharashtra where, generally, only the image of Ganapati is
submerged in the water.

In Varanasi the Ganapati temples are close to Siva temples,
for Varanasi is a traditional ksetra of Siva. The temples I visited
had Smarta brahmana priests. They are essentially Kananjia

--- Page 228 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 229

brahmanas who belong to the region. The Kananjias are sub-divided
into various classes and the temples I visited were serviced by
priests who were Dubes, Tewaris and Sarjupalli brahmanas. In these
temples the mantras and rituals were based mainly on the
Mahapuranas. One of the biggest Ganapati temples in Varanasi is
the Bada Ganesa temple. The Durga Vinayaka temple is also well
known as also the numerous small shrines to the various Vinayakas,
the more famous being Dhundhiraja Vinayaka, Saksi Vinayaka
and Pafcamukha Vinayaka. At the Bada Ganesa temple, Ganesa
Jayanti was considered the most important festival followed by
Ganega caturthi. However there is no public celebration on either
occasion and nor does the temple organise a rath yatra or palaki
procession. Like in Maharashtra, durva grass and sami leaves are
specially offered to Ganapati. The Sri Ganapati Atharva-Sirsa_ is
recited in addition to numerous stotras from various Puranas. Suktas
from the Vedas are not, as far as I know, included in the daily
ritual of the temples. People merely come to the temple to make
offerings and for darsana (a sight of the deity) and, important
though the Vinayakas may be, they remain an intrinsic part of
Siva’s pantheon and worship. Some of the Vinayakas such as
Dhundhiraja and Saksi Vinayaka have a third eye on their forehead,
and Dhundhiraja even has the crescent of the moon on his
forehead. These are typical features of Siva. According to the
Mudgala Purana, Ganapati became the son of Siva by the name of
Dhundiraja in order to rid Kaéi of King Divodasa and make it free
for Siva to reside in.) Kasi and Siva are both depicted as
worshipping Ganapati. Siva insists that Ganapati be worshipped
before him. Only then will he be pleased and bestow muktt
(liberation from rebirth) and bhukti (enjoyment).

According to the Mudgala Purana, the name Dhundhiraja
was given to Ganapati because Siva searched for him in all the
Vedas and Sastras in order to understand him. Ganapati is believed
to give dharma, kama, artha and moksa in this city.” The images of
Dhundhi Ganapati are also found at Ranjangoan and Ojhar. None
of these images appear to have any common form. Cintamani
Ganapati is found at Gokarna, at Theur where it is the name of
the svayambhu miurti, and at Varanasi where he figures as one of
the fifty six Vinayakas. In each place, however, the form is different
and, as the name indicates, merely symbolizes Ganapati as the
fulfiller of wishes. The Mudgala Purana describes him as having

--- Page 229 ---
930 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

three eyes and wearing the cintamani jewel in his heart.2> What
appears to have mattered was the name of the form rather than
the form itself.

Both in Maharashtra and in Varanasi Ganapati is con-
sidered to be a grhastha (married man). In Maharashtra, because
of the influence of the two Ganapatya Puranas, his wives are
believed to be Siddhi and Buddhi or Rddhi and Siddhi although
some consider Laksmi or Saraswati to be his wives. However, since
both Laksmi and Saraswati were associated with other major gods,
the Ganapatyas popularized Ganapati’s association with Siddhi and
Buddhi. It was essential for Ganapati to have his own consorts if
he was to be equated with the other major deities. This permitted
the deity to conform to the Brahmanical concept that a man
without a wife is incomplete. Ganapati is not the only deity to
have two wives and nor is he the only deity who is looked upon as
the husband of various goddesses. Siva and Visnu are both
sometimes described with more than one wife. Ganga and Kasi
are sometimes referred to as Siva’s wives in addition to Uma,
Parvati, Durga or Sati. Similarly, Visnu is sometimes flanked by
Bhuidevi and Sridevi. Brahma, likewise, is described with his two
wives, Gayatri and Saraswat. The names of Ganapati’s consorts
are such that they can be interpreted as the very gifts that his
worship bestows and which are essential for a successful life. In
that way Ganapati can be conceived of both as a brahmacarin and
as a grhastha at the same tme. Also, that way Siddhi and Buddhi
become acceptable even to those who prefer to consider Laksmi
or Saraswau as his wife. In Varanasi, where the recently established
cult of Santosi Ma has become very popular, Ganapati is considered
both a husband and a father. At the Bada Ganesa temple he is
depicted with Rddhi and Siddhi along with their sons referred to
as Subha and Labha. There is even a shrine for Santosi Ma.
Reference to Ganapati’s sons occurs only in the Siva Purana where
they are referred to as Ksema and Labha.” They are not mentioned
in the Ganapatya texts and this aspect of Ganapati's personality
was only recenuy popularised by the creation of the goddess Santosi
Ma in north India. It is, however, not accepted in the tradi-
tional Ganapati temples of Maharashtra and Karnataka, where,
inspite of the popularity of the film Jai Santoshi Ma, the majority
of the people I spoke to were not aware that Ganapati had any
sons. The Ganapati temple at Titwala was the only temple that

--- Page 230 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 231
I visited in Maharshtra which had images representing his two
sons (along with their mothers) beside the principal image of
Ganapati.

The relevance of the Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas also
varies from place to place. The Ganeja Purana has been published
in Sanskrit with a Marathi translation and the Mudgala Purana is
available in Sanskrit. I do not know of any Marathi translation of
the latter although abridged translations in Marathi of some
portions exist. Obviously then, these texts have some relevance
today. At Moregaon a brahmana resident of the village reads
excerpts from the Mudgala Purana in the temple at the request of
devotees. Such sessions last from three days to a month. The sixth
khanda of the Mudgala Purana is especially popular as it deals with
this particular sacred site. Portions of the Ganesa Purana are also
read. However, the Ganesa Gita which forms part of the Ganesa
Purana is unknown to most people and, I am told, is never recited.
At Ojhar, almost throughout the year, at around 8.00 a.m. some
part of the Ganesa or Mudgala Purana is read within the precincts
of the temple. The Maratha who reads it lives in the village but is
not part of the temple. He knows Sanskrit and is able to translate
what he reads into Marathi. The audience consists mainly of the
residents of the village. At Theur and Sidhatek these texts are not
read. The reason given at Sidhatek was that the village was too
small. The majority of the population consisted of farmers who
spent most of the day in the fields and who only came to the
temple for darsana. In none of the other temples that I visited in
Maharashtra were these texts ever referred to. In Karnataka, at

the Ganapati temple on Kasturba Road, Bangalore, on important
occasions such as the twenty days celebrations for the Ganesa
caturthi, lectures (basically stories) based on the Ganesa Purana are
sometimes organized but none from the Mudgala Purana. At
Gokarna, the pramukha pujan was familiar with the Ganesa and
Mudgal Puranas but the texts were never read in the village. At
Idagunji no one had even heard of them. At the Bada Ganesa
temple at Varanasi, the priest whose family has served in the temple
since four generations had heard of the Ganesa and Mudgala
Puranas. However, he had never seen the texts and did not even
know if they were available. Essentially, the public is familiar with
those myths of Ganapati which are described in the Saiva Puranas.

So, in the final analysis, who are the texts relevant to

--- Page 231 ---
232 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

today? Probably they have become a part of the religious heritage
of the region and only very few scholars read them. Portions of
them are also read by interested lay persons and devotees. They
are also relevant to a few residents in those villages with astavinayaka
shrines where limited portions of these texts are sometimes read.
However, it is certain that only a very small number of myths from
these Puranas are known. This is the case with most of the sacred
texts today. Take for instance the Agamas. These texts are
acknowledged as being authoritative in many temples of Tamil
Nadu. Yet, there is hardly anyone who really knows them. Many of
them are not even known to exist any more. Most priests are
familiar with some of the rituals prescribed in them and these
rituals are preserved by the principle of heredity and not by the
study of texts.

Further south, in Tamil Nadu, the priests in the more
important Ganapati temples are mainly Yajurved: Smartas. Whereas
the Ganapati homa, pancamrtam abhiseka and the Sahasranama are
common to these different regions, the Sri Atharvasirsa was not
included in the ritual of the temples I visited. In some temples the
Rudracamakam is also recited daily. Ganesa caturthi is celebrated
with a homa and the distribution of prasad. In some temples the
utsava murti is taken on a palaki around the temple and the streets
of the neighbourhood and then returned to the temple. Where
there is public celebration it is a more recent phenomena although
the domestic celebration is the same as in Karnataka and
Maharashtra in that clay images are installed in individual homes,
worshipped, and then immersed in the sea, river or tank. As in
the case of Siva temples in Tamil Nadu, the priests in the Ganapati
temples are referred to as gurukkals whereas the term arcaka is
usually used for priests in Visnu temples. The gurukkals are not
recognised as regular brahmanas. They are Saivites to a greater
extent than the Smartas. In fact, in most of the smaller temples,
the priests are Saivas rather than Smartas. At the Alavrksa Eyarkai
Temple (Banyan tree natural Vinayaka) in the Government Estate,
Madras, the gurukkal said that he served as an officiant only in
temples of Siva or Ganapati. At some of the smaller shrines such
as the Saku Vinayaka temple, opposite Adyar Park Sheraton hotel,
the temple priest is a Mudaliar. The Mudaliars were originally an
artisan caste and they are generally Saiva by religion. In this
particular temple all the puja is in Tamil. The ritual is also very

--- Page 232 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 233
simple—snana, naivedya and aratt. At a small roadside shrine on
TTK road, Madras, there is a temple called the Golden Vinayaka.
Here the priest calls himself a Sivacarya and said that he based his
puja entirely on the Kamikagama. The officiants in the temples I
visited were not familiar with the Ganesa and Mudgala Puranas
even though there is a south Indian version of the Ganesa Purana
called the Vindyaka Purana. In all the temples the priests believed
that Ganapati is not equal to Siva. Neither is he an independent
deity. He is only the son of Siva and, therefore, important though
he may be, he can never be as great as his father. However, being
an important member of the family, he is ented to his own
temples and rituals. The forms of Ganapati in some of the temples
recall the forms mentioned in the Sankaravijaya. The Golden
Vinayaka temple recalls the Suvarna Ganapati of the Sankaravijaya.
Another, the Sakti Vinayaka, recalls the Sakti Vinayaka of the
Ajitagama.*> However, in this particular temple, Ganapati is not
depicted with any Sakti and is represented alone.

In Tamil Nadu the difference between the Vaisnavas, the
Smartas and the Saivas has been more marked than in other regions.
However, most non-brahmana Tamilians maintain multiple sectarian
affiliations, seldom shifting from one to another, but more often
adding to their affiliational connections through time. Today there
are syncretic tendencies but these appear in the Smarta context. A
case in point is the Sri Ananda Vinayaka temple, Madras. It is a
pancdyatana temple where Ganapati is the principal deity and is
looked upon as an avatara of Lord Venkatesvara by the priests
because the idol was gifted by the Tirupati temple where Lord
Venkateévara, a form of Visnu, is the principal deity. The priest is
an Iyer but he wears the tlaka of the Vaisnavas as does the deity
he serves. The Ganesa caturthi puja is performed with 1008 sankhas
and chanting from the Krsna Yajur Veda. The sankha is an attribute
of Visnu and, in this case, because Ganapati is looked upon as an
incarnation of a form of Visnu, he is associated with it. Hence,
Ganapati is the link between various castes in Maharashtra and
various sects in Tamil Nadu, even as he was the bridge between
Sivaism and Buddhism in the early medieval period.

Diurva grass is important for Ganapati worship in Tamil
Nadu, but not so, sami. The arka ( Calotropis gigantea) root and arka
flowers are also specifically associated with Ganapati in this region.
The arka plant is associated with Ganapati in some Mahapuranas

--- Page 233 ---
234 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

and Saiva Agamas and, therefore, some of the temples in Karnataka
where the influence of the Saiva Agamas exists arka flowers are
used in the worship of the deity. According to the Svayambhu-
vagama, the bali to Ganapati consists of, among other things, arka
flowers.”° According to the Agni Purana, oblations done to Ganapati
with the root of white arka, are believed to result in the fulfilment
of all wishes of the worshipper.”’

In contrast to Tamil Nadu where Ganapati worship is based
on the Saiva Agamas, in Kerala, in the temples I visited, it is based
on the Vedas. This is not taking into consideration temples which
have been set up by other communities and where the ritual
conforms to the regions where the communities come from. Like
Maharashtra, Kerala too had a royal family, albeit a small one,
that considered Ganapati as its family deity—that of the Rajas of
Edapilli. Edapilli was a tiny state in the Malabar which was ruled
by rajas belonging to the Namboodiri caste of brahmanas. The
dynasty claimed its origin from the days of Parasurama (looked
upon as one of the ten incarnations of Visnu). Information about
Edapilli is available mainly from Portuguese and Dutch sources.
The state and the ruling dynasty existed from at least before the
arrival of the Portuguese. This state, which was originally inde-
pendent, came under the suzerainty, at one time or another, of
Travancore and Cochin. The would-be-Raja and his family still
live at the Edapilli palace in Cochin. Ganapati is their family deity
and an image of a ten-armed Ganapati made of panicaloha (five
metals) is now worshipped in the puja room of the palace. At
certain umes of the day this puja is open to the public. However,
since very few people know about this temple there are not many
visitors. Vasudeva Raja, the brother of the would-have-been Raja,
said the image had been around all his life (he is about fifty years
of age) and his parents’ life. He maintained that Ganapati had
been the family deity for generations but could not say for how
many generations. The image housed at the Edapilli palace had
formerly been the utsava murti at the temple of Ganapati at
Panangad (on the outskirts of Cochin) which once belonged to
the royal family. The temple at Panangad has an image that is
believed to be svayambhu. When the Raja lost his land after his
statc was abolished he was obliged to give up this temple. Since
the svayambhu murti could not be moved, he only took away the
ulsav murt: and entrusted the temple to the care of the forty odd

--- Page 234 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 235
families residing in Panangad. There is no other image in the
temple at Panangad. There are two smaller shrines in the large
compound, one for the ndgas and the other for Siva. This Ganapati
temple is believed to be at least two hundred years old although
there were some trustees who said that tradition had it that it was
about six hundred years old.

The priests at this temple at Panangad are Embrandri
brahmanas. The Embrandris are a brahmana caste who immigrated
from the South Kannada District of Karnataka. They are not as
high a caste as the Namboodiris but some families have inter-
married with the Namboodiris. The mila mantra in this temple is
Gam namah. The celebration of Ganesa caturthi at Panangad includes
a special homa with the offering of 1008 coconuts and other items
like rice and sugar cane. The festivities do not include a yatra nor
the immersion of a clay image of the deity. The prayers include
the Purusa Sakta and the gayatri mantra, The Sri Ganapati Atharva-
Sirsa is not recited and no one had heard of the Ganesa and Mudgal
Puranas.

Some of the better known temples dedicated to Ganapati
in Kerala are the Madhura Ganapati in Kasargod, the Mahaganapati
temple in Calicut and the Ganapati temple in Trivandrum. The
temple priests in Kerala are referred to as tantn. What is common
to Tamil Nadu and Kerala is the representation of Ganapati with
the wunk turning right holding the amrta kalasa (jar of ambrosia).
This form appears to be special to these two regions and gives
Ganapati another dimension to his personality—the giver of
immortality.

What appears common in Varanasi, Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu is the association between Hanuman
and Ganapati. The popularisation of the cult of Hanuman in the
region of Maharashtra is largely due to the seventeenth century
saint, Ramadas. The latter worked towards a spiritual regeneration
of society and established a chain of monasteries throughout the
Maratha state where physical education was imparted with special
attention to the formation of bodily strength and character. The
presiding deity in these mathas was Hanuman.” Hanuman was a
symbol of strength and his role in the Ramayana is believed to
have inspired Sivaji and the Marathas to fight against Mughal
domination. The images of both Ganapati and Hanuman are
smeared with thick coats of sindiura. Whereas one represents wisdom

--- Page 235 ---
236 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

and knowledge, the other represents physical might, both necessary
qualities for a successful life. In Maharashtra what is striking is the
presence of an image of Hanuman in virtually all the Ganapati
temples and shrines, old and new. Probably it was during Ramdas’
time or shortly thereafter that many Ganapati temples acquired a
shrine to Hanuman, popularly known as Maruti or as Anjaneya in
the south. In Ahmadnagar both the deities are looked upon as
grama devatas of the city. Hanuman guards the northern gate of
the old city wall and Ganapati is the guardian of the southern
gate. Both have temples in these locations.” At Sidhatek the
gramadevata is Hanuman. One difference between the two, however,
is that Ganapati in Maharashtra and Varanasi is considered to be a
grhastha whereas Hanuman is a brahmacarin. In Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu both are brahmacarins. Hanuman is also present in
many Ganapati temples in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. At Varanasi
there were many small shrines under trees where images of both
deities are placed. In Pune, in a small shrine not far from the
Kasbah Ganapati temple, I came accross a tall (about 6 ft.) and
powerful looking statue of Ganapati where he resembles the figure
of Hanuman. His belly protrudes only slightly and thus he does
not look stocky. In one of his hands he bears a mace which is an
attribute of Hanuman. The other hands bear no attributes. This
process of syncretism finds its culmination at the Sri Ananda
Vinayaka temple in Madras where there is a syncretistic deity who
is half Hanuman and half Ganapati (plate 4). He is referred to as
Adianta Prabhit (eternal lord). The left side is Hanuman and the
right is Ganapati. The image stands on a lotus. At Varanasi one of
the popular prayers to Ganapati is the Ganesa calisa which has its
counterpart in the Hanuman calisa.

How the priests view themselves also differs in temples.
Whereas most priests, including the ones at the astavinayaka shrines,
consider themselves as the sevaks or servants of the lord, three
priests, one at the Ganapati temple on Kasturba Road, Bangalore,
another at Kurudumale, also in Karnataka, and the third at the
Golden Vinayaka temple, Madras, considered themselves as
pratinidhis or representatives of the lord. Their claims to be
representatives of the deity they serve can be understood in the
context of the Agamas on which they base their worship. One of
the Agamic precepts is that ‘one must become Siva to worship
Siva’ and that ‘only Siva can worship Siva’. Fuller describes how,

--- Page 236 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 237
among the Minaksi temple priests (Madurai, Tamil Nadu), the
Agamic precepts are taken to mean that a priest must become a
form of Siva before he can worship him. This transformation is
first achieved when a priest is initiated and consecrated by his
guru, and it is repeated thereafter when the priest invokes Siva in
himself before commencing a ritual. Similarly, by extension of
that precept, these priests in the Ganapati temple felt that they
were representatives of Ganapati by reason of their diksa (initiation)
and consecration. The priest at Kurudumale performed puja at
both the Siva and the Ganapati temple. He considered the laity to
be the sevaks whereas, being the intermediary between them and
the deity and since he prayed on their behalf, he was the pratinidhi.
The priest at the Pancamukha Heramba Ganapati temple,
Mahalaksmi layout, Bangalore, considers himself a messenger
between the laity and the god. Without using the word pratinidhi
he insisted that he was a part of the deity, in this case, Siva,
because he looked upon Ganapati as an avatara of Siva.

There is a popular belief about Ganapati which does not
find mention in the Ganapatya or other texts dealing with Ganapat.
In Maharashtra, the image of the deity with the trunk turning
right is known as Siddhi Vinayaka and it is commonly believed
that this form has a special significance. It requires special puja
and, when not worshipped according to strictly defined procedures,
it can be unlucky. Therefore, it is not recommended for homes
but is usually housed in a temple. A friend told me how her father
had presented an antique bronze image of Ganapati with the
trunk turned right to neighbours in Bombay. He discovered,
subsequently, to his horror, that the antique had been thrown
into the sea because the neighbours feared it would bring bad
luck.*! The biggest temples to Siddhi-Vinayaka are in Bombay and
Pune. It is believed that the worship of Siddhi Vinayaka ensures
siddhi, or success, quickly. According to members of a family I met
in Pen, their guru was regarded by his devotees as an incarnation
of Ganapati with his trunk to the right. This family believed that
Ganapati with the trunk to the left signified Siva’s son whereas
Ganapati with the trunk to the right symbolised the deity in his
capacity as the source of all creation. The guru in India 1s
traditionally looked upon and worshipped as God. He is the
representative of Brahma, Visnu or Siva because by showing the
devotee the path to realization he becomes the creator of a new,

--- Page 237 ---
238 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
more evolved human being. Many devotees of the late Swami
Chinmayananda looked upon him as an incarnation of Adi Sankara
who, in turn, was considered to be an incarnation of Siva. If some
people in Maharashtra look upon their guru as an incarnation of
Ganapati, it is understandable since Gosavi and his seven descen-
dants established a tradition of Ganapati incarnating in human
form in this region.

In Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala there were many
images of Ganapati with the trunk turning right but each time I
was told that it did not have any special significance. In Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu such an image is referred to simply as balamun
Ganapati and valamburi Ganapati respectively. In Karnataka some
priests considered that Ganapati with his trunk to the right
represented the tgas (brilliant or fierce) aspect of the deity whereas
the image with the trunk to the left represented the saumya (mild)
aspect. At Idagunji the image with the trunk turning right is
referred to as Ugra (fierce) Ganapati. At other places the trunk
turning left was considered sdatvic (endowed with the quality of
sattva or goodness), the straight, rajasic (endowed with the quality
of rajas or passion), and the right, tamasic (endowed with the
quality of tamas or darkness/ignorance). In Kerala, at the
Guruvayoor temple, there is a Ganapati shrine where the trunk of
the image turns right. I was told that it had no particular
significance and that it made no difference whether the trunk
turned to the right or the left. This tradition of Siddhi-Vinayaka
with the trunk to the right does not find mention in the Ganapatya
texts which, on the contrary, refer to Ganapati with the straight
urunk. It was probably started by some temple priests in order to
attract a greater number of followers and gradually became
established. Even in some of the small temples in Pune the image
of a Ganapati with trunk turning right is installed since it is
associated with greater power and, thereby ensures a greater
clientele. Images of Ganapati with the trunk turned to the right
appear as early as the seventh century (plate 5) but the Puranas
and Agamas make no mention of whether the trunk should turn
left of right. It is possible that these variations existed because of
different artisans who produced the images and, much later, the
idea of their having a special significance was popularized.

Inspite of the several perceptions of Ganapati’s civil status
in different regions what is evident everywhere is that the link

--- Page 238 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 239
between him and the goddess remains constant. She may be
Laksmi, Saraswati, Sakti, Siddhi and Buddhi, Rddhi and Siddhi,
Vallabha or Santosi Ma. The goddess is mother, wife, female
counterpart, half of him (ardhanar), symbol of his attributes or
powers, his sister or daughter. The latter is the most recent addition
to Ganapati’s pantheon. As the pujart at the DaSabhuja Ganapau
temple in Pune said, the name of the devi on Ganapati's lap does
not really matter. The devi has many forms and what is significant
is that Ganapati is associated with her regardless of whether she is
in the form of mother, wife, sister or daughter. Since the
Ganapatyas considered Ganapati to be synonymous with Brahman,
and all the other deities as aspects of the Brahman, Ganapati
accompanied by Laksmi or Saraswati is acceptable in that Visnu or
Brahma are merely aspects of Ganapati. Similarly, although
Ganapati is popularly accepted as Parvati’s son, it is he and not
Siva who is closely associated with rites celebrating the Durga
festival. Similarly, the harvest festival in which Ganapati worship is
an important component is eloquent of his role vis a vis the
goddess.

The vratas of Ganapati are performed on the caturthi.
However, the caturthi is also associated with many vratas of the
Goddess and, more often than not, these are undertaken for the
attainment of conjugal happiness. That of the month of jyestha is
celebrated as the sativrata. By performance of this rite, the devotee
is said to rejoice in the world of the mother of Ganapati, at par
with him.°? Gaurivrata is observed on the fourth day in the bright
half of the month of magha. This vrata is said to increase conjugal
blessedness and its observance is recommended annually for both
men and women.” It is especially auspicious for unmarried girls
desirous of a bridgroom or by a women seeking matrimonial bliss
and good fortune for their husbands and sons.*4 Sometimes the
worship of Uma is specially recommended on the caturthis of the
bright halves of magha, asvayuj and jyestha.*

In Maharashtra, at Cincvad and Ojhar, it is generally
believed that Ganapati has a sister in each of the four directions
and he goes to meet her annually on the occasion of Ganesa
caturthi. This represents the traditional celebration of the festival
and not the public celebration introduced by Tilak. At Ojhar, for
instance, the palaki of Ganapati with Siddhi and Buddhi is first
taken to a village five kilometres east of Johar to the temple of

--- Page 239 ---
240 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Ambika. The goddess is worshipped and the palaki with Ganapati
returns to Ojhar. Next, the procession proceeds south, west and
north of Ojhar where, each time, it visits the local goddess’s shrine.
It would be difficult to explain the constant association with the
goddess if in folk memory Ganapati is not a part of her. The close
association between the goddess and Ganapati is further evident
in the rite of immersion of the idol of Ganapati in water after
celebration of Vindyaka caturthi. This practice does not occur with
the images of Siva, Visnu, Rama, Krsna or the other deities. It is
otherwise associated only with the Goddess as on the occasion of
Durga puja.

Since Parvati absorbed within her all the numerous village
and tribal goddeses, she became representative of the universal
Sakti. However, because of her role as the consort of Siva, her
relationship with Ganapati remains ambiguous. Although com-
monly represented as the mother of Ganapati, it is clear that she
is also his consort. In Bengal, Ganapati is married to the banana
tree, the ‘Kala Bau’ during Durga puja which is none other than
Durga herself ritually transformed during the festival. At other
times, however, Ganapati is conceptualised as the son of Durga
and brother of Laksmi and Saraswati. Take, again, the worship of
Ganapati with Gauri at the harvest festivals where ritual motifs of
menstruation and rebirth are integral. This idea was neatly summed
up by Narayana Upadhyaya the pramukha pujart at Gokarna. He
said that Parvati is the symbol of the earth and so Ganapati, as the
son of the earth, is also symbol of the earth. The gam in the mila
mantra of Ganapat signifies the earth. We get everything from the
earth. Since Ganapat is so closely associated with the earth which
itself is endangered in the Kali yuga, Ganapati worship becomes of
primordial importance in this age. Naturally his worship is
intrinsically associated with that of the devi: the Earth Mother and
her consort-cum-son.

Even the mouse that Ganapati rides on is associated with
the earth. According to the Brahmavaivarta Purana, when all the
gods offered Ganapati presents after the name-giving ceremony,
the Earth gave him a rat to serve as his vehicle.** According to the
Rgvidhana,” rats, mice and moles must be propitiated with
sacrificial offerings of boiled rice placed on a mole-hill. Moles
were believed to know the very essence of the earth, and the
mounds thrown up by them represented this essence and brought

--- Page 240 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 24]
about good fortune.** The underworld which the mouse inhabits
is the world of the dead and the womb of the earth from where
regeneration occurs. This theme of death by sacrifice and
regeneration is itself intrinsic to the fertility rites associated with
agriculture and which appear to be associated with the earliest
stages of this deity’s origin. The red sindura coating on the images
of Ganapati and the elephant head on a human body evoke the
concept of blood sacrifice. Ganapati’s sindira coated image recalls
the sindira associated with the goddess. The Goddess Lalita (a
form of Pavati) is described as being of red-complexion.” Similarly
Bhadrakali is described as being dressed in red and smeared with
red unguents.*® Even the arka leaves and flowers with which
Ganapati is worshipped, specially in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu,
are associated with the goddess and appear to be symbolic of
fertility. In the context of devi worship, the Narada Purana prescribes
that a thousand flowers of the arka be offered to the goddess.*’ A
hymn in the Atharva Veda" refers to the arka wood amulet which
is prescribed for making the devotee’s penis as large and virile as
that of the elephant, ass and horse. The arka wood is the giver of
virility to men and has a definite sexual connotation. Among the
brahmanas there has been a tradition, whereby, if a man wanted
to marry a third time, he was first symbolically married to the
arka plant. After the ceremony the plant was cut down.* The
significance of this ritual is that the third ime is unlucky. Therefore,
the arka takes on the ill-luck and leaves the man free to marry a
fourth time without fear. According to an old tradition, leaves of
the arka plant were used to garland adulterers and publicly disgrace
them.”

Ganapati’s civil status remains ambiguous not only in the
region under discussion but in the whole country. This is because
of the process of Brahmanization that the deity has undergone. It
:s within the Brahmanical context that he becomes Siva’s son. To
rule out all possibility of ambiguity in his relationship with Parvati
he was made into a brahmacarin. Within the Saiva context, Ganapati
and Kartikkeya represent the ideal sons. There is no further need
for them to have families because Siva’s family symbolises all aspects
of the human condition. Yet, folk tradition and folk memory have
continued to associate the deity with the Goddess, for Ganapati
existed before his induction into the Saiva pantheon and his rituals
were closely linked to those of the Goddess. Finally, this association

--- Page 241 ---
242 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

manifests itself in a variety of ways in the Brahmanical context
where he is associated with numerous goddesses. Ganapati with
Laksmi symbolises Ganapati as the harbinger of wealth since Laksmi
symbolises wealth. She initially represented agricultural prosperity
and, later, commercial prosperity. As the goddess of wealth she
was first linked to Kubera and then to Ganapati. The Mudgala
Purana found the ideal explanation for this association which would
remove all amibiguities in the eyes of the Ganapatyas. According
to the text, since Visnu is born of Ganapati and, therefore, is a
form of Ganapati, Laksmi being depicted with either of them
makes sense.*® Therefore, Ganapati is referred to as Laksmipati*®
(lord of Laksmi). The distinctions that we perceive are all the
result of maya. With Saraswati, Ganapati symbolises the harbinger
of wisdom and knowledge since Saraswati is the goddess of learning.
This association was subsequent to his association with Parvati and
Laksmi and carries no echoes of Ganapati’s elephant past. His
role of the deity of knowledge derives purely from within the
Brahmanical context.

The most recent goddess with whom Ganapat is associated
is Santosi Ma. Her cult is especially important in the urban areas
of north India although her popularity has spread even to some
rural areas. Her worship necessitates no knowledge of traditional
rituals and prayers. It is simple and does not require the mediation
of a priest. Santosi Ma, who is gentle and benevolent, is the new
saviour of the harassed modern woman. The ‘demons’ today are
ill-treatment of women by in-laws, female infanticide, bride burning
and other tensions associated with modern life. Since Ganapati is
the remover of obstacles, it is possible that in the popular mind
his daughter, too, partakes of his special powers. Each time
Ganapati is associated with a goddess whether as a son, husband
or male counterpart, he shares her powers and functions. As the
son of Parvati he is invincible before the power of Siva. Or, he is
the deity with chothonic powers even as Parvati represents the
earth. With Laksmi, he is the giver of wealth and with Saraswati,
knowledge. Siddhi and Buddhi are an intrinsic part of him and
have no independent existence. It is, therefore, appropriate that
Santosi Ma appears through the intermediary of a deity who is
benevolent and who grants success to his devotees. She is gentle
and powerful like her father. Besides, it is not possible for modern
families to identify themselves with the family of Siva, nor with

--- Page 242 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 243
those of Rama and Krsna beyond a point. In the case of Ganapau,
however, the film depicts him with two sons who desire a sister on
whose hand they can tie a rakhi—a situation prevalent in numerous
Indian families. So Ganapati, on being persuaded by his wives,
sister and sons, creates his mind-born daughter, Santosi Ma. The
creation of Santoégi Ma suggests the importance of a daughter and
Ganapati becomes the first Hindu deity to have a daughter who
becomes as important as the sons of Siva. It is easy to create family
situations involving Ganapati since the sacred texts provide little
information on this subject. The personality and waits of this
daughter mirror some of the modern perceptions of Ganapati
himself.

Finally, the Ganapatyas have, indeed, left a substantial
legacy. The Smarta Ganapatyas succeeded in making Ganapati a
major Brahmanical deity and, in some cases, as popular as Siva,
Visnu or the goddess. The regions where they flourished continue
to be the regions where the deity has the most numerous temples
dedicated to him and where he is one of the favourite deities.
Like Siva and Visnu who are believed to have incarnated in the
form of several historical figures such as Lakulisa, Sankaracarya,
Krsna and the Buddha (the latter in some Vaisnava texts is accepted
as an incarnation of Visnu), Ganapati, too, is believed to have
incarnated in the person of Moraya Gosavi and his seven
descendants. This is, perhaps, one of the main reasons why
Maharashtra, specially the region around Pune, became and has
remained the stronghold of the Ganapatya tradition. In Karnataka,
Varanasi and Tamil Nadu, although there are several Ganapati
temples he remains second to Siva. Certain common features
prevail in these areas. The way of bowing and paying obeisance to
Ganapati appears to be the same in the regions where the Smarta
Ganapatyas and the Ganapatyas off-shoots of the Saivas flourished.
Some of the forms popularized in the Agamas continue to be
popular such as Mahaganapati, Nrtya Ganapati, Heramba Ganapati,
Vira Ganapati, Prasanna Ganapati and, to a lesser extent, Suvarna
Ganapati. The Ganapatya Puranas introduced numerous myths
identifying Ganapati with various older divinities. This has resulted
in him being worshipped by Smartas, Saivas and Vaisnavas alike in
temples where he is the principal, and often the only, deity and
where he is sometimes identified with Visnu or Siva. The
Ganapatyas established a tradition which has become a part of the

--- Page 243 ---
244 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
religious life not only of the regions where they flourished but
in other parts of the country as well. In New Delhi, for example,
there are at least three Ganapati temples where the ritual is the
same as in the temples of Tamil Nadu. The priests are lyers ( Smarta
brahmanas) and the patrons are largely members of the South
Indian community, although, increasingly, other residents living
in the areas also frequent the temples. Ganesa caturthi is becoming
an increasingly popular festival with public celebrations in a greater
number of regions. Similarly, in other parts of India as well, where
Ganapati was traditionally a part of the temples of other deities,
he now has temples devoted to him alone. Judging by the number
of mediums in which Ganapati is portrayed—metal, ceramic,
terracotta, stone, cloth, glass, shell, arka root, coral, mud, etc.,—
and the numerous homes where he adorns not only the family
shrine but also the living room or the garden, this deity is, indeed,
the most popular Hindu deity today. Having a Ganapati as a
decorative piece is in fashion and one has to only visit the
Government Emporia, melas, craft bazaars and exhibitions of
paintings and handicrafts to realize the extent to which Ganapati
inspires artistic expression in India.
NOTES
1. Details regarding the temples | visited are given in Chapter I
under the subheading ‘Sources’.
2. Mudgala Purana, IV.48.19-20.
3. Ibid., IV.47.61
4. Ibid., 8.42.45.
5. Ibid., 6.9.8.
6. Ibid., V.24.10.
7. Ganesa‘ Purana, Upasana Khanda, I.46.
8. For a translation of the text see ‘Appendix’ of Paul B. Courtright’s
Ganesa: Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings, pp. 252-4.
9. Ibid., p. 208.
10. Mudgala Purana, V.24.21-4.
11. Ibid., [11.26.44.
12. Told to me by Sri Surya Narain Upadhyaya, the head priest at this
temple.
13. Siva Purana, Vidyesvarasamhita, 1.7 and 8.
14. Gazetteer of Karnataka, South Kannad District, p. 110.
15. Mudgala Purana, 1.20.7-8.
16. Ibid., V1.7.15.

--- Page 244 ---
LEGACY OF THE GANAPATYAS 245

17. Padma Purana, I1.i1.63.8-9.

18. Quoted by Paul B. Courtright, op. cit., p. 150.

19. Richard Cashman, ‘The Political Recruitment of the God
Ganapathi’ in Robin Jeffrey et al., eds., India: Rebellion to Republic,
pp. 37-63.

20. Gazetteer of India, Mysore State, Kolar District, p. 82.

21. Mudgala Purana, 1.39.49. For an older version of the myth see
Vayu Purana, 11.30.

22. Ibid., I. 52.4-16.

23. Ibid., 1.20.35.

24. Siva Purana, IL.iv.20.8.

25. Ajitagama, Vol. III, 55.6.

26. Svayambhuvagama, 58.106, p. 292.

27. Agni Purana, 11.1.301.7.

28. G.S. Sardesai, New History of the Marathas, Vol. I, p. 275.

29. Paul B. Courtright, op. cit., p. 109. ;

30. CJ. Fuller, ‘ “Only Siva can worship Siva”: Ritual mistakes and
their Correction in a South Indian temple’, Contributions to Indian
Sociology (NS), Vol. 27, 2, 1993, pp. 169-89.

31. Told to me by Shereen Ratnagar.

32. Narada Purana, IV.113.90-1.

33. Ibid.

34, Ibid., 1V.112.2-7.

35. Nilmata Purana, 511-14.

36. Brahmavaivarta Purana, 3.13.12cf.

37. Rgvidhana, Il.14.5. Quoted by Margaret Stutley, Ancient Indian Magic
and Folklore, p. 120.

38. Satapatha Brahmana, II.i.17. Quoted by Margaret Stutley, op. cit.

39. Narada Purana, 111.88.35-7

40. Siva Purana, I1.v.36-7.

41. Narada Purana, 111.i.67.60.

42. Atharva Veda, V1.72.

43. E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of Southern India, Vol. I, A and B,
pp. 295-6.

44. Ibid., p. 296.

45. Mudgala Purana, VH.11.

46. Ibid., VII.11.25.

--- Page 245 ---
CHAPTER 8

Conclusion
Ganapati, as we know him, is the creation of brahmanas. He
represents a syncretism of different waditions which converge to
form a composite deity around the fourth century of the Christian
era. However, one aspect of Ganapati’s antecedents, namely the
concept of a sacred elephant, reaches back to the early stages of
civilisation in the subcontinent. The first evidence of the elephant
having some sacred significance comes from a few Harappan sites.
The elephant motif appears on seals, amulets and terracotta art in
the Mature Indus period. The symbol of the elephant possibly
originated as a totem of a descent group which came into
prominence during this period. Although many of the seals on
which it is depicted had a secular function, it is generally accepted
that the motifs themselves had a magico-religious significance.

Between the Harappan period and about 600 Bc there isa
blank in the availability of data on the elephant. Thereafter, there
is evidence of people and places named after it and the motif
reappears on coins and sculpture. There are literary references to
the worship of the elephant deity and to rituals of a religious
nature associated with the animal. Much of this evidence highlights
the existence of a tradition where the elephant was venerated by
some categories of people in and around the zone where the
ancient Harappan culture had flourished. By the mid-first
millennium Bc, the elephant had also become the mount for kings.
It was associated with royalty because of its size and majestic
appearance. It symbolised nobility of character, grandeur and
strength. This link with kingship and divinity determined the nature
of the role it was to play in the different religions which evolved in
north India from about 600 Bc. The worship of the elephant and
associated rituals did not form part of the Vedic tradition. However,
the elephant symbol was eventually adopted by the three major
religions of ancient India—Brahmanism, Buddhism and Jainism—

--- Page 246 ---
CONCLUSION 247
and was adapted to suit the needs of each. In Buddhism and
Jainism it became the symbol of the divine conception of the
Buddha and Mahavira, respectively. In the Brahmanical context it
became, Airavata, the elephant mount of Indra. At a later stage,
when Indra declined in importance and Siva rose to prominence,
the elephant was converted into the therianthropic son of Siva.
Some Puranic myths highlight the continuity of tradition by
describing how the head of Airavata was cut off and transferred
onto the headless torso of Ganapati. This close association of the
elephant with the Buddha, Mahavira and Siva is one reason why
the elephant-headed deity eventually became a major god in the
pantheons of these religions whereas the other animals such as
the bull, the ram or the lion/tiger, which also appear in a divine
context from Harappan times, remained at the level of sacred
animals.

This does not imply that the significance of the elephant
continued unchanged from Harappan times until the dawn of the
Christian era. In the long span of nearly two thousand years the
motif must have come to represent changing ideas and concepts.
If no evidence of this evolution remains, it may be because of the
use of perishable mediums such as wood or clay and the lack of
any textual reference. The apparently sudden reappearance of
the elephant motif after 600 Bc can hardly be considered as a new
development for nothing happens all of a sudden. Only the
mediums were new (stone for the Asokan inscriptions and the
early Buddhist stipas and metal for coins). The motifs must have
been those that the artisans were familiar with. In fact, art motifs
survive the ideas which they express and are capable of assuming,
from one period and from one religion to another, more than
one signification. The tree, for example, had a sacred significance
in Harappan culture. Later, it was associated with the kevalas or
caityas of the Jaina Tirthankaras. It became the sacred Bodhi tree
under which the Buddha achieved enlightenment. It became the
pipal tree (ficus religiosa) associated with Siva, the tulsi plant (basil)
which is married to Visnu in the Vaisnava context and the banana
tree which is married to Ganapati,’ as part of the celebrations of
the festival of the goddess Durga in Bengal. Similarly, the wheel
representing the sun or the cycle of nature became the wheel of
Dharma in the Buddhist context. In each case the context changed
but the sacred connotation of the motif remained.

--- Page 247 ---
248 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Similarly, the practice of ritual processions, which
constitute part of religious celebrations in the modern context,
seem to have their origin in Harappan religion. In the mid-second
millennium sc (post Harappan period) an image of the elephant
with provision for wheels has been found which suggests that it
was used in processions. The elephant festival in the early centuries
of the Christian era also included a ceremonial procession. Such
processions eventually became a part of the ritual of various
religious sects. Fa-hien, a Chinese Buddhist monk who visited India
in the fourth century aD, mentions a car-procession at Pataliputra
where an icon of the Buddha was taken out in procession.’ In the
early medieval period this ritual was connected with almost all the
major gods and goddesses. Undoubtedly, the ritual evolved over
the centuries in nature and significance. In the early medieval
period the divinity, in human form, was usually carried in a chariot
drawn either by a horse or an elephant whereas in the Harappan
culture the animal emblem was carried on poles or mounted on
wheels. Whereas in the early medieval period the gods were treated
as the divine counterparts of the king who had to be bathed, fed,
clothed and entertained in a manner similar to that of the king,
in the Harappan period the animal emblems may have represented
animal spirits or the mythical ancestors of the rulers. For these
reasons, even if there is a blank in the availability of data on the
elephant between the Harappan period and the early historical
period, from the evidence that suddenly becomes available in the
post 600 Bc period, it is possible to infer that the elephant did,
indeed, continue to be an object of veneration throughout the
centuries, although perceptions of its character and role, as also
the exact nature of its worship, evolved to suit changing material
conditions and the religious needs of new social groups.

In the early historical period, the elephant was associated
with a goddess in some regions such as Kapisa in modern
Afghanistan. Even this association appears to reach back further
into ime and continues to exist in some folk rituals today. Whereas
the Brahmanical Ganapati branched off along a path newly created
for him by the Brahmanical religion, the older rituals associated
with the sacred elephant must have persisted outside the
Brahmanical framework. Some of these can be gleaned from
existing folk rituals. These are often not described in any text and
they generally evolve more slowly than those of the ‘high’ tradition.

--- Page 248 ---
CONCLUSION 249
Besides, they are usually restricted to a few places, normally in
regions where material conditions have not been radically
transformed. Goddess cults often center around fertility rites and
imply human or animal sacrifice. The best known of such cults
today is that of Durga associated with the buffalo sacrifice. In
certain villages in Andhra Pradesh, where buffalos are sacrificed
to the goddess on her festival, a woman from one of the
Untouchable communities, referred to as Matangi, is considered
to be the special representative or manifestation of the goddess
and is associated with the buffalo sacrifice. Matangi is also the
name of a minor goddess in the Puranas and the term is
understood as ‘elephant goddess’ since the term ‘mAatanga’ signifies
elephant. I wonder how this specific epithet came to be associated
with the goddess Durga unless, in the distant past, a counterpart
of Durga did not play a similar role in the context of elephant
sacrifice. Durga and Mahisasura, the buffalo demon that she kills,
(only in the Brahmanical context is the slayed animal referred to
as an asura), appear to have had a parallel in a goddess who killed
the elephant demon. In other words, the sacrificed animal was
originally looked upon as the consort of the goddess, as is the case
even today in certain folk traditions, and it replaced what, in the
earlier stages, must have been a human consort. Mahisa has a
counterpart in the Heramba form of Ganapati. Hcramba signifies
‘buffalo’ and I wonder how the elephant-headed deity is even
remotely connected with the buffalo. Besides, this form of Ganapati
has five heads, like Siva, and rides a lion like Durga. Evidently, the
elephant had been closely associated with the goddess and had
played the same role as the buffalo or as Siva, vis-a-vis her. If
Matangi (elephant goddess) is the representative of Durga then
Heramba Ganapati (buffalo-Ganapati) is the counterpart of mahisa.
Even the myths of Ganapati’s beheading and the tradition of
applying sindura on his images retain the idea of sacrifice.

In certain parts of Bihar terracotta elephants are associated
with the marriage ceremonies on the bride’s side.* They are
installed in a specially made mandapa in the courtyard of the
house. Votive elephants are also offered to the village goddesses
in some parts of Uttar Pradesh, mainly in the districts of Gorakhpur,
Deoria and Azamgarh. The sacred spots of the goddesses are usually
below neem, pipal or palm trees. Clusters of terracotta elephants
are found in practically every settlement of these three districts. *

--- Page 249 ---
250 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

There is even a goddess known as Hathi Mai (elephant mother)
in Gorakhpur town. Folk memory has retained the association
between the elephant and the goddess. There are other rituals
where women are closely associated with the elephant just as they
were in the case of the ancient elephant festival described in
Chapter II. One such example is the chatha (the sixth) festival—so
called because it takes place six days after Dipaval (festival of
lights) which is celebrated primarily in Bihar and the adjacent
parts of eastern Uttar Pradesh. It is.a festival in honour of the Sun
god. One of the important rituals of this festival is the setting up
of a mandapa in which is installed one or more terracotta elephants
facing the west, the direction of the setting sun and the rising
moon. The elephants are then painted with stndura and riceflour
paste and a water jar (ghada) is placed above them. An earthern
bowl attached to each votive figure is filled with fruit and sweetened
wheat-cakes which are offered to the setting sun. Throughout the
performance of this ritual, folk-songs are sung by women. The
next morning the mandapa with its votive contents are shifted to
the waterside. The rising sun is worshipped and the terracotta
elephants are immersed in the water marking the end of the
ceremony. The association of the elephant with the sun goes
back several centuries. I have referred to the elephant, kept in the
Sun Temple at Taxila before the turn of the Christian era, in
Chapter II. Even the association of the votive elephant with the
bowl of water, and finally its immersion in water speak of age-old
associations which have continued in the case of Ganapati,
regardless of the fact that within the Brahmanical framework he
acquired a new identity and a different set of rituals.

The concept that creation starts from water is an ancient
one and the elephant’s close association with water derives from
its early role as the consort of the goddess in her form as Earth
Mother, or as the mythological ancestor of a lineage. Because
of its role, vis-a-vis the goddess, the elephant came to be used as
a metaphor for rain clouds, the harbingers of fertility to the
earth and prosperity to mankind. This role is modified in the
Brahmanical context, where Ganapati becomes the son of Siva
and, thereby, assumes the role of son of the goddess Parvati. This
situation creates tension in his relationship with Siva and ambiguity
about his role, vis-a-vis the goddess in general. He is made into a
brahmacarin (celibate) and even in those regions where the

--- Page 250 ---
CONCLUSION 25]
Brahmanical Ganapati is looked upon as a grhastha (married) there
is ambiguity about his exact civil status. This is the result of the
Brahmanisation of a deity who had, in the process, to be
accomodated into an established framework which forced upon
him certain constraints that were in contradiction to his original
character. This original character was retained in folk rituals. It
has also persisted, in a subtle manner, in the Brahmanical context,
because of Ganapati’s constant association with various goddesses
whether it is Laksmi, Saraswati, Gauri, Durga, Siddhi and Buddhi
or Santosi Ma.

It is unlikely that there was ever one single sacred elephant.
It is more likely that the elephant was worshipped, in the pre-
Christian era, in a manner similar to that of the nagas (serpents).
Snakes in general were venerated. In addition, there were shrines
for particular snake deities (such as Maninaga in Rajagrha) who
were known by various names in different regions. While some
shrines had the image of a snake, others consisted merely of stones
daubed with red paint. Elephant worship must have been similar
to snake worship for in the latter half of the first millennium Bc,
the term ndga became a synonym for the elephant and many
famous ndgas were represented in both serpent and elephant form.

The elephant deity first acquired a therianthropic form in
the Buddhist context. Buddhism absorbed many minor cults in
the regions where it gained a stronghold. The elephant deity was
one such cult and it is first depicted in the form of an elephant-
headed yaksa in the Buddhist stupa at Amaravati in the second
century aD. This form enables it to be distinguished from the
elephant symbol of the Buddha’s conception or from the purely
decorative motif of the elephant. In the Buddhist perspective only
the Buddha could have a perfect physical form. All other cults, in
form and attitude, had to be shown as inferior to the Buddha.
The rotund and stunted physique of the various yaksas presents a
contrast to the noble physique of the Buddha. This form became
the basis for the iconography of the syncretic deity, Ganapati-
Vinayaka.

The popularity of Buddhism and the impetus it received
from the time of Asoka in the third century Bc posed a threat to
the social order propounded by the older Vedic religion. The
antagonism of the latter is expressed in the creation of the demonic
Vinayakas. Although these demons represent age-old evil forces,

--- Page 251 ---
252 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

‘in fact, they personify popular cults that had become a part and
parcel of Buddhism. Special rites are elaborated for warding off
the evils of the Vinayakas which are stated to affect every age
group and category of society and these are included in the
domestic manuals of the brahmanas. They are made an integral
part of domestic rites and, thereby, local superstitions and rituals
are recognized by Brahmanism and a clientele requiring their
performance is ensured. Many syncretic Hindu cults have
developed as a result of challenges posed to the Hindu social
order in the course of the centuries by Buddhism, Islam and
Christianity and this shows the remarkable capacity of Hinduism
for self-renewal.

At the turn of the Christian era, Siva and Visnu rose in
importance and took the place of the older Vedic divinities. These
gods represented the needs of a changing social order. It is with
the rise of Siva that the elephant deity finally finds mention in
Brahmanical texts as part of Siva’s entourage. Simultaneously, in
the same region, the Vinayakas gradually evolved into one single
Vinayaka whose worship became an established part of the
Brahmanical faith. No longer totally maleficient, the single
Vinayaka lacked an iconographical form. Certain similarities of
concept and function lead to Vinayaka being identified with the
elephant deity around the fourth century ap. The Buddhist
iconographic form of the elephant-headed yaksa was adopted for
the new Brahmanical deity.

After about aD 400, images of Ganapati-Vinayaka pro-
liferate. The cult spreads to all the regions of the sub-continent
and grows more complex. In each region it acquires a special
flavour of its own, determined by the ecology, past and existing
religious beliefs, inclination of the rulers, and so on. Between the
sixth and twelfth centuries of the Christian era several develop-
ments take place. On the one hand, Ganapati develops as a part
of the Puranic Siva’s pantheon. He evolves from an ordinary gana
of Siva to the position of his younger son, eventually replaces
Skanda as the older son and, finally, becomes worthy of worship
as a deity in his own right. By the eighth century, he is acknow-
ledged as a part of the Saiva pantheon all over the country. From
the ninth/tenth century, temples are constructed for him, land
grants are made for their maintenance and he is invoked in the
epigraphs of kings and ministers. Simultaneously, in the context

--- Page 252 ---
CONCLUSION 253
of certain esoteric Buddhist sects, he comes to symbolise the union
of Buddhism and Brahmanism and is depicted with attributes
of both the Buddha and Siva, or of Siva and the Boddhisattva
AvalokiteSvara.

While Ganapati evolves along different lines among various
religious comunities he also acquires a particular significance for
certain categories of society such as the traders. His role as an
important deity of the trading class appears to manifest itself first
in Rajasthan amongst the Jaina mercantile community from about
the seventh century AD. He is initially worshipped not as a giver of
wealth, but as the remover of obstacles for the acquisition of wealth.
Eventually, invocation to him alone is deemed sufficient to ensure
success in business matters. After a couple of centuries, this role is
acknowledged in Brahmanical texts. As Ganapati becomes popular
with the traders in south India, he acquires special forms specifically
associated with this community.

The rise of the Brahmanial Ganapati from about the
fourth-fifth century aD is closely associated to certain social and
economic changes that take place during this period. These
centuries correspond to a period which some historians® have
characterised as one of urban decay marked by the decline of
long-distance trade and the ruralization of economy over a greater
part of the subcontinent. The Puranas reflect Brahmanical reaction
to the loss of urban householder clients and to other stressful
socio-economic changes resulting from the decline of urban life
and the development of an increasingly village-based subsistence
economy. These developments forced many urban brahmanas to
search for an alternative means of livelihood. The changing
environment is reflected in Brahmanical texts which stress the
virtue of making land grants to brahmanas, a practice that became
an increasingly important element in the rural economy from the
fifth century onward. Brahmanical social attitudes towards certain
occupations undergoes a change. Agriculture, until now only
associated with the vaisya caste, is prescribed for brahmanas even if
only in a managerial capacity.’

It is in this period and against this background that
Ganapati rises in popularity. Sivaism is gaining in importance but
this particular deity suddenly becomes popular and it is insisted
that his worship be performed first. Even though he is not given
the same importance as Siva or Visnu, he is associated with all

--- Page 253 ---
254 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

forms of worship. He is made a part of the Brahmanical pantheon
even though his form and figure present a stark contrast to the
forms of other Brahmanical deities. An agricultural and village
deity, associated with fertility and well-being, becomes a
Brahmanical deity responsible for the removal of obstacles, for
conferring knowledge and for granting wealth and prosperity at
all levels. It is precisely in the region where trade continues to
prosper that Ganapati is first identified with the prospering
mercantile community. Later, his popularity with the merchant
community spreads to the south among agriculturists turned
traders.

As Ganapati rises in importance some people choose to
worship him exclusively. The early Ganapatyas appear to have
been sub-sects of the Buddhists and the Saivas and these five or
six sects appeared around the ninth century aD. Each sect worship-
ped a particular form of Ganapati and members of the sect
were identified by a particular sign branded on the shoulder.
However, none of these sects appear to have had any specific
doctrine nor an exclusive laity. They were distinct from the Smarta
Ganapatyas who emerged in the region of Maharasthra, Karnataka,
some parts of Andhra Pradesh and in Varanasi around the twelfth
century. The Smarta Ganapatyas considered Ganapati as the greatest
god. They acknowledged the other deities of the pancayatana, but
considered them to be emanations of Ganapati. They established
a theology in line with traditional Brahmanical beliefs and practices
and were responsible for establishing Ganapati as a major
Brahmanical deity. The region in which this sect evolved is the
very region where Ganapati continues to be one of the most
popular deities and where he has several important temples and
pilgrimage sites.

Many of the existing perceptions of Ganapati belong to
the realm of oral tradition and it would be difficult to exaggerate
the importance of this tradition as a medium for the dissemination
of ideas and attitudes in India. One such example is the belief
that Ganapati with the trunk turning to the right requires special
worship. This belief is not reflected, as far as I know, in sacred
literature. It would, therefore, be worthwhile to enquire into other
traditions of this nature, existing in different regions. A detailed
study of Ganapati worship by occupational groups within a
particular region would also help deepen our understanding of

--- Page 254 ---
CONCLUSION 255
some of the varying perceptions of the deity in the contemporary
context. In this study I have focussed on one occupational group,
the traders. Ganapati represents what is true of so much else in
Indian culture. Nothing emerges suddenly. Nor do new beliefs
and concepts completely wipe out older ones. They only modify
them. This process of evolution is a continuing one and, therefore,
contemporary studies on Ganapati become all the more important.

NOTES

1. This is a tradition associated essentially with the celebration of
Durga puja in Bengal where the banana tree ‘Kala Bau’ is ritually
transformed into the Goddess during the festival.

2. Quoted in R.N. Nandi, Religious Institutions and Cults in the Deccan
(c AD 600-1000), p. 30.

3. Ibid., p. 31.

4. Ibid., p. 34.

5. Vidula Jayaswal and Kalyan Krishna, An Ethno-Archaeological View of
Indian Terracottas, pp. 27-8.

6. R.S. Sharma, Indian Feudalism, c. 300-1200; Social Changes in Early
Medieval India (c. AD 500-1200); Urban Decay in India, c.300- c. 1000,
R.S. Sharma and D.N. Jha, ‘The Economic History of India upto
AD 1200: Trends and Prospects’, JESHO, Vol. 17, No.1, 1974,
pp. 48-80; For the impact on religious life of these changes see
R.N. Nandi, Social Roots of Religion in Ancient India.

7. R.N. Nandi, op. cit., p. 16.

--- Page 255 ---
. Fone
.w §
SRS Sirs cme ET TING
ase ae Re eT ND:
12 | sy (A Pres . Cars ead ~ Pp
_ ft ‘A te ek me os “. ee
oF od PS we os cee i any ws : pz} +s .  } 7
ANI] Bs Wz Re Je oe aay EK bets
ON Ht BR: SE CRA TES ate aa & at Se
>* (= em: De RS He fe
. a L . aw,
: : . ar eye PN) Te. eal
. < * inane oo = bd oo
_
Plated. The principal image of Ganapati atthe Sri Mahaganapati
temple at Idagunji, Karnataka. Photo courtesy: the
trustees.

--- Page 256 ---
hie ta Loy.
ed ea my T ee ‘\ wy Mae te ¥ ‘i
. . P (canes be Ne a
ws ib ee 4 Ar ‘ % t ~ y : Se Aaateted
- ) QC AWLE Ria paar
a ie | NA TINS sg ae
eo 7% ae a ™~ ~~’ ww “3 i" . ee. bo.
. ree § phy “te oo Se se Sg
woes TP: ere x is foq a
. . SN PE 4 aes a ists - _— org: eaciras wee ! > . nk - Pee. :
wn ; PA MNEM YO Neg
ot ag eee ic ee
. a ‘ we . . p ss ~ -
ue 4 Yy ° . A . g “ . +
‘ wo i 4 Y ” y
; co — Oy ~ Se, ~—— ey eS c, . ft at
Plate 2. Simha Ganapati in the Utsava Hall of the Sri Siddhi-
Buddhi Vinayaka Mandir, New Delhi. Author’s photo.

--- Page 257 ---
hea 6 TIO) itn,
3 af is 4 W ca Sanaa 34 Cr ~ . « , ca pe : . :
ee OR
CE AP satin TE Ne Ov,
Bg SS SNe a ND UN
oe me Rs “ee _ q ". r; ea on tows nN a : a 4 “
7 7 caw . 1.
oY a ‘ : P ' . “a . 1 4
Plate 3. Vaisnava Ganapati, Utsava Hall of the Sri Siddhi-Buddhi
Vinayaka Mandir, New Delhi. Author's photo.

--- Page 258 ---
UT agi 2 2
: tes ! 5 Ne figs See AS EP
r. ee i Eecemean ee "SOO BOS aia
SORES eee a 2% 4 ao ae : a Yi). Me
alk iow: eee ops ee AR
Pp ANGI thw t
es Cr A | {ee
EES. a ee ie 0
Siege eae MA
yo 1 mo ee 8... + ees... 4
ae eee ee Ri ea
Plate 4. Adianta Prabha showing a syncretism between Ganapau
and Hanuman. Madhya Kailash Temple Complex. Adyar,
Madras. Author's photo.

--- Page 259 ---
wee [ies Yes rae ge: poy Me.
meee, e "9 +h Sake Wo ae rks) 3. Y
ote Mee Le VE a Tae fee a Or a se .
i CENA RT
oo ARR at. Cee Seed, One I MMAR SY 11,77 rate! ts in
Bory, CE Mag Poe aia a mht “yy + : .
RA 5” btn Re a i th ee
EASON i. 1A Ye af . pea
Ker et, y ay it 1{<7) on y Voy at cere corte
‘: Bek” fi Ma Sart ery “ . Sake yh ta a tg ‘ ; ba
& it et Te RAS, ASO, CARA! f On ¥ ee : ‘Saree a
. 6 fa as ‘ Pe wp “ rele an ard L ae a
ia ON Ot ee jee yas Ea a oN Peer
nae 6 Ae iia “Ee aim 7 OR os . -
aS . Fa Ree aM. ‘ wee yO ww
a ced a os yg 0 aie eee 15 5 1, cesta 4
“2, Pe “8 + 2k SEER oo, ae eA AV reR Ue J
mete 3 OTP a hh ee WERE pts eet fe, {hae Be et
Wi 3 age a EE. we tly | Ne Red Fe Lae Se cee iar a
Sen, Fo 57, ee eB
Ca ae 1 i oc
LES aae sell shy Pe RRL Rte BOO Stem egg TE
Plate 5. GaneSa, c. seventh-eighth century. Vijayawada, Andhra
Pradesh. Madras Museum No. 89/38. Photo courtesy:
American Insutute of Indian Studies, Varanasi.

--- Page 260 ---
a on
, y, ~
: «.,
oe . AY
/ |
f
f
: Nikeo a
aha > a ‘= © =
7 Un ‘ aN aS Ba Picks wad
g Se eee sf ey _ |
: : fgpsoy GINO ies a:
AS ge oy rr a ; , Poe y* 4
ey gy” Se if > ; a A oe . rane
re EEE SIE TAWABDE gneiss Shots
Plate 6. Painting of Heramba Ganapati, c. eighteenth century.
Allahabad Museum. Photo courtesy: American Institute
of Indian Studies, Varanasi.

--- Page 261 ---
Bibliography
PRIMARY SOURCES
I. LITERATURE

Agni Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri, trans., N. Gangadharan, Ancient Indian
Tradition and Mvthology series, Vols. 27-30, Motilal Banarsidass,
Delhi, 1984-7.

Ajitagama, cri. edn., N.R. Bhatt, 3 vols., Publication de l'Institut Frangais
d'Indologie, No. 24. I, I and III, Institut Francais d'Indologie,
Pondicherry, Vol. I - 1964, Vol. II - 1967 and Vol. IIT - 1991.

Amarakosa, With Unpublished South Indian Commentaries, ed., A.A.
Ramanathan, Madras, 1983.

Arthasastra of Kautilya, trans., R. Shamasastry with an ‘Introductory Note’
by J.F. Fleet, Mysore, 1960; The Kautilya Arthasastra, cri. edn., trans.
and Commented upon by R.P. Kangle, 3 vols., 2nd edn., 1969, rpt,
Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1988.

Atharva Veda, Sanskrit text with English translation by William Dwight
Whitney, revised and edited by Nag Sharan Singh, 2 vols., Nag
Publishers, Delhi, 1987. Hymns of the Atharvaveda, trans., Ralph T.H.
Griffith, 2 vols., rpt, Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1985.

Baudhayana Dharma Sutra, trans., G. Buhler, Sacred Books of the East,
Vol. XIV, Ist edn. Oxford University Press, 1882, rpt, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1991.

Bhagavata Purana, ed., J.-L. Shastri, trans., Board of Scholars, Ancient
Indian Tradition and Mythology, Vols. 7-11, Motilal Banarsidass,
Delhi, 19768.

Bhavisya Purana, Geeta Press, Gorakhpur; ed., Rajendra Nath Sharma,
Nag Publishers, Delhi, 1984.

Brahma Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri and G.P. Bhatt, trans., Board of Scholars,
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 33-6, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1985-6.

Brahmanda Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri, trans., Ganesh Vasudeo Tagare,
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 22-6, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1983-4.

--- Page 262 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 263

Brahmavaivarta Purana, Text with Hindi trans., Tarinish Jha, Hindi Sahitya
Sammelan, Prayag, Sak. 1903, San. 1982.

Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, in S. Radhakrishnan’s The Principal Upanisads,
Ist edn. 1953, centenary edn, Oxford University Press, New Delhi,
1991, pp.149-333.

Brhaddharma Purana, ed., M.M. Haraprasad Sastri, Chaukhambha
Amarbharati Prakashan, Varanasi.

Buddhacarita of Asvaghosa, trans., E.B. Cowell, Sacred Books of the East,
Vol. 49, Pt. I, 1st edn. Oxford University Press, 1894, rpt, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1905.

Dasopanisads (With Commentary of sn Upanisad Brahma Yogin), Vol. H, Sanskrit
text with introduction in English, eds., Pandits of Adyar Library
under the supervision of Prof. C. Kunhan Raja, Adyar Library Series
no. 15, Madras, 1936.

Devi Rahasya unth Parisistas, eds., Ram Chandra Kak, Harabhatta Shastri,
Butala Publications, Delhi, 1985.

Dhammapaaa, ed., and trans., F. Max Muller, Sacred Books of the East,
Vol. 10, Ist edn. Oxford University Press, 1881, rpt by Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1965.

Diptagama, transcript No. 15 in library of the French Institute of
Pondicherry.

Ganesa Purana, Shri Yogindra Matha, Moregaon, Pune, Upasana Khanda
in 1979 and Krida Khanda in 1985.

Garuda Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri, trans., Board of Scholars, Ancient Indian’
Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 12-24, Motilal Banarsidass,
Delhi, 1978-80.

Gathasaptasati of Hala, ed., S.A. Joglekar, Sanskrit text with translation in
Marathi, Pune, 1956.

Guhyasamaja Tantra, ed., Sridhar Tripathi, Buddhist Sanskrit Texts, No. 9,
Mithila Institute of Post Graduate Studies and Research in Sanskrit
Learning, Darbhanga, 1988.

Hevajra Tantra: A Cnitical Study, wans., D.L. Snellgrove, in 2 Parts, Oxford
University Press, London, 1959.

[sdnasivaguridevapaddhati of jsanasiva, ed., T. Ganapati Sastri, 4 vols.,
Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, Vols. 69, 72, 77 and 83, Trivandrum,
1922-5.

Jatakas, ed., E.B. Cowell, trans., various scholars, 6 vols., rpt by Cosmo
Publications, Delhi, 1973-9.

Jraneshwan, (Sri Jnandeva's Bhavartha Dipika otherunse known as Jnaneshwan),
trans. from Marathi by Ramachandra Keshav Bhagwat, Samata Books,
Madras, 1979. Jraneshwart by Sri_Jnyandev, trans., R.K. Bhagat, revd
by V.V. Dixit, 2 vols., Poona, 1954.

Kathasanitsagara by Somadeva, trans., C.H. Tawney, 2 vols., Calcutta, 1880-4;

--- Page 263 ---
264 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
trans., C.H. Tawney, ed. with notes by N.M. Penzer, 10 vols.,
Ist edn. London, 1924-8, rpt by Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1968.

Kurma Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri, trans., Ganesh Vasudeo Tagare, Ancient
Indian Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 20 and 21, Motilal
Banarsidass, Dethi, 1981-2.

Laksmi Tantra, trans. and notes by Sanjukta Gupta, EJ. Brill, Leiden,
1972.

Lalitavistara Sutra (The Voice of the Buddha), trans. into English from
the French by Gwendolyn Bays, 2 vols., Dharma Publishing, Berkeley,
California, 1983.

Linga Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri, trans., Board of Scholars, Ancient Indian
Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 5 and 6, Moulal Banarsidass,
Delhi, 1973.

Mahabharata, cri. edn., various scholars, Poona, 1927-66; Geeta Press, 7th
edn., Gorakhpur; trans., J.A.B. Van Buitenen, 3 vols., Chicago
University Press, Chicago/London, 1973, 1975 and 1978.

Mahanirvanatantra (Tantra of the Great Liberation), ed., Arthur Avalon,
Ist edn. 1913, 4th edn., Ganesh and Co., Madras, 1963.

Maha-Parinibbana-Sutta, in Buddhist Suttas, trans., T.W. Rhys Davids, Sacred
Books of the East, Vol. XI, Ist edn. Oxford University Press, 1881,
rpt by Mouilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1989.

Mahavairocana-Sitra, trans. from the Chinese version of Subhakarasimha
and I-hsing (AD 725) by Chikyo Yamamota of Koyasan University,
Japan, International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya
Prakashan, New Delhi, 1990.

Maittrayani Samhita, ed., D. Satvalekar, Svadhyaya Mandal, Oudh, Vik. Sam.,
1998.

Manavagrhyasitra of the Mattrayaniya Sakha With Commentary of Astavakra,
ed., Ramakrishna Harshaji Sastri, Panini, Delhi, 1982.

Manu Smrtt (The Laws of Manu), ed. F. Max Muller, Sacred Books of the
East, Vol. XXV, Ist edn. Oxford University Press, 1886, rpt by Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1987. Manusmrti, With the Sansknit Commentary
Manvarthamuktavalt of Kulluka Bhatta, ed., J.L. Shastri, Ist edn. 1983,
rpt by Moulal Banarsidass, Dethi, 1990.

Markandeya Purana, trans. with notes by F. Eden Pargiter, rpt, Indological
Book House, Delhi/Varanasi, 1969.

Matangalla of Nilakantha, ed. with notes by T. Ganapati Sastri, Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series, No.X, Trivandrum, 1910. The Elephant Love of the
Hindus. The Elephant Sport (Matangalila ) of Nilakantha, trans. into
English by Franklin Edgerton, New Haven, Connecticut, 1931.

Matsya Mahapurana, Sanskrit text with trans. arranged by Nag Sharan
Singh, Nag Publishers, Delhi, 1983.

Mayamata, cri. edn. and trans. into French by Bruno Dagens, 2 vols.,

--- Page 264 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 265
Publication de I'Institut Frangais d’Indologie, No. 40, Pondicherry,
Vol. I, 1970 and Vol. II, 1976. Mayamata: An Indian Treatise on
Housing Architecture and Iconography, wans. into English by Bruno
Dagens, Sitaram Bhartia Institute of Scientific Research, New Delhi,
1985.

Milindapanha, original text with Hindi translation, ed. and trans., Swami
Dwarikadas Shastri, Bauddhabharati, Varanasi, 1990.

Mrgendragama (Kriyapada and Caryapada) with the commentary of Bhatta
Narayanakantha, cri. edn., N.R. Bhatt, Publications de I’Institut
Fran¢ais d’Indologie, No. 23, Pondicherry, 1962. Mrgendragama
(Section de la Doctrine et du Yoga) avec la urtti de Bhattandrayanakantha
et la dipika d’Agorasivacarya, trans. into French with introduction
and notes by Michel Hulin, Publications de I’Institut Frangais
d'Indologie, No. 63, Pondicherry, 1980. Mrgendragama (Section des
Rites et Section du Comportement) avec la urtti de Bhatta Narayanakantha,
trans. into French with Inwwoduction and Notes by Héléne Brunner-
Lachaux, Publications de l'Institut Francais de Pondicherry,
No. 69, Pondicherry, 1985.

Mudgala Purana, Sri Mudgala Prakashan Mandalam, Bombay, October,
1976.

Narada Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri, trans., Ganesh Vasudeo Tagare and
Hemendra Nath Chakravorty, Ancient Indian Tradition and
Mythology series, Vols. 15-19, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1980-2.

Narasimha Purana, text with Eng. trans. and notes by Siddheswar Jena,
Nag Publishers, Delhi, 1987.

Nilamata Purana, cri. edn. and trans., Ved. Kumari, 2 vols, J & K Academy
of Art, Culture and Languages, Srinagar, 1968.

Padma Mahdapurana, ed., Nag Sharan Singh, 4 vols., rpt of the Venkateshwar
Steam Press edn., Bombay, Nag Publishers, Delhi 1984-5. Padma
Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri, trans., N.A. Deshpande, Ancient Indian
Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 39-48, Moulal Banarsidass,
Delhi, 1988-90.

Pranatosini (tantra) by Ramatosana Vidyalamkara, ed., J. Vidyasagar,
Calcutta, 1898.

Prapancasara Tantra, ascribed to Sankaracarya, revd and documented with
exhaustive introduction by Arthur Avalon and ed. by Atalananda
Sarasvati, Ist edn. 1935, 3rd edn. by Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi,
1989.

Rajatarangini of Kalhana, trans. with an introduction, commentary and
appendices by M.A. Stein, 2 vols., Ist edn. 1900, rpt by Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1989.

Ramayana, 8th edn, Geeta Press, Gorakhpur.

Rauravagama, cri. edn., N.R. Bhatt, Vol. I, Publicauons de l'Institut Francais
d’Indologie No. 18, Pondicherry, 1961-72.

--- Page 265 ---
266 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Rauravottaragama, cri. ed., N.R. Bhatt with introduction and notes,
Publications de I’Institut Francais d’Indologie, No. 66, Pondicherry,
1983.

Saiva Upanisads, trans. into English by T.R. Srinavasa Ayyangar and ed.,
G. Srinivasa Murti, Adyar Library, Madras, 1953.

Samaveda, ed. with trans. in Hindi by D. Satvalekar, Pardi. The Sama-Veda
Samhita, text with English trans by Ralph T.H. Griffith, 2 vols. Nag
Publishers, Delhi, 1991 (based on Griffith’s trans publ in 1893).

Samavidhana Brahmana (with Vedarthaprakasa of Sayana and
Padarthamatravivrti of Bharatsvamin), ed., B.R. Sharma, Kendriya
Sanskrit Vidyapeetha Series, No.1, Tirupati, 1964.

Samyutta-Nikaya (The Book of the Kindred Sayings), trans., Mrs. Rhys
Davids, Pt. I, Luzac and Company Ltd., London, 1950.

Sankaravijaya of Anandagin, ed., Pt. Jibananda Vidyasagara, Calcutta, 1881.
Sri Sankaravijaya of Anantanandagini, ed., N. Veezhinathan, Madras
University Philosophical Series, No. 16, Madras, 1971.

Skanda Mahapuranam, Sri Venkateshwara (Steam) Press, 7 vols., Bombay,
Samvat 1966. Skanda Purana, 7 vols., rpt of the above edn, Nag
Publishers, Delhi, 1986; ed., G.P. Bhatt, trans., G.V. Tagare, Ancient
Indian Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 49-54, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1992-4.

Siva Purana, eds., Arnold Kunst and J.L. Sastri, wans., Board of Scholars,
Ancient Indian Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 1-4, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1969-70.

Somasambhupaddhat, text with translation into French and notes by
Helene Brunner-Lachaux, 3 vols., Publications de l'Institut Francais
d'Indologie, No. 25, I, Il and HI, Pondicherry, 1963, 1968 and
1977.

Sri Ganesa Kosa (in Marathi), ed., Amarendra Gadgil, 2nd edn., Sriram
Baku Agency, Pune, 1981.

Sri Ganesatharvasirsam Sabhasyam, ed., Vamana Sastri Islampurkar, Anand
Ashram Press, Poona, 1919.

Sri Ucchista Ganapati Stotra Satanamavah, Pub. by T.S. Sundaresa Sharma,
Tanjore, 1959.

Sutta-Nipata, ed., F. Max Muller, trans., various scholars, Sacred Books of
the East, Vol. X, Part II, Ist edn. Oxford University Press, 1881, rpt
by Moulal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1965,

Svayambhuvagama, chap. 58, Transcript No. 39 in the library of the French
Institute of Pondicherry.

Taittiriya Aranyaka, Pt. I (With Commentary of Sayana) Ananda Ashram
Press, Poona, 1925.

Unpublished Upanisads, eds., Pandits of Adyar Library under the supervision
of Dr. C. Kunhan Raja, Sanskrit text with introduction in English,
Adyar Library Series-14, Madras, 1933,

--- Page 266 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 267

Vamana Purana, text with Hindi trans. by a group of scholars, ed.,
Anandswaroop Gupta, All India Kashiraj Trust, Varanasi, Vik. Sam.
2025.

Varaha Grhyasiutra, (with short extracts from the Paddhatis of Gangadhara and
Visistha), Cri. edn., Raghu Vira, Panini, New Delhi, 1982.

Varaha Purana, ed., J.L. Shastri, wans., S. Venkitasubramania Iyer, Ancient
Indian Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 31 and 32, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1985.

Vayu Purana, ed., G.P. Bhatt, trans. and annotated, G.V. Tagare, Ancient
Indian Tradition and Mythology series, Vols. 37 and 38, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1987-8.

Vijndnabhairavatantra, ed. with French trans., L. Silburn, Publications de
l'Institut de Civilisation Indienne, series in-8, fasc. 15, Paris, 1961.

Vindyakavratakalpadi, Transcript No. 1001 copied from Manuscript
No. 43428, both in the library of the French Instutute of Pondicherry.

Visnudharmottarapuranam, ed., Charudev Shastri, 2 vols., rptd from the
Venkateshwar Steam Press edn, Bombay, Nag Publishers, Dethi,
1985.

Visnu Purana, trans., H.H. Wilson, ed., F. Hall, 7 vols., London, 1966.

Yajnavalkya Smrti, Vol. [, (With the Commentary of Vijnanesvara called the
Mitaksara), twrans., Rai Bahadur Sirsa Chandra Vidyarnava, Allahabad,
1918. The Yajnavalkya Smrti, Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, Trivandrum,
1922.

2. EPIGRAPHY

Brahmi Inscriptions from Bharhut, ed., H. Luders, CI/, Vol. I], revised and
supplemented by E. Waldschmidt, M.A. Mehendale, Ootacamund,
1963.

Ejngraphia Andhrica, eds., N. Venkataramanayya and P.V. Parabrahma
Sastry, Vols. I-IV, Hyderabad, 1969, 74 and 75.

Epigraphia Carnatica, eds., B.R. Gopal et al., 9 vols, Institute of Kannada
Studies, University of Mysore, 1972-90.

Epigraphia Indica, Various Editors, 42 vols., Calcutta and Delhi, 1892 (in
progress).

Insenptions of Bengal, ed., N.G. Majumdar, Vol. III, Varendra Research
Society, Bengal, 1929.

Inscriptions of the Kalachuri-Cedi Era, ed., V.V. Mirashi, CI/, Vol. IV, Pt. I
and II, Ootacamund, 1955.

Inscriptions of Orissa (c. AD 600-1100), ed., Sri Satyanarayan Rajaguru,
Government of Orissa, Bhubaneshwar, 1960.

Inscriptions of the Seleucid and Parthian Period and of Eastern Iran and Central
Asia, ed., H.W. Bailey, Corps Inscnptionum Tranicarum, Pt. II, Vol. V
(Saka), Percy Lund, Humphries and Co. Ltd., London, 1968.

--- Page 267 ---
268 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Inscriptions of the Silaharas, ed., V.V. Mirashi, CII, Vol. V1, Archaeological
Survey of India, New Delhi, 1977.

Inscnptions of the Vakatakas, ed., V.V. Mirashi, C//, Vol. V, Archaeological
Survey of India, Ootacamund, 1963.

Kharoshthi Inscriptions (With the exception of those of Asoka), ed., Sten Konow,
CI, Vol. II, Pt. I, Calcutta, 1929.

Maity, S.K. and R.R. Mukherjee, Corpus of Bengal Insenptions, Firma KL.
Mukhopadhyay, Calcutta, 1967.

Sharma, Mukunda Madhava, Inscriptions of Ancient Assam, Gauhati
University, Assam, 1978.

Sircar, D.C., Some Epigraphical Records of the Medteval Period from Eastern
India, Abhinav Publications, New Delhi, 1979.

——- Select Inscnptions, 2 Vols., Calcutta, 1965.

——— ‘Two Brahmi Inscriptions’, /BRS, Vol. XXXIX, Pts. 1-2, pp. 41-8.

South Indian Inscnptions, ed. and trans., E. Hultzch, Vol. I], Pts. 1 and 2,
Madras, 1891 and 1892.

SECONDARY SOURCES

Abraham, Meera, Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India, Manohar
Publications, Delhi, 1988.

Acharya, G.V., ‘Gala Inscnption of Siddharaja Jayasimha, (Vikrama) Samvat
1193’, JBBRAS, Vol. 25, No. 2, 1918-19, pp. 32244.

Agrawala, P.K., ‘The Kumbhanda Figures in Sanchi Sculpture’, EW,
Vol. 37, Nos. 14, Dec. 1987, pp. 179-89.

———— ‘A Panca-Ganesa Panel from Varanasi’, J/O/B, Vol. 25, pp. 71-3.

——— ‘The Kumbhanda Overlord Virtdhaka’, pp. 67-74 in Devendra
Handa and Ashvini Agrawal, ed., Ratna-Chandrika: Panorama of
Onental Studies, (Shri R.C. Agrawala Festschrift), Harman Publishing
House, New Delhi, 1989.

——— Goddess Vinayaki, Prithvi Prakashan, Varanasi, 1978.

—— Goddesses in Ancient India, Abhinav Publications, Delhi, 1984.

——— ‘A Note on Ardhanari Ganapati’ in Studies in Indian Iconography,
pp. 155-8.

Agrawala, R.C., ‘Some Interesting Sculptures of Yaksas and Kubera from
Rajasthan’, J/HQ Sep. 1957, pp. 201-7.

—— ‘Unusual Icons of Vaikuntha Visnu with Asvamukha’, JOTB,
Vol. 25, pp. 387-9.

———— ‘Some More Unpublished Sculptures from Rajasthan’, Lalit Kala,
Vol. 10, 1961, pp. 31-3.

——— ‘Sculptures from Abaneri, Rajasthan’, Lalit Kala, Vol. Nos. 1-2,
1955-6, pp. 130-5.

——— ‘Urdhvaretas Ganesga from Afghanistan’ in EW (NS), Vol. 18,

--- Page 268 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 269
Nos. 1-2, Mar-Jun. 1968, pp. 166-8.

——— ‘The Astamatrkas of Marwar’, /JHQ, Vol. 29, 1953, pp. 393-5.

— ‘Some Interesting Sculptures from Devangana, Rajasthan’, Lali
Kala, Vol. 8, 1960, pp. 69-71.

— ‘Skanda-Karttikeya in Sculptures from Rajasthan’, Lalit Kala,
Nos. 3-4, 1956-7, pp. 109-11.

———— ‘Some More Unpublished Sculptures from Rajasthan’, Lalit Kala,
Vol. 10, 1961, pp. 31-3.

— ‘Yaksa Torso from Bharatpur Region’, JO/B, Vol. 17, Nos. 14,
1967-8, pp. 645.

Agrawala, V.S., Siva-Mahadeva - the Great God, Varanasi, 1966.

— India as Known to Panini (Astadhyayi) Banaras Hindu University,
Ist edn. 1953, rpt, Varanasi, 1963.

——— Devi-Mahdtmyam. The Glorification of the Great Goddess, All India
Kashiraj Trust, Varanasi, 1963.

——— ‘Geographical Data in Panini’, JHQ, Vol. 29, 1953, pp. 1-34.

——— ‘Images of Brahma, Vishnu and Siva, etc.’, Catalogue of the
Mathura Museum 2, J/UPHS, Vol. 22, 1949, pp. 102-220.

——— Ancient Indian Folk Cults, Prithvi Prakashan, Varanasi, 1970.

—_—— ‘Meaning of Ganapati’, /O/B, Vol. 13, 1963, pp. 1-4.

—_—_—— ‘Miscellaneous Architectural Sculptures: Buddhist’, JUPHS,
Vols. 245, 1951-2, pp. 77-118.

Allan, John, Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India, 1st edn. London, 1936,
rpt, Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1975.

Allchin, Bridget and Raymond, The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan,
Select Book Service Syndicate, New Delhi, 1989.

Allchin, F.R., ‘The Legacy of the Indus Civilization’ in Gregory L. Possehl,
ed., Harappan Civilization, 2nd revd edn., American Institute of
Indian Studies, Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi,
1993.

Apte, V.M., Social and Religious Life in the Grhya Sutras, The Popular Book
Depot, Bombay, 1954.

Apte, V.S., The Practical Sansknit - English Dictionary, 4th revd and enlarged
edn., Delhi 1965, rpt, Moulal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1978.

Aravamuthan, T.G., ‘Ganesa: Clue to a Cult and a Culture’, Journal of
Oriental Research, Madras, Vol. 18, 1949, pp. 221-45.

Ardeleanu-Jansen, Alexandra, ‘The Terracotta Figurines from Mohenjo-
daro: Considerations on Tradition Craft and Ideology in the
Harappa Culture (CA. 2400-1800 Bc)’, Lahore Museum Bulletin,
Vol. I, No. 2, July-Dec. 1988, pp. 9-28.

Atre, Shubhangana, The Archetypal Mother: A Systemic Approach to Harappan
Religion, Ravish Publishers, Pune, 1987.

Ayyar, P.V. Jagadha, South Indian Shrines, Asian Educational Services, New
Delhi, 1982.

--- Page 269 ---
270 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Bagchi, P.C., ‘The Cult of the Buddhist Siddhacaryas’, Cultural Heritage of
India, Vol. IV, Calcutta, 1956, pp. 273-9.

— ‘Evolution of the Tantras', Cultural Heritage of India, Vol. IV,
Calcutta, 1956, pp. 211-16.

Bandyopadhyay, Samaresh, ‘A Note on Ganapati’, JO/B, Vol. 21, 1971-2,
pp. 328-30.

Banerjea, J.N., The Development of Hindu Iconography, 4th edn., rpted from
second rev edn. of 1956, Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1974.

Banerjee, Priyatosh, ‘A Note on the Worship of Images in Jainism
(c. 200 BC - 200 aD)’, JBRS, Vol. 36, Pts. 1-2, Sep.-Dec. 1950, pp. 57-65.

Banerji, Adris, ‘Further Unpublished Sculptures from Mewar’, Lalit Kala,
No. 10, Oct. 1961, pp. 18-20

Banerji, R.D., The Temple of Siva at Bhiimara, Memoirs of the Archaeological
Survey of India, No. 16, 1924.

——— Bas Reliefs of Badami, Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of
India, No. 25, 1928.

Barua, Benimadhab, Gaya and Buddha-Gaya, Bharuva Publishing House,
Varanasi, 1975.

———- Bharhut, Indological Book Corporation, Patna, 1979.

Basham, A.L., The Wonder that was India, 1st edn., London, 1954, rpt in
paperback of 3rd revd edn., 1967, Sidgwick and Jackson, London,
1988.

Bedekar, V.M. ‘Kubera in Sanskrit Literature with special reference to
the Mahabharata’, /GJARI, Vol. 25, 1969, pp. 425-51.

Bhandarkar, R.G., Vaishnavism, Satvism and Minor Religious Systems, rpt of
1913 edition, Indological Book House, Varanasi, 1965.

Bharati, A., The Tantric Tradition, Rider and Company, London, 1965.

Bhattacharji, Sukumari, Literature in the Vedic Age, Vol.I1, K.P. Bagchi and
Co., Calcutta, 1986.

——— The Indian Theogony, Cambridge University Press, London, 1970.

Bhattacharya, B.C., The History of Sarnath or the Cradle of Buddhism, Benares,
1924.

——— The Jaina Iconography, revd edn., Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1974.

Bhattacharyya, Benoytosh, Indian Buddhist Iconography, 2nd ed., Calcutta,
1958,

—_ _‘Tantrika Culture Among the Buddhists’, Cultural Heritage of India,
Vol. IV, Calcutta, 1956, pp. 260-72. |

Bhattacharyya, N.N., History of the Tantric Religion, Manohar, New Delhi,
1982.

——— Ancent Indian Rituals and their Social Content, Curzon Press, London,
1975, and Rowman & Littlefield, Totowa, USA, 1975.

——— History of Sakta Religion, Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1974.

Biardeau, Madeleine, ‘The Sami Tree and the Sacrificial Buffalo’,
Contnbutions to Indian Sociology (NS), Vol. 18, No. 1, 1984, pp. 1-23.

--- Page 270 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 27]

Bolon, Carol Radcliffe, ‘Two Chalukya Queens and their Commemorative
Temples’ in Vidya Dehejia, ed., Royal Patrons and Great Temple Art,
Marg Publications, Bombay, 1988, pp. 61-76.

Bopearachchi, Osmund, ‘On the So-Called Earliest Representation of
Gane§a’, in Marie-Francoise Boussac and Jean-Francois Salles, eds.,
Athens, Aden, Arikamedu, Manohar Publishers and Centre des
Sciences Humaines, New Delhi, 1995.

Brown, Robert L., ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God, State University of
New York Press, Albany, 1991.

—___— ‘Ganeéa in Southeast Asian Art: Indian Connections and
Indigenous Developments’, in Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies
of an Asian God, State University of New York Press, Albany, 1991,
pp. 171-234.

Brubaker, Richard L., ‘Barbers, Washermen and Other Priests: Servants
of the South Indian Village and its Goddess’. History of Religions,
Vol. 19, No. 2, Nov. 1979, pp. 128-52.

Buhnemann, Gudrun, The Worship of Mahaganapat: According to the
Nityollasa, Institut fur Indologie, Wichtrach (Switzerland), 1988.

—— Forms of Ganesa, Institut fur Indologie, Wichtrach, Switzerland,
1989.

Burnouf, E., [Introduction a U'Histoire du Buddhisme Indien, Paris, 1876.

Cashman, Richard, ‘The Political Recruitment of the God Ganapathi’ in
Robin Jeffrey et al., eds., India: Rebellion to Republic (Selected Writings,
1857-1990), Sterling Publishers, 1990.

Chakravarti, Chintaharan, ‘Tradition about Vanaras and Raksasas’, J/HQ,
Vol. 1, Pts. 3-4, pp. 779-81.

Chakravarti, Uma, ‘Women, men and beasts: The Jataka as popular tradi-
tion’, Studies in History, Vol. 9, No.1, NS, Jan.-Jun. 1993, pp. 43-70.

Champakalakshmi, R., ‘State and Economy: South India, circa AD 400-
1300’ in Romila Thapar, ed., Recent Perspectives of Early Indian History,
Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 1993, pp. 266-308.

—-—— ‘Ideology and the State in South India’, Mamidipudi Venkata-
rangaiah Memorial Lecture -1, Andhra Pradesh History Congress,
Srisailam, 1989.

Chanda, Ramaprasad, The Beginnings of Art in Eastern India unth Special
Reference to Sculptures in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, Memoirs of the
Archaeological Survey of India, No. 30, 1927.

——— Exploration in Orissa, Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of
India, No. 44, 1930.

_—_ ‘Nidhigrnga (Cornucopia): A Study in Symbolism’, Prince of Wales
Museum Bulletin, No. 9, 1964-6, pp. 1-33.

Chandra, Moti, ‘The White Elephant’, Lalit Kala, Nos. 1-2, 1955-6, p. 96.

Chandra, Pramod, The Sculpture of India, (3000 Bc-1300 ap), National
Gallery of Art, Washington, 1985.

--- Page 271 ---
272 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Chandra, Rai Govind, ‘Problem of Yaksas’, /G/hRI/, Vol. 28, Jan-Apr. 1972,
Pts. 1-2, pp. 499-521.

Chatterjee, Asim Kumar, The Cult of Skanda-Karttikeya in Ancient India,
Punthi Pustak, Calcutta, 1970.

Chatterji, B.R., Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia, University of Calcutta,
1928.

Chatterjee, J.C., Kashmir Shaivism, Ist edn. 1914, rpt, Indological Book
Corporation, Patna, 1978.

Chattopadhyaya, B.D., ‘Origin of the Rajputs: The Political, Economic
and Social Processes in Early Medieval Rajasthan’, Indian Historcal
Review, Vol. III, No.1, pp. 59-82.

Chattopadhyaya, Debiprasad, Lokdyata: A Study in Ancent Indian Matenalism,
People’s Publishing House, New Delhi, July, 1959.

Chattopadhyaya, Sudhakar, Reflections on the Tantras, Moulal Banarsidass,
Delhi, 1978.

——— Evolution of Hindu Sects, Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1970.

Chavannes, E., ‘Une Sculpture Bouddhique de l’Annee 543 p.c.’, Ars
Asiatica, Vol. 2, 1914, pp. 13-19.

Cohen, Lawrence, ‘The Wives of Ganesa’ in Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh:
Studies of an Asian God, State University of New York Press, Albany,
1991, pp. 115-40.

Coomaraswamy, A.K., Yaksas (2 parts), rpt, Munshiram Manoharlal, New
Delhi, 1971.

— ‘Ganesha’, BMFA (Boston), Vol. 26, April 1928, pp. 30-1.

——— History of Indian and Indonesian Art, 1st edn. 1927, republication,
Dover Publications, New York, 1965.

Courtright, Paul B., Ganesa: Lord of Obstacles, Lord of Beginnings, Oxford
University Press, New York and Oxford, 1985.

——_—— ‘The Beheading of Ganesa’, Purana, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 67-80.

Cousens, H., The Chalukyan Architecture of the Kanarese District, Central
Publication Branch, Calcutta, 1926.

Crooke, William, The Tribes and Castes of North Western India, Vol. IV, rpt,
Cosmo Publications, Delhi, 1975.

Dagens, Bruno, Les Enseignements Architecturaux de l'Ajitagama et du
Rauravagama, Publications de l'Institut Francais d’Indologie,
No. 57, Pondicherry, 1977.

Dandekar, R.N., Vedic Mythological Tracts, Ajanta Publications, Delhi, 1979.

Das, D.N., ‘Serpent Worship in Ancient Kalinga’, PIHC, 1965, pp. 43-4.

Das, Veena, ‘The Mythological Film and its Framework of Meaning: An
Analysis of Jai Santoshi Ma’, India International Centre Quarterly,
Vol. 8, No. 1, Mar. 1980, pp. 43-56.

Dasgupta, K.K., The Audumbaras, Calcutta, 1965.

—— A 1nbal History of Ancient India - A Numismatic Approach, Nababharat
Publishers, Calcutta, 1974.

--- Page 272 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 273

Dasgupta, Shashi Bhusan, An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism, University
of Calcutta, 1950.

Dehejia, Vidya, Slaves of the Lord, Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi,
1988.

Deva, Raja Radha Kanta, Sabdakalpadruma, 5 vols., lst edn. Saka era 1808
by Baptist Mission Press, Calcutta, rpt, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series
Office, Varanasi, 1961, 1967

Dhavalikar, M.K., ‘A Note on Two GaneSa Statues from Afghanistan’, EW
(NS), Vol. 21, nos. 3-4, 1971, pp. 331-6.

——— ‘Daimabad Bronzes’ in Gregory L. Possehl, ed., Harappan
Civilization, 2nd revd edn., American Institute of Indian Studies,
Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1993,
pp. 421-6.

—— ‘Ganefa: Myth and Reality’ in Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studtes
of an Asian God, State University of New York Press, Albany, 1991,
pp. 49-68.

Diskalkar, D.B., ‘Ganegar Inscription of V.S. 1291 (AD. 1235)’, ABORI,
Vol. 9, Pts. 1-4, 1927-8, pp. 179-81.

—— ‘Some Unpublished Inscriptions of Vastupala’, ABORI, Vol. 9,
Pts. 1-4, 1927-8, pp. 179-81.

Drabu, V.N., Saivagamas. A Study in the Socio-Economic Ideas and Institutions
of Kashmir (200 BC- AD 700), Indus Publishing Company, New Delhi,
1990.

Drury, Nevill, Shamanism, Element Books Ltd., Brisbane, 1992.

During Caspers, E.C.L., ‘Some Thoughts on the Indus Script’ in Ellen
M. Raven and Karel T. Van Kooij, eds., /ndian Art and Archaeology,
E.J. Brill, Ledien, 1992, pp. 5467.

—___—- ‘Magic Hunting Practices in Harappan Times’ in K. Friefelt and
S. Sprensen, eds., The Indus Civilization, South Asian Archaeology,
Curzon Press, London, 1985, pp. 227-36.

Eliade, Mircea, ed., The Encyclopaedia of Religion, Macmillan Publishing
Company, New York, and Collier Macmillan Publishers, London,
1987.

—_——— Patterns in Comparative Religion, Sheed and Ward, Inc., New York,
1958.

Farquhar, J.N., An Outline of the Religious Literature of India, rpt, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1967.

Ferreira, John V., Totemism in India, Oxford University Press, Bombay,
1965.

Foucher, A., The Beginnings of Buddhist Art, rpt, Varanasi, 1972.

——— Etudes sur l’Art Bouddhique de l’Inde, Tokyo, 1922.

_—_—— On The Iconography of the Buddha's Nativity, Memoirs of the
Archaeological Survey of India, No. 46, 1934.

--- Page 273 ---
274 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Frankfort, H., Cylinder Seals, Macmillan & Co., London, 1939.

Frederic, Louis, Les Dieux du Bouddhisme. Guide Iconographique, Flammarion,
Paris, 1992.

Fuller, C.J., ‘Only Siva can worship Siva: Ritual Mistakes and their
Correction in a South Indian Temple’, Contributions to Indian
Sociology, (NS), Vol. 27, No. 2, 1993, pp. 169-89.

Garde, M.B., ‘The Site of Padmavati’, ASJAR, 1915-16, Calcutta, 1918,
pp. 101--..

Gazetteer of India, Karnataka State, Uttara Kannada District, Bangalore, 1985.

Gazetteer of India, Karnataka State, South Kanara District, Bangalore, 1973.

Gazetteer of India, Kerala, Trichur, Kerala, 1962.

Gazetteer of India, Mysore State, Kolar District, Bangalore, 1968.

Gazetteer of Kashmir and Ladakh, Vivek Publishing House, Delhi, 1974.

Geiger, W., Pali Literature and Language, trans., Balakrishna Ghosah, 2nd
edn., Oriental Books Rpt Corporation, Delhi, 1968.

Getty, Alice, Ganesa, 1st edn. Clarendon Press Oxford, 1936, 2nd edn.,
Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1971.

Ghurye, G.S., Gods and Men, Popular Book Depot, Bombay, 1962.

— Vedic India, Popular Prakashan, Bombay, 1979.

Gonda, J., The Ritual Sutras, (J. Gonda, ed., A History of Indian Literature,
Vol. I, Fasc. 2), Otto Harrassowitz, Weisbaden, 1977.

—— Medieval Religious Literature 1n Sanskrit, (J. Gonda, ed. A History of
Indian Literature, Vol. II, Fasc. 1), Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden,
1977.

—— Visnuism and Sivaism, 1st edn. London, 1970, Ist Indian edn.,
Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1976.

——— Aspects of Early Visnuism, Utrecht, 1954.

Gopalachari, K., Early History of the Andhra Country, University of Madras,
1941.

Gopalan, R., History of the Pallavas of Kanchi, University of Madras, 1928.

Gordon, Stewart, The Marathas (1600-1818), The New Cambridge History
of India, Vol. II. 4, Cambridge University Press and Foundation
Books, New Delhi, 1993.

Granoff, Phyllis, ‘Ganesa as a Metaphor: The Mudgala Purana’ in Robert
L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God, State University of
New York Press, Albany, 1991, pp. 85-99.

Graves, Robert, Greek Myths, Cassell and Co. Ltd., London, Graves, Robert,
Greek Myths, Cassell and Co. Ltd., London, 1958.

Gupta, Ramavatara, Ganesa Mahima, Pustak Mahal, Delhi.

Gupu, Sanjukta, Dirk Jan Hoens and Teun Goudriaan, Hindu Tantrism,
E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1979.

Gupte, B.A., ‘Harvest Festivals of Gauri and Ganesh’, Indian Antiquary,
Vol. 35, Nov. 1906, pp. 60-4.

--- Page 274 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 275

Guseva, N.R., Jainism, trans. from the Russian by Y.S.Pedkar, Sindhu
Publications, Bombay, 1971.

Haldar, J.R., Early Buddhist Mythology, New Delhi, 1977.

Harle, J.C., The Art and Architecture of the Indian Subcontinent, Penguin
Books, England, 1986.

—— ‘Towards Understanding Gupta Sculpture’ in Kal Khandalavala,
ed., The Golden Age, Marg Publications, Bombay, 1991, pp. 7-14.

Hazra, R.C., ‘The Ganega Purana’, /GJhRI, Vol. 9, 1951, pp. 79-99.

—- ‘Ganapati-Worship and the Upapuranas Dealing with it’, /GJARi,
Vol. 5, Pt.4, 1948, pp. 263-76.

——— Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, rpt, Moulal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1987.

Heras, H., The Problem of Ganapati, Indological Book House, Delhi, 1972.

Hiltebeitel, Alf, ‘The Indus Valley “Proto-Siva”, Reexamined through
Reflections on the Goddess, the Buffalo and the Symbolism of
vahanas’, Anthropos, Vol. 73, 1978, pp. 767-97.

——— ‘Rama and Gilgamesh: The Sacrifices of the Water Buffalo and
the Bull of Heaven’, History of Religions, Vol. 19, No. 3, Feb. 1980,
pp. 187-223.

Hingorani, R.P. Jaina Iconography in Rupamandana, Kishor Vidya Niketan,
Varanasi, 1978.

Jaiswal, Suvira, The Origin and Development of Vaisnavism, 2nd ed.,
Munshiram Manoharlal, New Delhi, 1981.

James, E.O., The Cult of the Mother Goddess, Thames and Hudson, London,
1959.

Jash, P., History of Saivism, Calcutta, 1974.

Jayakar, Pupul, The Earth Mother, first published as The Earthen Drum by
the National Museum, 1980, revd and updated edn., Penguin Books,
New Delhi, 1989.

Jayaswal, Vidula and Kalyan Krishna, An Ethno-Archaeological View of Indian
Terracottas, Agam Kala Prakashan, New Delhi, 1986.

Jha, D.N., ed., Feudal Social Formation in Early India, Chanakya Publications,
Delhi, 1987.

Jha, V.N., ‘Varnasamkara in the Dharma Suwas: Theory and Practice’, in
JESHO, Vol. 13, Nos. 1-3, 1970, pp. 273-88.

Joshi, Kashinatha Sastri, Saratha Puja Samgraha, Chitralekha Agency, Pune.

Joshi, M.C. and KS. Ramachandran, ‘A Rare Wooden Sculpture of Five
Faced Ganesa’, EW(NS), Vol. 21, Nos. 3-4, Sep.-Dec. 1971, pp. 337-40.

Kakar, Sudhir, Shamans, Mystics and Doctors, 2nd impression, Oxford Indian
Paperbacks, New Delhi, 1992.

Kane, P.V., History of Dharmasastra, 5 vols., Govt. Oriental Series, Class B,
No. 6, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona, 2nd edn.,
1968-74.

--- Page 275 ---
276 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Keith, A.B., A History of Sanskrit Literature, rpt, Oxford University Press,
Delhi, 1973.

Kenneth, KS. Ch’en, Buddhism in China (A Historical Survey), Princeton
University Press, New Jersey, 1964.

Kern, H., Histoire du Bouddhisme dans l'Inde, Vol. 2, Leipzig, 1884.

Klingender, Francis, Animals in Art and Thought, Routledge and Kegan
Paul, London, 1971.

Kosambi, D.D., Myth and Reality, Popular Prakashan, Bombay, 1962.

Lahiri, A.N., Corpus of Indo-Greek Coins, Poddar Publications, Calcutta,
1965.

Lal, B.B., ‘Excavation at Hastinapura and other Explorations in the Upper
Ganga and Sutlej Basins, 1950-52’, Ancient India, Nos. 10 and 11,
1954 and 1955, pp. 5-151.

Lal, B.B. and S.P. Gupta, Frontiers of the Indus Civilization, (Sir Mortimer
Wheeler Commemoration Volume), Books & Books, New Delhi,
1984.

Lanius, M.C., ‘Rajasthani Sculpture of the Ninth and Tenth Centuries’,
pp. 78-84 in Pratapaditya Pal, ed., Aspects of Indian Art, E.J. Brill,
Leiden, 1972.

Law, B.C., A History of Pali Literature, Vol. 1, 1st edn., 1933, rpt, Bhartiya
Publishing House, Varanasi, 1974.

— Kausambi in Anaent Literature, Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey
of India, No. 60, 1939.

——— Rdyagnha in Anaent Literature, Memoirs of Archaeological Survey
of India, No. 58, 1938.

Levi-Strauss, Claude, Totemism, Penguin Books, 1973.

Lippe, Aschwin de, Indian Medtaeval Sculpture, North Holland Publishing
Company, Amsterdam, 1978.

Lohuizen-de Leeuw, J.E. Van, ‘Gandhara and Mathura: Their Cultural
Relationship’, pp. 27-43 in Pratapaditya Pal, ed., Aspects of Indian
Ant, E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1972.

Longhurst, A-H., Pallava Architecture, 2 vols., Cosmo Publications, New
Delhi, 1982.

Lorenzen, David, The Kapalikas and Kalamukhas: Two Lost Saivite Sects,
Motilal Banarsidass, New Delhi, 1972.

Macdonell, Arthur A., A History of Sansknit Literature, rpt, Motilal Banarsidass,
Delhi, 1990.

Mackay, Ernest, Early Indus Civilization, revd and enlarged edn. by Dorothy
Mackay, Indological Book Corporation, New Delhi, 1976.

——— Further Excavations at Mohenjo-Daro, Vol. I., rpt, Indological Book
Corporation, New Delhi, 1976.

Mahadevan, T.M.P., ‘Saivism and the Indus Civilisation’, JGShRI, Vol. 4,
Nov. 1946, pp. 1-10.

--- Page 276 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 277

Maharashtra State Gazetteer, Yeotmal District, 1st edn. 1908, revd edn.,
Bombay, 1974.

Majumdar, A.K.,, Bhakti Renatssance, 2nd edn., Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan,
Bombay, 1979.

Marshall, Sir John and Alfred Foucher, The Monuments of Sancht, rpt,
Swati Publications, New Delhi, 1982.

Meadow, Richard, ‘Animal Domestication in the Middle East’ in Gregory
Possehl, ed., Harappan Civilization, 2nd revised edn., American
Institute of Indian Studies, Oxford and IBH Publishing Co. Pvt.
Ltd., New Delhi, 1993.

Misra, O.P. Iconography of the Saptamatrkas, Agam Kala Prakashan, Delhi,
1989.

Misra, R.N., Yaksha Cult and Iconography, Mushiram Manoharlal, New Delhi,
1981.

Mitra, Haridas, Gandpati, Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan, 1959.

Modhey, S.G., ‘God Kubera in the Ramayana’, /OJB, Vol. 21, 1971-2,
pp. 299-306.

Moor, Captain Edward, ‘Account of an Hereditary living Deity to whom
Devotion is paid by the Bramins of Poona and its Neighbourhood’,
Asiatick Researches, Vol. 7, 1801, pp.383-97.

Mukherjee, A.N., Ongin and History of Pala Sena Sculpture, Ashutosh
Museum, Calcutta, 1966.

Munshi, KM., ed., The Glory that was Gurjaradesa, AD 550-1300, Pt. 1,
Bombay, 1955.

Nagarch, B.L., ‘Siva Temples - Gandai'’, G. Kuppuram and K, Kumudamani,
eds., History, Archaeology, Art and Religion (Prof. Upendra Thakur
Felicitation Volume), Vol. I, pp. 93-199, Sundeep Prakashan, Delhi,
1990.

Nagaswamy, R., Masterpieces of Early South Indian Bronzes, National Museum,
New Delhi, 1983.

—_—.- Siva Bhakti, Navrang, New Delhi, 1989.

Nandi, R.N., Soctal Roots of Religion in Ancient India, K.P. Bagchi and
Company, New Delhi, 1986.

——— Religious Institutions and Cults in the Deccan, Motilal Banarsidass,
Delhi, 1973.

Narain, A.K., The Indo-Greeks, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1980.

——— ‘On the Earliest Ganesa’, pp. 142-4 in J.E. Van Lohuizen De
Leeuw, ed., Studies in South Asian Culture, Vol. 7, (Senarat
Paranavitana Commemoration Volume), E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1978.

———— ‘Ganeéa: A Protohistory of the Idea and the Icon’ in Robert L.
Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God, State University of New
York Press, Albany, 1991, pp. 19-48.

Nath, Amarendra, ‘Ganeéa in Central Asian Art: An Identification’, Journal
of Indian Society of Onental Art (NS), Vol. 6, 1974-5, pp.14.

--- Page 277 ---
278 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Nilkanta Sastri, KA., A History of South India, 7th impression, Oxford
University Press, 1987.

Norman, K.R., Pali Literature, (J. Gonda, ed. A History of Indian Literature,
Vol. 7, Fasc. 2), Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1983.

Obeyesekere, Gananath, The Cult of the Goddess Pattini, University of
Chicago, Chicago, 1984.

O'Flaherty, W.D., Asceticism and Eroticism in the Mythology of Siva, Indian
edn., Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1975.

——— Sexual Metaphors and Animal Symbols in Indian Mythology, rpt, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1981.

Pal, Pratapaditya, Bronzes of Kashmir, Graz, New York, 1975.

——— The Ideal Image: The Gupta Sculptural Tradition and its Influence, The
Asia Society, New York, 1978.

———— Hindu Religion and Iconology (According to the Tantrasara), Vichitra
Press, Los Angeles, 1981.

Pandey, Rajendra, Kasi Through the Ages, Sundeep Prakashan, Delhi, 1979.

Panigrahi, K.C., Archaeological Remains at Bhubaneswar, Orient Longmans,
Delhi, 1961.

Parekh, V.S., ‘An Image of Double-Faced Ganesa from Junagadh’, JOJB,
Vol. 27, pp. 40-2.

Peterson, Indira Viswanathan, Poems to Siva, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi,
1991.

Possehl, Gregory L., ed., Harappan Civilization, 2nd revd edn., American
Institute of Indian Studies, Oxford and IBH Publishing Col. Pvt.
Ltd., New Delhi, 1993.

Preston, Lawrence, W., ‘Subregional Religious Centres in the History of
Maharashtra: The Sites Sacred to Gane§a’, in N.K. Wagle, ed., Images
of Maharashtra: A Regional Profile of India, Asia Publishing House,
Bombay, 1980.

Radhakrishnan, S., Indian Philosophy, Vol. I, Centenary edn, Oxford
University Press, 1990.

Raja-Manikam, The Development of Saivism in South India Under the Pallavas of
Kana and the Imperial Colas (AD 300-1300), University of Madras, 1951.

Ramasubramaniam, V., ‘The Ganapati-Vinayaka-Gajanana Worship:
Analysis of an Integrated Cult’, Bulletin of the Institute of Traditional
Cultures, Madras, 1971, pp. 110-46.

Rao, S.K. Ramachandra, ed., Ganapati (32 Drawings from a 19th Century
Scroll), Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath, Bangalore, 1989.

Rao, T.A.G., Elements of Hindu Iconography, 2 vols., 4 pts., rpt of 1914
Madras edn., Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1985.

Rao, U. Venkatakrishna, ‘The Ganapaty Cult’, Quarterly Journal of the Mythic
Society, Vol. 41, July 1950, pp. 92-9.

Ratnagar, Shereen, Enquines into the Political Organization of Harappan Society,
Ravish Publishers, Pune, 1991.

--- Page 278 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 279

Ray, Nihar Ranjan, Maurya and Sunga Art, Calcutta, 1965.

Riviere, Juan Roger, ‘The Problem of Ganesa in the Puranas’, Purana,
Vol. 4, 1962, pp. 96-102.

Sahu, B.P., From Hunters to Breeders, Anamika Prakashan, New Delhi, 1988.

Samaddar, J.N., ‘Industrial and Trading Organisation in Ancient India’,
JBORS, Vol.7, Pt. 4, 1921, pp. 35-54.

Saraswati, Baidyanath, Kasi: Myth and Reality, Indian Institute of Advanced
Study, Simla, 1975.

Sardesai, G.S., New History of the Marathas, Vol. I, Ist edn., 1946, rpt,
Bombay, 1957.

Schastok, Sara L., The Samalaji Sculptures and 6th Century Art in Western
India, EJ. Brill, Leiden, 1985.

Shah, U.P., Jaina-Rupa-Mandana (Jaina Iconography), Vol. I, Abhinav
Publications, New Delhi, 1987.

—_ ‘Minor Jaina Deities’, /O/B, Vol. 32, pp. 82-98.

——— ‘Ancient Sculptures from Gujarat and Saurashtra’, Journal of Indian
Museums, Vol. 8, 1952, pp. 49-57.

—— ‘Some Early Sculptures from Abu and Bhinmal’, BBMPG, Vol. 12,
1955-6, pp. 43-56.

——— Sculptures from Samalaji and Roda (North Gujarat) in the Baroda
Museum, Baroda, 1960.

_——— ‘Western Indian Sculpture and the So-called Gupta Influence’,
pp. 448 in Pratapaditya Pal, ed., Aspects of Indian Art, EJ. Brill,
Leiden, 1972.

Sharma, B.N., Iconography of Vainayaki, Abhinav Publications, Delhi, 1979.

———- ‘Abhiéeka in Indian Art’, /O/B, Vol. 21, 1971-72, pp. 108-13.

Sharma, R.S., Material Culture and Social Formations in Ancient India,
MacMillan India Ltd., Delhi, 1983.

——— Indian Feudalism, c. 300-1200, University of Calcutta, 1965, 2nd
edn, MacMillan, Delhi, 1980.

——— Social Changes in Early Medieval India (c. AD 500-1200), Delhi,
1969.

Sharma, R.S. and D.N. Jha, ‘The Economic History of India upto AD 1200:
Trends and Prospects’, JESHO, Vol. 17, No. 1, 1974, pp. 48-80.

Shrimali, K.M., History of Pancala, 2 vols., Munshiram Manoharlal, New
Delhi, 1983, 1985.

Shrivastava, M.C.P., ‘Ganesa and Jyestha: A Comparative Study’, JBRS,
Vol. LVIII, Pts. 1-4, 1972, pp. 165-70.

Sills, David, L., Jnternational Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol. 10,
Macmillan Co. and the Free Press, 1968.

Singh, Harihar, Jaina Temples of Western India, ParshvanathVidhyashram
Research Institute, Varanasi, 1982.

Singh, R.B.P., Jainism in Early Medieval Karnataka, (A.D. 500-1200), Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1975.

--- Page 279 ---
280 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI

Singh, Sarva Daman, ‘The Elephant and the Aryans’, JRAS, 1963, pp. 1-6.

Sircar, D.C., Studies in the Religious Life of Ancient and Medieval India, Moulal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 197).

—_— Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medteval India, 2nd edn.,
Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1971.

——— ‘Mahamayuri: List of Yaksas’, Journal of Ancient Indian History,
Vol. 5, Pts. 1-2, 1971-2.

Sivaramamurti, C., ‘Early Eastern Chalukya Sculpture’, Bulletin of the Madras
Government Museum, (New Series - General Section), Vol. 7, No. 2,
Madras, 1957.

——— ‘Geographical and Chronological Factors in Indian Iconography’,
Anaent India, No. 6, New Delhi, 1950, pp. 21-63.

— South Indian Bronzes, New Delhi, 1963.

Smith, Vincent A., The Jain Stupa and Other Antiquities of Mathura,
Archaeological Survey of India (New Imperial Series), Vol. 20,
1901.

Snellgrove, D.L., The Hevajra Tantra. A Critical Study, 2 Parts (London
Oriental Series, Vol. 6), London, 1959.

Snodgrass, Adrian, The Matnx and Diamond World Mandalas in Shingon
Buddhism, 2 vols. Sata-Pitaka Series, Indo-Asian Literatures, Vol. 354,
Aditya Prakashan, New Delhi, 1988.

Sompura, Kanulal F., The Structural Temples of Gujarat, Gujarat University
Theses Publication Series - 4, Ahmedabad, 1968.

Soundara Rajan, K.V., Cave Temples of the Deccan, Archaelogical Survey of
India, New Delhi, 1981.

Sorensen, S., An Index to the Names of the Mahabharata, rpt, Motilal
Banarsidass, Delhi, 1963.

Srinivasan, C.R., ‘Saptamatrkas’, JOJB, Vol. 24, 1974, Nos. 1-2, pp. 428-35.

Srinivasan, K.R., Cave Temples of the Pallavas, Archaeological Survey of
India, 1st edn. 1964, rpt, New Delhi, 1993.

Stein, Aurel, An Archaeological Tour in Upper Swat and Adjacent Hill Tracts,
Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, No. 42, Calcutta,
1930.

Stutley, Margaret, Anaent Indian Magic and Folklore, Routledge and Kegan
Paul, London, 1980.

Subbarayalu, Y., ‘The Cola State’, Studies in History, Vol. IV, No. 2, 1982,
pp. 265-306.

Subrahmanian, N.S., ed., Encyclopaedia of the Upanisads, Oriental University
Press, London, 1986.

Sukul, Kubernath, Varanasi Down the Ages, Patna, 1974.

Tarn, W.W., The Greeks in Bactria and India, Cambridge, 1938 and 1951.

Thapar, Romila, Asoka and the Decline of the Mauryas, OUP, London,
1961.

——— ‘Origin Myths and Historical Tradition’, Ancient Indian Soaal History,

--- Page 280 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY 281]

Ist edn. 1978, rpt of 1984 edn., Orient Longman, New Delhi, 1990,
pp. 294-325.

Thurston, E., Castes and Tribes of Southern India, 1st edn., Madras, 1909,
rpt, Johnson Reprint Corporation, USA, 1965.

Tiwari, J.N., Goddess Cults in Ancient India (With special Reference to the First
Seven Centuries AD), Sundeep Prakashan, Delhi, 1985.

Tiwari, Maruti Nandan and Kamal Giri, ‘Images of GaneSa in Jainism’ in
Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Asian God, State University
of New York Press, Albany, 1991, pp. 101-14.

Tucci, Guiseppe, ‘Preliminary Report on an Archaeological Survey in
Swat’, EW, Vol. 9, 1958, pp. 279-328.

Upadhye, A.N. ‘Paisaci Language and Literature’, ABORI, Vol. 21, 1940,
pp. 1-37.

Virji, KK, Anctent History of Saurashtra, Konkan Institute of Arts and
Sciences, Bombay, 1955.

Vogel, J. Ph., Indian Serpent Lore, 1st edn. London, 1926, rptd by Indological
Book House, Varanasi and Dethi, 1972.

Warder, A.K., Indian Buddhism, 1st edn. Delhi, 1970, rpt of 2nd revd edn,
1980, Moulal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1991.

Watters, Thomas, On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, (AD 629-645), st
edn. London, 1904-5, 2nd Indian edn., Munshiram Mancharlal,
New Delhi, 1973.

Wayman, A., The Buddhist Tantras: Light on Indo-Tibetan Esotencism, New
York, 1973.

Weiner, Sheila L., From Gupta to Pala Sculpture, rptd from Artibus Asiae,
Vol. 25, pp. 167-82, Ascona, Switzerland.

Wilkinson, Christopher, ‘The Tantric Ganesa: Texts Preserved in the
Tibetan Canon’ in Robert L. Brown, ed., Ganesh: Studies of an Asian
God, State University of New York Press, Albany, 1991, pp. 235-76.

Winternitz, Maurice, A History of Indian Literature, 3 vols., 1st edn., Delhi,
1981, rpt, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1988.

———- ‘Gane§a in the Mahabharata’, /RAS, 1898, No. 3, pp. 380-4.

——— ‘Notes on the GuhyasamajaTantra and the Age of Tantras’, JHQ,
Vol. 9, No. 1, Mar. 1933, pp. 1-10.

Woodcock, George, The Greeks in India, Faber and Faber, London, 1966.

Zeuner, Frederick E., A History of Domesticated Animals, London, 1963.

Zimmer, Heinrich, Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civilization,
Pantheon Books, New York, 1962.

——— The Art of Indian Asia, 2 vols., New York, 1955.

Zvelebil, K.V., Tamil Traditions on Subrahmanya-Murugan, Insutute of Asian
Studies, Madras, 1991.

--- Page 281 ---
Index
Abaneni, 151 Akra (NWFP, Pakistan), 121
abhaya mudra, 190, 194 aksa, 199
Abhilashitarthacintamani, 204 Alakere, 168
Abhiras, 153 Alamar Selvam, 164
abhiseka, 73, 155, 160, 216-18; abhiseka Alavrksa Eyarkai Temple, Madras, 232
patra, 221 Alexander, 47, 62
Gcarya, 86 Alinaatta Jataka, 24, 58
Achaemenid culture, 42 Allahdino (Pakistan), 43, 51
Achelous, 52 Allchin, Bridget and Raymond, 53
Adianta Prabhi, 236 Alwar, 155
Adipurana, 161 Amarakantaka (mountain), 134
Adi Sankara, 238 Amarakosa, 85
Aditya (the sun), 95, 96 Amaravati, 27, 103-4, 134, 165, 251
Adityas (twelve), 129 Amber (Rajasthan), 151
Advaita Vedanta, 35, 176, 198 Ambika, 28, 96, 100, 123, 240
Afghanistan, 54, 61, 140n41, 248 Amdalli (Karnataka), 36
Afghan invasions, 181, 214 Amitabha, 183-4
Africa, African tribes, African myths, Amoghavajra, 181
45-6 AmreSvara temple, Mandhata, MP, 32,
Agama(s), 20, 22-3, 32-5, 70, 105, 160, 201
162, 164, 166, 179-80, 186-7, 189-92, amrta kalasa, 235
196-202, 219-21, 232, 234, 236, 238; amsavatara, 132
Agamic precepts, 237 Anandagiri, 35, 176, 198
Agathocles, 62 Ananda Vinayaka temple (Sri), Madras,
Aghorasivacarya, 160 210n124, 233, 236
Agni, 68, 88, 123 Ancestor worship, 50
Agni Purana, 129, 136, 234 Andhaka(s), 97; Andhakasura, 97, 122
Ahmadnagar, 236 Andher, (stupa at) 85
Ahmedabad, 224 Andhra Pradesh, 21, 66, 167-8, 178, 203,
Aias, 62 249, 254
Aihole, 123 Ane (gotra) 45, see also gotras
Airavata/Elapattra, 18, 67, 102, 122,133, Anegudde Sri Vinayaka temple,
247; lineage of, 68-9, 105, 127-8 Kumbhasi, Karnataka, 193-4, 221-2
Ajatasatru, 56 Angalamma, 67
Ajita, 156 animal cults, 24; emblems, 248; spirits,
Ajttagama, 33, 34, 160-2, 189, 192, 233 248
Ajitanatha, 74 Anjana, 68
Ajivikas, 97 Afijana-vasabho, 59

--- Page 282 ---
INDEX 283
Anjaneya, 236, see also Hanuman Avighna firtha, (UP) 177
Anjaneya temple, Gumballi, Karnataka, —_ axe, 183
168 Axes, 63
ankusa, 190, see also goad Axilises, 63
antelope, skin of, 68, 171n33; motif, 50 Azamgarh, 249
Antimachus Theos, 61
Appar, 163, 165
Aquatic plants, mouf 43 Bacchanalian festivals, 79n117
Aranyakas, 21 Bactria, 46, 61
drati, 215-16, 219, 221, 227, 233 Bada Ganesa temple, Varanasi, 229,
arcaka(s), 218, 220, 222, 232 230-1
Ardhnarisvara/Ardhanari, 113, 119, 131, Badami, 123, 163, see also Vatapi
163, 201, 239 baddhakonasana, 47
Arhants, 51 Bahamis, 205
arjuna trees, 143n134 bahuladhenuka vrata, 132
Arjunayanas, 59, 71 Baijnath (Kangra), 126, 152, 177
arka plant/root/flowers/ leaves/wood/, Baka (raksasa) , 92-3, 102
137, 233, 241, 244 Bala (goddess), 35
Arkamarkas, 92 Bala Ganapati, 187
Arthasastra, 26, 27 Bali, 17
artisan(s), 148, 149 bali, 65, 105, 234
Arya Nagarjuna, 25 Ballalesvara (Sri), 20
asadha, 137 Baluchistan, 42-3,
Asoka, 24, 27, 57-60, 62, 85, 25] banana tree (Kala Bau), 240, 247
Asokan incriptions, 247 Banaras, 74, 91, see also Kasi and
asramas, 21, 112, 192 Varanasi
ass, 24] Banawali (Haryana), 44
Assavatika, 61 Banerjea, J.N., 61
Assyrian culture, 42 Bangalore, 36, 188, 222
Astakinoi (tribe), 46 banias, 153, see also Jainas, merchants/
astavindyakas, 20; astavindyaka temples/ merchant community, trade/ traders,
shrines, 30-1, 36-7, 143n153, 203, vanijya and vanik(s)
204, 206, 215-17, 223, 226, 227-8, bankers, 152-3
232, 236 Bannu plain (Pakistan), 42
asura(s), 69, 88, 94, 113, 115-17, 125, | Bansi (Rajasthan), 150
138, 200, 224, 249 Bara, 43
Asutosh Museum, Calcutta, 185 bard, 67
asvamedha, 25, 64-5 Basham, A.L., 13
asvayuj, 239 Bastar, 79n112
Atharva Veda, 21, 68, 219, 241 Baudhayana Dharmasitra, 109n88
Atre, 48, 50 Baudhayana Grhyasesasitra, 109n88
Audumbaras, 59, 71 Bedarahalli/Byadarahalli (Karnataka),
Aurangabad, 180 167
Avalokitesvara, Aryavalokitesvara, 182-5, bel fruit, 218
189, 253 Bengal, 23, 126, 136, 185, 240, 247,
Avalon, 34 255n1; East Bengal, 47; West Bengal,
avatara(s), 188, 200, 224, 233, 237 214
avidyda, 94 Bhadrakali, 241

--- Page 283 ---
284 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
bhadrapada, 128, 132, 137, 199; boar, 69, 223; symbol of male fertility,
bhadrapada suddha chauthi, 168, see 52
also caturthi, Ganesa caturthi and — Bodh-Gaya, 58, 72
Vinayaka caturthi Bodhi tree, 247
Bhagavata Purana, 124 Bodhisattva(s), 57-8, 62, 72, 182-4, 189
Bhagavat, 147 Bombay, 36, 217, 237
Bhairavakonda Inscription, 152 Bopearachchi, Osmund, 63
Bhairava (form of Siva) 117, 128, 142; | Borneo, 17
Bhairava-Siva, 183; sixtv-four Brahma, 14, 945, 115, 122, 138, 191,
Bhairavas, 116 200-1, 223, 230, 239
Bhaja Govindam, 35 Brahma Purana, 126, 132
bhakta(s), 127, 147, 163 brahmadeyas, 160
Bhakta Ganapati, 187 Brahmadhirayar, 166
bhakti, bhakti movement, 112, 127, 197; — brahma-ksatva status, 154
bhakti ideal, 165, 186; bhaktitradiuon, bradhmana(s) (caste), 19-21, 45, 90, 93-4,
22 101, 114, 129, 138-9, 147, 149, 153-
Bhaktisataka of Ramachandra, 94 4, 160, 164-6, 168, 171n33, 177, 186,
Bhandaris, 221 192, 196-8, 204, 216, 223, 225-6, 231,
Bharadvaja (gotra), 45 233, 241, 246, 252, 253; Bhargava
Bharati (goddess) 158 brahmanas, 153; brahamana priests in
Bharhut (stupa), 24, 27, 68, 71, 81n174, Ganapati temples, 216; Desastha
87 Rgvedi brahmanas, 216, 217, Dubes,
bhasma, 218, 222 Tewaris and Surjupalli dbrahmanas,
Bhattacharji, Sukuman, 24-5 229, Embrandnis, 235; Havig Rgved:
Bhavisya Purana, 124, 130, 137 brahmanas, 220; Kananjia brahmanas,
Bhida (goddess), 35 228-9; Karada brahmanas, 217; from
Bhima (one of the Pandavas), 222 Kashmir, 91; Konkanastha or
Bhima river, 216 Chitpavan brdhmanas, 205, 223-4;
Bhimasvamin, 122 Konkanastha Rgvedt brahmanas, 213;
Bhinmal (Rajasthan), 150 Kota Rgved: brahmanas, 217, Madhava
Bhiru, 92 Saraswat brahmanas, 223; Maga
Bhisma, 98 brahmanas, 154; Maitrayaniya
Bhonsle, Sri Raghuji, 206 brahmanas, 102, 105; Namboodiris,
Bhrgu, 169 234; Sakadvipiya brdhmanas, 154;
Bhudevi, 230 Shivalli brdhkmanas, 45; smarta
bhuktu, 229 brahmanas, 198, 220, 228, 243; Smdrta
Bhumiara, 104 Sarasvats; Gauda Saraswats, 223;
bhiimisparsa mudra, 185 Sukla Yajurvedi smarta brahmanas,
bhitas, 27, 92, 95, 99, 129; bhiutagana, 221; Vaisnava brahmanas, 221, 223
Q8; bhutaraksasas, 97 Bréhmanas, (texts) 21
Brhaddharma Purana, 124 Brahmanaspati, 219
Brhadisvara temple, Thanjavur, TN, 164 = Brahmanaspati sukta, 219
Bhrngi/Bhrngin, 122, 129, 133 Brahmanda Purana, 94, 159
Bihar, 185, 214, 250; east Bihar, 223 brahmandas, 200
Bijapur, 205 Brahmanism, Brahmanical religion, 13,
iniva leaves, 222 21-2, 27, 56, 62, 67, 72, 74, 99, 102,
Bimbisara, king of Magadha, 55 184, 198, 246, 248, 250-1; art 75;
bird(s), 181; motif of, 43 context, 117, 135, 191, 241-2, 248,

--- Page 284 ---
INDEX 285
250-2; culture, 111, 113; deities, 47, tradition, 24; texts/literature, 23, 46,
85, 94-5, 111, 119, 149, 254; 55, 69, 87, 121, 133, 159; votive
fold, 129; framework/fold, 17-18; inscriptions, 151
guardian deities/lokapalas, 88, 148; _ buffalo, 65, 69, 116-19, 188, 249; horns,
literature, 21, 56, 88, 92, 99, 121; 43, 47; images/figurines, 53; motif,
mythology, 54; norms, 137, 198; 47-8: sacrifice, 66-7, 249; vahana, 48;
pantheon, 92, 96, 227, 252; practices, demon, 249
135; rites, 138; sects, 131; shrines/ _ bull(s), 52, 247; motif, 42-4, 50, 58, 63,
temples, 163-4; society, 21, 113; texts, 119; as part of a composite creature,
22, 42, 95, 121, 191, tradition, 102, 44, 50; bull deity, 116; symbol of
112, 183, 191 male fertility, 51-2; chariot driven by
Brahman, (all-pervading soul and spirit two bulls, 53; sacred bull, 123
of the universe), 14, 31, 191, 197, Burzahom, 43
201, 215, 219, 239
brahmardaksasas, 97 Caitanya, 22, 36
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 146 cakra, 194
Brahmavaivarta Purdna, 126, 240 Calukya(s), 156, 158, 163, 164; of
Brahmavati, 146 Badami, 114; of Kalyana, 204
Bronze Age, 76n32 camaradharas, 73-4
Brown, Robert L., 17, 18 Cambodia, 121
Brhaspati, 97, 198 camels, 92
Buddha, 23-4, 46-7, 55-7, 60, 62, 69, 71- | Canda (Siva's gana) 114, 129
2, 85, 88, 94-5, 101, 118, 183, 185, Candala(s), 56, 85, 190, 203
189, 198, 243, 247-8, 251-2; image(s) | Candali (goddess), 190
of, 34, 104, 149, 180, 189; symbols candan, 222, see also sandal paste
representing the principal episodes Candika (goddess), 152
of his life, 57-8; tooth relic, 79n112 Candinath temple, Bhinmal, Rajasthan,
Buddhas, 182 150
Buddhakapala, 184 Cashman, Richard, 19
Buddhi (consort of Ganapati), 32, 126- — caturmaras, 94
7,159, 192, 201, 204, 225, 230, 239, caturthi, 132, 137, 199, 228, see also
242, 251 bhadrapada caturthi, Gane$a caturthi,
Buddhism/ Buddhist religion/Bud- sankasta caturthi and Vinayaka
dhist(s), 13-15, 17-18, 23-4, 26-7, caturthi
33, 51, 55, 56, 58, 60-2, 70, 71, 75, Cave temples, Vallam, TN, 163
87-8, 91-4, 101, 104, 111, 147, 148, | Chaddanta Jataka, 58, 70
149, 150, 180, 184-5, 189, 197, 233, | Chakrasamvara, 189
246, 247, 251-3; art, 70, 72, 74, 89, Champa, 185
118, 165; canon(s), 181; context, | Chanhu-daro, 434, 50, 53
147, 180, 191, 247; deities, 48, 94; chatha festival, 250
Ganapatya texts, 181, 186; icono- China, 17, 181, 184-6
graphy, 105; influence, 214, monks, Chinmayananda (Swami), 238
91; motifs, 165; mythology/legends, Christianity, 252
27, 54, 56-7, 60, 74, 88; pantheon, _Cincvad, 36, 204, 215-18, 227, 239
88, 92: sects, 198, 253; saint/spiritual Cintamani, Cintamani Ganapati, Sri
teacher, 84; samgha, 93; schism, 26; Cintamani, 20, 203, 229
sources, 60, 150; Tantras/Tantric —cintdmani, (jewel) 121, 181, 230, place
texts, 20, 122, 159, 183-4, 197; in Kolar Distt., Karnataka, 182

--- Page 285 ---
286 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Cintamaniksetra  (Yeotmal Distt, |Dhanada, Dhanadata Deva, 147, 152, see
Maharashtra), 203, see also Kadamba- also Kubera
pura, Kadambgirigrama and Kalamb _ Dhaneévara, 150, see also Manibhadra
cobra(s), 73, 135 Dharkkata, Dharkatas, 153, 158
Cochin, 37, 223, 234 dharma, 112, 137, 247
Cola(s), 117, 160, 162, 164, 166-8, 179, | dharmacakra, 73
187, 197; temples, 117 Dharma Sastras, 149
Coomaraswamy, Ananda K., 104 Dharma Sutras, 21
copper, 53 Dhauli rock-edicts (Orissa), 57, 59
coral, 137 Dhavalikar M.K., 53, 104
Courtright, Paul B., 18-20, 30, 35 dhotis (of pujaris), 218-19
cow, 132 Dhrtarastra (a Naga), 68, 88
Cretan culture, 42 Dhamravarna (form of Ganapati), 200
crocodile(s), 70; motif, 50 Dhundhi Ganapati, 229; Dhundhiraja
Cyrus the Great, 79n117 Vinayaka, 229
Dharta, 86; Dhurta Kalpa (hymn), 86-7
Daimabad (Maharashua), 53 Dhusara, 153
daitya(s), 97, 118, 138 dhyana (of Ganapati), 70
dakinis, 97 Dhyani Buddhas, 189
Daksa, 98, 114, 122, 127 Digambara monks/sect, 157, 162
danava(s), 92, 112, 115 diggajas, 68, 88, 98, 102
danda, 202 Digha Nikéya, 27, 87
Dandisvara, 152, 178 dignagas, 70, 88, 98, 102
Dantapura, 59, see also Kalinga diksd, 199, 237
Dantesvari, 79n112 Candika (goddess), Dionysus, 52
152-3 Dipankarasrijfiana, 181
Dantewara, 79n112 Dipavali, 250
Danti/Dantn, 28-9, 60, 79n112, 100-2,  Diptagama, 33, 161, 189, 191, 192
112, 137-8 Dirghatapas, 70
darsan (at Ganapati temple), 229, 231 Diskalkar, D.B., 159
Dasabhuja Ganapati temple, Pune, 206, | Divodasa, 229
215, 239 Doab, 54, 59
DaSaratha, 200 dog (mouf). 50
Deccan, 53 Dombiheruka of Magadha, 181
Dethi Sultanates, 205 dragon, 66
Demeuwnius I], 61 Drury, Nevill, 48
Deodhar, Rajbhau, 226 Dualistic school of philosophy, 191
Deogarh, 123 Dummedha Jataka, 58, 70
Deoria, 249 Durga, 28, 31, 47, 115-16, 131, 164,
Desa region (Maharashtra), 217 180, 188, 200, 230, 240, 247, 249,
deva(s), 90, 94, 97, 112, 129, 133, 138, 251; Durga puja, 240, 255n];
189 Durgabhaktitarangini, 196; Durga
Devasakha, 151, see alsu Kubera Sukta, 221
Devasena (consort of Karttikeya), 127 Durga Vinayaka temple, Varanasi, 229
Devayajana, 86, 90, 93 durva grass, 219, 222, 229, 233
devis(s), 160-2, 188, 190, 199, 239-4] dusta-raudra-devatas, 94
Devi Rahasya, 35, 188, 190 Dutch sources, 234
Dhakad, 153 dvuarapala(s), 166, 170, 186

--- Page 286 ---
INDEX 287
Dvapara yuga, 13, 200 Fa-Hien, 57, 248
Farquhar, J.N., 28, 30, 32, 35

eagle (motif), 43 fertility rites, 241, 249
earth, 184, 223, 240-2, 250 fire, 181
ecology, 150 fish(es), 51, 86, 149, 181; motif, 43, 70
Edapilli, Rajas of, 234; palace, 234 flesh and flesh offerings, 89, 148, 187,
Ekadanta (epithet of Ganapati), 128, 203, see also sacrifice

200 folk tradition, memory, 15, 240-1, 249;
Elephanta, 123 rituals, 249, 251
elephant(s), 23, 43-4, 50, 64-5, 67-75

passim, 89, 92, 96, 101, 104, 109n102,  gada, 190, 194

114-19, 122, 125, 128, 148, 150-1, gaja, 54, 70, 81n174, see also elephant

155-6, 160, 181-2, 188, 241, 248; in| Gaja Alvar, 194

African context, 45: as a composite Gajanana, 159, 200, 224

creature, 44; elephant cow, 46; Gajabhimika, 46, 61

elephant deity, sacred elephant, 24 Gajahvaya, 55

5, 28, 61-3, 67, 69-70, 84, 99-103, 114 Gajakarna, 100

23 passim, 133-4, 136, 155, 246, 251-  Gajalaksmi, 64, 151, 157, 160, 188

2; elephant head/scalp, hide, skin Gajamukhasura, 118

63, 84, 89, 115-18, 125, 132, 156,201; Gajapura, 55

elephant worship/cult, 25, 61, 64, | Gajasahvaya, 55

74, 79n112, 105; elephant-headed = gajasampdadana rite, 26, 36

deity/figure, 29, 97, 99, 109n102, —gaja Sastra, 25

111, 118-19, 129, 134, 137, 247; Gajasura, 115-18, 121, 165, 200

elephants of the quarters, 68 (see also Gajasya, 126, 152

diggajas); elephant demon, 112,116, | Gajavaktra, 128

118, 249; festival, 24-5, 62, 64-6, 248, Gana (epithet of Ganapati), 20

250; goddess in form of elephant, gana(s), 28, 90, 97-102, 105, 111, 113

66 (see also Matangi); motif of, 42-5, 15, 117, 122-9, 136, 148, 163, 165,

47-9, 54, 57-8, 61, 63, 71, 73; in 188, 252; gana homa, 219, 221, 228

mythology, 25, 45-6, 57, 60; sacrifice, | Ganadhipa, 98, 174n86

65, 249; semen, stool, blood and  Ganadhipati, 168

meat, 46, 65; six-tusked elephant, 24, | Gananayaka, 97

72, 81n174; terracotta masks/ Ganapa Tantrika tradition, 179

figurines, images, 43, 53, 104, 249- Ganapati, 13,15-7, 22-3, 30-3, 42, 51, 62-

50; as symbol, 54, 56, 58, 64; rituals, 4, 66, 70, 74, 75, 84, 86, 89, 94-105,

54, 62, 67; vahana, 67, 68, 69, 157; 111-12, 114, 116, 118, 121-37, 143,

people named after it, 55 (see also 151-70 passim, 186-8, 191, 196-9, 201,

Matangas); white elephant, 57, 67, 217, 235-6, 242, 247, 250, 253;

69, 71, 189 ardhanadrigfvara form, 32; as
Eliade, Mircea, 51 brahmacarin, 204, 230, 236, 241, 250;
Ellamma, 67 Brahmanical Ganapati, 19, 65, 179,
Ellora, 112, 117, 123 183, 219, 226, 248, 250, 253-4; as
epic(s), epic literature, 21, 88, 98, 100, Brahman, 31, 205; Buddhist

157, 220 Ganapati, 182-3; Buddhist Tantric
Ernakulam, 37 Ganapati, 65; Burmese Ganapati,
Eucratides, 61 185; dual form, 184; Cham Ganapau,
Europeans, 35 185; as a child, 123-4; festivals, 215,

--- Page 287 ---
288 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
225; as grhastha, 230, 236, 250, Gandhara, 47, 60, 63, 119, 146
associated with goddess, 240; images  gandharvas, 97
of, 218; Khmer Ganapati 185; as  Gane$a, Sn GaneéSa, 20, 30, 85, 98, 102,
Lord of Knowledge, 225; his 104, 118, 128-9, 133, 136-7, 157, 200;
mantra(s) and mila mantras, 34, 220- Cambodian Ganesa, 120; Ganeéga
1, 240; manufacturers of Ganapati caturthi, 19, 137, 225-7, 231-4, 239,
statues, 37; mythology, 29, 33; his 244; GaneSa jayank, 215, 228-9; hsetra
pantheon, 239; Puranic Ganapati, 203; temples, 164
188; as the divine Purusa, 219; sacred GanesSas, 109n102, 203
sites/tirthas, 32, 203; stotras, 227; GaneSa-bdavadi, 157
syncretic Ganapati, 184; Tantric Ganefa calisa, 236
form, 185; temples, 16, 20, 36, 133, -Ganega Ghat, 122
143n153, 169, 178-9, 187, 190, 194, GaneSagiri, 122
197, 206, 214, 220-1, 223, 226, 231, Ganesa Gita, 224, 231
233, 235, 237, 243-4; with two tusks, | GaneSa Nataraja temple, Madurai, 135
119, 122; Vaisnava Ganapati, 194; as GaneSapura, 203
an incarnation of Visnu, 234; Ganesa Purana, 20, 30-3, 35, 169, 180,
valamburt/balamun/ straight trunk 192, 198-206 passim, 215, 219, 231-3,
Ganapati, 202, 238, 254; vratas, 239; 235
worship, 20, 31, 36, 70, 130, 215,241, | Ganega temple, Mamallapuram, 164
see also Ganesa and Vinayaka GaneéSar Inscription, 158
Ganapatis, 84, 167; group of thirty-four GaneSsvara(s), 98-9, 101, 159
194 GaneSavara-Vinayakas, 27, 98-9, 101, 111
Ganapati temple, Kasturba Road, Ganesavimarsini, 36
Bangalore, 231, 256 Ganes-bal, 122
Ganapatihrdaya mantra, 184 Ganga,(goddess) 68, 129, 230; temple
Ganapati-mantrasadhand, 156 in Ganauli village, Gujarat, 158
Ganapati Sahasrandma, 219, 22) Ganga river, 55
Ganapati Upanisad, 219 Gangetic/Ganga plain, Ganga/middle
Ganapati-Vinayaka, 66, 75, 93, 99-104, Ganga basin, 47, 54, 60, 91, 102,
109n88, 109n102, 118, 119, 122, 130, 107n43, 146
138, 152, 155, 251 garbhagrha(of Ganapati temple), 217
Ganapatyas, 15-16, 19, 20, 22-3, 29, 30 Gardez, 119, 140n41
1, 37, 176, 179-80, 188, 196-7, 199, Garuda, 85
21415, 242-3, 254; meaning of the Gathasaptasati, 104
term today, 215, 220, 239; Buddhist Gauri, 228, 240, 251
Ganapatyas, 186, 214; Ganapatya Gaurivrata, 239
Puranas, 100, 203, 216, 218, 230, Gautami river, 177
243, literature/texts, 179, 230, 237- Gaya, 134
8; tradition, 220, 243; smdrta Gayadhara of Gaya, 182
Ganapatyas, 35, 180, 197, 199, 202- _ gayatri(s), 28, 101, 137-8, 235
3, 206, 214, 219, 221, 243, 254; Getty, Alice, 17, 20, 104, 181, 185
Upapuranas, 23 ghada, 250
Ganasa, 146-8 ghanal (crocodile), motif, 44
Ganauli (Ahmedabad Distt, Gujarat), | Ghatiyala, 95, 153, see also Kakkuka and
158 Pratiharas
gana-yajin, 90 ghosts, 90
gana yajna, 90 Gilgamesh (motif), 49

--- Page 288 ---
INDEX 289
Girijatmaja (Sri), 20 Guhagraja, 123, 128
Girnar rock edit (Gujarat), 57 guhyakas, 97, 143n134
Gita, Bhaguad Gita, 201 guild, 146, 167; merchant guild 151;
Gita Govinda, 22 guild of traders, 170
Goa, 178, 223 Gujarat, 43, 54, 91, 112, 135-6, 156-8,
goad (elephant), 63, 151, 156, 171n33 177, 202
goat, 68; motif, 43 Gumla, 43
gods, 248 Gumballi, 168
Goddess(es), 22, 47, 51, 66-7, 111, 114 | Gundadhya, 107n43
15, 123, 128-30, 132, 134-5, 155, 160- Gupta period, post-Gupta period, 19, 29,
2, 239-41, 243, 248, 249, 251, 255n1; 72, 74, 104, 121, 131; art, 104, 119,
city goddess, 61; cults, 243; Earth 171n35; temples, 121; images, 151
Goddess/ Mother, 50-1, 64, 123,151, | Gurav(s), 216-17
240, 250; elephant goddess, 249; Gurjara, 154; Gurjarapratihara lineage,
festivals, 67; Mother goddess, 43, 155
79n112; pantheon, 29; sacred spots, guru, 166, 183, 257
249; seven goddesses, 144n164; gurukkal(s), 232
temples/shrines of the goddess, 217, | Guruvayoor, 37; temple in Kerala, 238
240; tribal goddesses, 240; village Gwalior, 61, 146
goddesses, 119, 249; vratas, 239
Gokarna (Karnataka), 36-7, 178, 206, |Haimavata school, 85, 92
218, 221, 223, 229, 231, 240 Halayudhastotra, 32, 201
Golden Vinayaka temple, Madras, 233, Hanuman, 130, 131, 176, 183, 198, 236;
236 calisd, 236, also see Anjaneya
Golkonda, 205 Harappa, Harappan sites, 43-4, 52-3,
goloka, 132 246; culture/civilization, 23 43, 44,
Gomal valley, 42 47, 50-1, 246; Early/Mature/Late
Gonda, J., 26, 33 and Post Harappan period, 42, 46-7,
Gopinatha Rao, T.A., 33 53-4, 246, 247, citadels, 54; motifs,
gopis, 131 48; religion, 46-7, 53, 248; seals, 45-
Gorakhpur, 249 6, 49, 50
Gosavi, Moraya, 203, 204-6, 227, 238, Haridra Ganapati, 161; sect, 35, 176,
243; hagiological tradition, 204; his 180, 192, 196
samadhi, 217-18, 227 Haridraganapatimatavadi, 196
gostha, 147 Hari-Hara, 131, 201
Gotama (gotra), 45 Hariparbat Hill, 122
Gotiputa, 147 Haryana, 43
gotra(s), 45, 158 hasti, hastin, 55, 70, 81n174; king Hastin
govatika, 61 of Paurava dynasty, 55
Gowdas (caste), 221 Hastigrama, 55
graha(s), 87, 96, 144n164; graha dosa,105 —- Hastimukha, 101, 109n88
grama devata, 224, 236 Hastinapura, 55, 59, 60
Granoff, Phyilis, 30 Hastinayana (tribe), 47
Greece, 60 Hastipada, 55
Greek mythology, 52, 61 Hastipisacisa, 105
Grhya Sutras, 21, 26 Hastipisaci, 105
Guha, 126, see also Karttikeya, Kumara, — Hastisahvaya, 55
Skanda and Subrahmanya Hastydyurveda, 25, 64, 65-6

--- Page 289 ---
290 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
hatta, 153, 155 Indus valley/ civilization, 42, 54; early/
hatthivatika, 61 Mature Indus period, 42-3, 246, see
Hathi Mai, 250, see also goddess and also Harappa
Matangi Iravan, 68
Hazra, R.C., 30, 32 Igana, 129
Heliocles II, 63 Isanasiva, 34
Heracles, 51, 63 [snasivagurudevapaddhan, 34-5, 190-1
Heramba, Hairamba, Heramba Islam, 252
Ganapati, 116, 128, 177, 183, 188 —ista devata, 215, 224
90, 194, 222, 243, 249 itthasa-Purdna tradition, 125
Heramba Ganapati sect, Heramba _ lyer(s), 233, 244
Ganapatyas, Herambas, 35, 188, 190,
192, 197 Jagaddala, 185
Heras, 17, 20 Jagannatha temple, Orissa, 79n106
Hermaeus, 62 Jagdalpur (MP), 79n112
Heruka, 189 Jainism, 13-15, 34, 74, 91, 111, 147, 154,
Himalayas, 98 162-3, 187, 246, 247
Hinduism, 13,17, 22, 252 Jaina/Jainas, 18, 74, 97, 149, 154, 157-8,
Hindu(s), 22, 94, 216, 226; cults, 252; 170, 202; context, 147; cosmography,
mind, 194; social order, 252; 156; deities, 48; iconography, 73;
temples, 205 images 104; monasteries, 151;
Hittite culture, 42 mythology, 54; pantheon, 74, 156,
Holeya, 66 158; traders/merchants/mercantile
homa(s), 65, 89, 105, 203, 235; Ganapati community, 151, 158, 162, 164, 253;
homa, 232, see also gana-homa tradition, 74; sculpture, 150; shrines/
horn (symbolism), 51] temples, 156-7; structure, 153; stupas,
horse, 64, 200, 241, 248; mouf, 57 104; Svetambaras, 147, 156-7
Hoysalesvara temple, Karnataka, 167 Jaipur, 152, 157
Hsuan Tsang, 60, 62, 70, 89, 165 Jat Santoshi Ma, 16, 230
Huviska, 119 Jambha, 99
Jambhaka(s), 92
Idagunji, Idakufja, Idagunyjige Jambudvipa, 89
(Karnataka), 36-7, 178, 206,218,221, Jambu Ganapati temple (Sri),
228, 231 Bangalore, 221
Idar, 158 janapadas, 59, 88
Iksavaku, 132 Japa mala, japa, 220
Indeya Benaka (Vinayaka), 167-8, see also Japan, 17, 184-6
Ganapau, Ganesa, Vinayaka Jataka(s), Jataka stories, 23-4, 58, 60, 71,
India, 20 87, 117, 148
Indian culture, 42; context, 45 jatamukuta, 185
Indian mythology, 51 Java, 17, 185
Indo-Aryans, 146 Jha, V.N., 56
Indologists, 48 jimitas, 69
Indra, 18, 61, 67-9, 88, 94, 98, 113, 125, Jina, 34, 73-4, 104, 156
134, 138, 151, 156, 183, 198, 247 vansamadhi, 204
Indrani, 61 Jivaskas, 94
Indraprastha/Indapatta city/kingdom, —jrdna yoga, 201
59 Jnanesvar, 31, 224

--- Page 290 ---
INDEX 291
Jranesvani, 205, 224 Kanthkot (Gujarat), 158
Jodhpur/Jodhpur Distt., 153-4 Kapadisa, 129
Jogubai, 116 Kapalikas, 209n93
Johar (Maharashtra), 239 hapi, 61
Junnar, 216 Kapilavastu, 58
pyestha (month), 132, 239 Kapisa, Kapisa, Kapisa, Kapiga, (modern
Junagarh, 60 Begram, Afghanistan) 47, 60, 61-2,
Jvalamukhi, 35 70, 79n112, 119, 121, 182, 248;
goddess of Kapisa, 69
Kabul, Kabul Valley, 63, 119 Kapigsam/Kapisam, 79n117
Kadas, 59 Karad (Maharashtra), 217, see also
Kadambari forest, 73 brahmanas
Kadambapura, Kadambgirigrama, Karakandu, king of Campa, 73
Kalamb (Maharashtra), 203 Karanagama, 33
Kadambas (kings), 178-9; Mayura- karmakdnda, 221
varman, 220 karma yoga, 201
Kafiristan, 107n45 Karnataka, 21, 23, 36, 67, 112, 167-8,
Kailaga temple (Ellora), 112, see also 177-9, 203, 205, 216, 218, 220-2, 225,
Ellora 228, 230-1, 234-6, 238, 241, 243, 254
Kailasa, Mount, 128 Karpatas, 94
Kakar, Sudhir, 94 Karpuracarita Bhana (of Vatsaraja) 150
Kakatiya(s), Rudradeva, 168 Karttikeya, 96, 125-7, 129, 134, 136,
Kakkuka (king) of the Prathara dynasty, 172n40, 177, 241, see also Kumara,
95, 153-4, 168 Mahasena, Skanda, Subrahmanya
Kakumranu, 178 and Swami
Kalachuris, 32; Prithvideva II, 170n40 Kasbah Ganapati temple, Pune, 236
Kalaha, 92 Kashmir, 23, 34, 133, 150, 189, 223;
Kalakatankata, 87 brahmanas of, 91
kalasa, 120, 160 Kadi, 56, 63, 70, 115, 118, 203, 229; king
Kali (goddess), 118 of Kaéi, 58, 62; Kasi personified as
Kali (mountain), 73 goddess, 229, see also Banaras and
Kalibangan (Rajasthan), 43-4; citadels, Varanasi
54 Kastha, 99
Kalinga, 59-60, 74 Kasyapa (gotra), 45
Kaki yuga, 13, 138, 240 Katankata, 87
kalpa(s), 14, 124, 215 Kathaka Grhya Sitra, 91
kalpalata, 160 Katyuri, 177
Kalsi (Uttar Pradesh), 57, 59 Kausambi, 107n43, 147
Kama, 200 Kaveri, 164
Kamikagama, 33-4, 233 Keith, A.B., 25
Kanauj, 155 keora, 137
Kandy (Sri Lanka), 60 Kerala, 25, 34, 37-8, 170, 216, 219, 234,
Kane, P.V., 26, 28, 30 235, 238
Kangi-ten, 184 ketaka plant/flower, 137, 223
Kangra Distt, 59 Ketaki Ganapati temple, Gokarna,
Kankandighi (West Bengal), 136 Karnataka, 223
Kantaka Celinga stupa (Sri Lanka), 72, Ketumala (old Bactria), 46, 61
165 kevalajnana, 87

--- Page 291 ---
292 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
kevalas, 247, see also caityas Kumbhakonam, 164
Khadgas (rhinoceros) tribe, 47 kumbhanda-ganendras, 87
khadgavisana, 51 Kumbhanria (Gujarat), 158
kheta, 189, 192 Kumbhasi (Karnataka), 36-7, 222
kilakastotra, 201 kumbhin, 64
Kiranadgama, 34 kumbhini, 64
Kirata, 56 Kumbhira, 87
Kirti, 151 Kumud, 68
Kirtimukha, 129 kunda, 203
kohi (caste), 226 Kung-hsien (China), 181
Konkan, 177, 217 hunyara, 81n174
Korravai, 164 Kurma Purana, 97
Kosala, 45, 47, 55, 134; ruling family of = kurmdsana, 47
KoSala, 56; king of Kosala, 58 Kurnool Distt., 134
Kota (near Mangalore), 221 Kuru kingdom, 59; family, 55
Kot Diji (Pakistan), 43 Kurudhamma Jataka, 24, 59
Kottayam, 169 Kurudumale (Karnataka) 36-7, 221, 228,
Kota-Vinayakapura, 168 236
Kraunica ( deity), 134 Kurus, 59
Kraufica mountain, 126 kusa grass, 219
Krsnaraya, 168 Kusana(s), 104; period, 72, 103, 104,
Knyakramadyoti, 160 113, 119, 150; king, 119
Krodha, 200 Kusika, 112
Krsna, 1245, 131, 143n134, 193-5, 200, _ Kusinagara, 58, 87
222, 240, 243 kusmanda/kumbhanda, kusmandas, 87-91,
Krsnaraja Wodeyar IV, 169 93, 98, 102, 106, 129, 133; kusmanda
Krsna Yajur Veda, 18, 90-1, 109n88, 192, homa, 89
233 Kusmandarajaputra, 86, 92
Krta yuga, 13, 200 Kutch, 43
Krutikas, 123 Kutimukha, 99
KAyrittivasesvara, 115
Krtyakalpataru, 122 Labha (son of Ganapati), 126, 159, 230
ksatnya, 88, 125, 149, 153, 171n33, 199, — laguda (club), 202
217 Laksmana, 130, 154
Ksema (son of Ganapati), 126, 159, 230 — Laksmi, 18, 69, 150-1, 155-6, 158, 160,
ksetra 199, 203; ksetra viveka, 201; ksetra 188, 225, 230, 239-40, 251
upadhyayas, 218 Laksmipati, 242
ksetrapalas, 97 Laksmi-Ganapati, 160, 188
Kuan-shi-ttien, 184 Laksmi-Narayana, 201
Kubera, 18, 88, 93, 99, 131, 143n134,  Lakuli/Lakulisa, 112, 120, 123, 136, 202,
146, 148-52, 155-9, 176, 198, 242 243; Lakuliga subsect of the Saivas,
kubjaka, 192 112
kuladevata, 223° Lalita (goddess), 241
Kumara (epithet of Skanda-Karttikeya), — Lalitagama, 34
98; signifying a young boy, 189 Lalitavistara Sutra, 27, 55-6, 97, 149
Kumaon, 177 Lambodara, 109n88, 128, 138, 166, 200
Kumara Gupta, 29 lanchana, 73-4
Kumbha, Kumbhasura, 222 Lata (Gujarat), 112

--- Page 292 ---
INDEX 293
Lenyadri (Maharashtra), 36, 203 35, 176, 192; temple(s), 175, 192;
Lewan, 43 Mahaganapati temple (Sri) 178,
Licchavis, 88 Bangalore, 224
Lidar river, 122 Mahaganapati temple, Calicut, 235
linga, Sivalinga, 59, 93, 100, 115-16, 118- Mahaganapatimatavadi, 196
19, 121, 128, 135, 165, 187,218,221,  Mahaganapati Tantra, 191
223 mahajanas, 153, 167, see also bantas,
Linga Purana, 126, 128, 138 merchants, trade/traders, vanyya
lion(s) 116, 181, 190, 200, 247, 249; and vaniks
Asokan lions, 58; lion motif, 58; lion Mahakala, 123, 129, 209n93
mount, 183; tion throne, 189 Mahakaya, 28, 100, 116
Lohitaksa, 92 Mahamayuri, 55
loka, 192 Mahapuranas, 18, 23, 29, 187, 191, 200,
lokapalas 27, 88, 92, 94, 98, 149 229, 233
Lorenzen, David, 35 Maharaja, 88, 92, see also Kuber
Lothal, 43 Maharaja-Siri-Ganasa, 148
lotus, 151, 181 Maharajni (goddess) 35
Lumbini, 58 Mahar, 67, 225
Lydian culture, 42 Maharashtra, 19-21, 32, 37, 66, 144n174,
Lysias, 63 177-9, 183, 202-6, 215-39 passim, 243,
254
Maasai (African tribe), 45 Mahasena, 26-7, 92, 96, see also
Macdonell, 24, 26, 28 Karttikeya, Kumara, Skanda and
mace, 157 Subrahmanya
Mada, 200 Mahatmyas, 22
Maddodara, 153-4 Mahavagga of the Digha Ntkaya, 27
Madhava, 22; sect of Vaisnavas, 193 Mahavairocana, 184
Madhura Ganapati temple, Kasargod, Mahavastu, 27, 149
Kerala, 235 Mahavinayaka, 103, see also Ganapati,
Madiga community, 66 Ganesa Mahaganapati and Vinayaka
madhyadeéa, 15, 25, 104, 111 Mahavira, 74, 88, 97, 156, 158, 247
Madhya Pradesh, 177, 190 Mahavira temple, Kanthkot, 158
Madurai, 135 Mahayaksa, 148, 156
Magadha, 55, 74, 146 Mahayana Buddhism 103, 164, 185, 189
magha, 199, 239 mahayuga, 14
Magna Mater, 51 Mahendra, 88
Mahabalesvara, 178, 223 Mahendravarman, Mahendravarman |
Mahabalipuram, 165 (Pallava), 163, 187
Mahabharata, 13, 21, 27-8, 55, 57, 87, Mahesa Mantra-Kathanam, 130
92, 98-101, 111, 124, 133, 140n29, Maheévara, 90
147, 150; Santi Parva, 28, 99; Mahisasura, Mahisa, 47, 115-17, 200,
AnuSgasana Parva, 28, 99; Sabha 249: Mahisa (buffalo) - people
Parva, 28, 99; Aranyaka Parva, 28, named after it, 47
148 Mahisasuramardini, Mahisamardini, 48,
Mahad (Maharashtra), 36, 203 79n112, 119, 153
Mahadeva, 27, 92, 96 Mahodara, 100, 200, 224
Mahaganapati, Sri Mahaganapati, 20,96,  Maitraka, 135
137, 159, 169, 191, 223, 243; sect of, Maitrayani Samhita, 28, 101, 102, 137-8

--- Page 293 ---
294 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Maitrayaniya School, 91, 102, see also Manus, 29
under brakmanas Manu Smrti, 88, 90
makara, 5) maras, 94
Makkhali Gosala, 97 Marathas, 204-5, 235; Maratha state, 235;
Makutagama, 34 a caste by that name, 217, 231
Malabar, 223, 234 margasiria, 128
malas (rosaries), 199 Marpadiga, 168
Malas (caste), 67 Marshall, John, 85
Malli (nineteenth Jina), 156 Maruts, 127, 129
Mamallapuram, 164 Matanga(s), 55-7, 66, 70, 134, 190, 249;
Manasollasa, 204 (elephant) dynasty, 45-7, 55-6, 134;
Manava Grhya Sutra, 26-8, 85-6, 90-3, 95- name of a yaksa, 74, 156
6, 99, 131, 136, 144n164, 149, 183 mata-ki-sal, 153
mandala, 182, 191, 208n35 Matangalila, 24-5, 46, 65, 70
Mandana Dhusara, 153 Matanga Jataka, 56
mandapa, 152, 153, 225, 249-50 Matangi, 66, 190, 249
mandara tree, 199, 220 matha(s), 197, 235
Mandasor Distt (M.P.), 158 Mathanadeva, 155
Mandor (Rajasthan), 123, 1534 Mathura, 72, 104, 119, 132, 146, 151,
Manduka (gotra), 45 177; school of art, 104, 122, 171n35;
mangala, 132 museum, 104
Mang (caste), 67 mair(s), matrkas, 98, 123, 136
mango, 162 Matsara, 200
Manibhaddas, Manibhaddavatika, 61, Matsya incarnation of Visnu, 51
147 Matsya Purana, 66, 124, 126, 129
Manibhadra, Mani, Manibhadra Vira, Maues, 63
18, 61, 70, 92, 102, 146-50, 155-7, Mauryas, Mauryan period, 45, 72, 91
173n58 manvantara, 14
manu, as prefix, 149; signifying jewel, 155 = maya, 14, 242
Manigramam, 169 Maya Devi, 57
Manigriva, 143n134 Manyakheta, 162
Manikara, 149 Mayamata, 33, 161
Maniman, 92 Mayuresvar, Sri Mayuresvara, 20, 200
Maninaga, 70, 102, 251 Mayuresvara (name of place), 203
Manuvara, 92 Meerut district (Uttar Pradesh), 55
Maniyar Matha, 135 Meghanada, 97
Manmata, 200 Mehrgarh, 43, 54
mantra(s), mahamantra, 89, 128, 130, mela, 226
136-7, 176, 182, 184, 193, 200, 221, | Melacheri (TN), 163
227, 229; mila mantra, 222, 235; Menander, 63
mrtyunjaya mantra, 187, see also merchant(s), merchant/mercantile
gayatri(s) community or class, 18, 86, 149-55,
Mantramaharnava, 162 157, 159, 165, 169, 195-6, 253, see
Mantramahodadhi, 160 also banias, Jainas, mahdjanas, trade
Manjusri, 94 and traders, vanijyas and vaniks
Mansar, 142n98 Mewar, 156
Manu, 52 Mhasoba/Mhaskoba/Mhatoba, 48, 116

--- Page 294 ---
INDEX 295
Mihintale (Sri Lanka), 103, 109n98 Nadlai, 157
Milindapanha, 97, 147 nadus, 160
Minaksi temple, Madurai, TN, 237 naga(s), 55, 60, 66-8, 70, 72, 74, 88, 98,
Mi-so’n (Vietnam), 120 102, 105, 133-5, 155, 176, 198, 235,
misramurtayah (composite images), 201 251: deities, 68, 100, priests, 68;
Mithila, 34 kings, 69, 92, 132
Mitra, Haridas, 20 naga-mandala, 67
modaka-priya, 116 naga-panicami, 69
modaka{s), 121, 224 Nagahvaya, 55
Modha, 177 nagara, 161
Moha, 200) Nagarjuna of Nalanda, 181
Mohammedans, 35 nagaram(s), 160, 167
Mohenjo-daro, 43-4, 48, 51, 52 Nagasahvaya, 55
moksa, 205 Nagaswamy, R., 165
mole(s), mole-hill, 240 nagini, 135
monkey, 182; motif, 50 naivedya, 216, 219, 233
Moon Goddess, 52 naksatra(s), 98, 149
moon, 1334 Nala Kubera, 143n134
Moregaon, 215-18, 227; its hagiological Nalanda, 25, 181, 214
tradition, 203 nama-mantra, 203
moriya, 45, see also peacock and Mauryas’ Nandi, 17, 51, 129, 152, 172n40
Mother Earth, 64, see also goddess Nandi (African tribe), 45, 126
mountain(s), 133, 181; motif/symbol of, Nandin, 98, 100, 113-14, 116, 123, 127
42, 61, 70 nandipada, 59
mouse/mice, 119, 200, 240 Nandiévara, 98, 100, 113-14, 152, 178
Mrgendragama, 33 Nandivarman, 174n102
mrgha, 70 Nafijundeévara temple (near Mysore,
Mudaliar(s), 232 Karnataka), 169, 195
Mudgala (gotra), 45 Narada, 143n134
Mudgala_ Prakashan Mandalam, Narada Purana, 96, 126, 130, 241
Bombay, 30 Narain, A.K., 17-18, 63
Mudgala Purana, 30-2, 35, 180, 192, 198- Narmada river, 203, 218
202, 204, 206, 215-20, 224, 231, 233, Narasimha, 29, 114, 194, 224
235, 242 Narasimha Purana, 122, 132
mudra(s), 136, 201 Narasimhavarman I Mamalla (Pallava),
Mughal(s), 205, 235 163
Mukundaraja, 205 Narayana Upadhyaya, 240
mukti, 191, 229 Narayana, 25, 138
Mulajapa, 148 Narayanopanisad, 28
Mulesingesvara temple, Belur Distt., | avagrahas, 136, 222
Karnataka, 167 Navanita Ganapati, 196, sect, 176, 193,
muni, 94 196; mantra of, 193
Muruga, 164 Nayanars, 164
miusaka, 220, see also mouse, mole neem tree(s), 249
Muslim spirit/ bhita, 95; rule, 205 negama, 15]
Mycenean culture, 42 Neminatha temple, Kumbharia, 158
Mysore, 169; palace, 194 Nepal, 17, 181, 185, 214

--- Page 295 ---
296 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Neolithic cultures, 51 pallu/pella, pillaka, pile, 62
New Delhi, 244 Panangad (Kerala), 235
Niddesa Commentary of the Suttanipata, _pancaloha, 234
23-4, 60 pancamrtam, 217, pancamrtam abhiseka,
Nigantha Nataputta, 97 219, 232
Nikumbha, 133 Pancamukha Heramba Ganapati
Nila, 68, 133 temple, Bangalore, 188, 194, 222,
Nilakantha, 25 228, 237
Nilamata Purana, 133, 150 Pancamukha Vinayaka, 229
nirakara form (of Ganapati), 218 Pancaratra tradition, 11]
Nirgranthas, 94 parcayatana-GaneSa, 133
Nisumbhi, 189 paticayatana-puja, parcayatana form of
Noh (Rajasthan), 72 worship, 137, 177, 197-9, 254;
nomadic pastoralism, 146 temples, 221, 233
Northern Black Polished Ware culture, Panipatras, 92
55 Paramesvaravarman I, 164
Nrtta Ganapati, Nrtya Ganapati, 188, Parasurama, 234
243 Parasuramesvara temple (Orissa), 136
nyasas, 201 Parkham, 72, 147
Parsvamauli, 157
Oeneus, 52 Parsvanatha/ Parsva, 73, 74, 156-7
Ojhar (Maharashtra), 36, 203, 215, 217, Parvati, 42, 94, 103, 111, 114, 117-18,
223, 227, 229, 239 123-6, 132, 139, 151, 164, 176, 187,
oral tradition, 20, 22, 188 194, 215, 230, 239-42, 250 see also
origin myths, 52 Uma
Orissa, 23, 54, 115, 136, 146, 148, 206 pasa, 190
Osian, 153, 157 ‘ Pasupatas, 91, 93, 95, 112, 117; religion,
Osvals, 153, 158, Osval Sravaks, 157; 112; ntes, 112; school of philosophy,
Jainas, 157 128; Pasupata Suwa, 112; wradition,
111; Pasupata Siva 117
padapuja, 218 Pataliputra, 248
padas, 134 Patanijali, 76n32
paddy, 162 Patan, 158
Padma (one of the diggajas), 68 paitana, 162, 191
Padma Purana, 90, 130, 138 Patwardhans, 224
padmasana, 47, 73 Paurava dynasty, 55
Padmavati, 146 pausa, 137
Paisaci language, 107n43 Pawaya, 146-7
Pakistan, 54, 61 peacock, 45, 126, 200
Pala kings/dynasty, 185 pearls, 18]
pancamakaras, 136, 203 Pen, 36, 215, 226, 237
pancayatana, 22 Periya Purana, 163
Pandya kings, I61 Peshwas, Peshwa times, 31, 37, 203-6,
Panini, 70 224; Bajirao, Nana Saheb, 206
Palakapya, 46 phalguna, 137
palaki, 226, 228-9, 232, 240 Philostratus, 62, 135
Pali (Maharashtra), 36, 203 Phoenician culture, 42
Pallavas, 163-4, 187 pig (motif), 43, 50

--- Page 296 ---
INDEX 297
Pi-lo-sho-lo, 62, 70 220, 224, 231, 239
Pillaiyar, 62, 167 Pulastyas, 86
Pilusara, 62 punch-marked coins, 45, 71
Pinaksena, 86 Pune, 36, 203-4, 206, 215, 224, 236-7,
Pingala Ganapati, 188 243
pipal (ficus religiosa), 247, 249, see also Punjab, 43
tree(s) Punnabhaddavatika, 61, see also Parna-
Pippalada Mata temple (Osian, bhadra
Rajasthan), 153 pura, 161
pisaca(s), 27, 88-90, 92, 98, 102, 105, Puranas, 15, 18-19, 20-1, 26, 29-33, 36,
107n43, 133-4 68, 87-9, 96-7, 104-5, 111-13, 117,
pisdcatirtha, 89 121, 122-4, 128, 131-3, 135-6, 138,
pitha, 158 159, 165, 179-80, 187, 199-201, 219,
pitrs, pitarah, 49, 88, 132, 134 231, 238, 253
pitr-puja, 133 Puri, 79n106
Plutodotes, 52 Purnabhadra, 61, 92, 156
poet-priest, 67 Puranic pantheon, 27, 114, 127, 170;
pomegranate, 162 gods/deities, 125, 198; literature,
Portuguese, 223, 224 100; myths, 69; religion, 136
Porus, 62 Puranic Saiva pantheon, 29, see also
Potu Raju/Potraj, 48, 67 Sivaism and Saivas
Potwar plateau, 42 purusa, 113
Prabhasa Patan, 156 purusartha, 227
Pradyumna, 132 Purusa sukta, 219, 235
Prajapati, 126 Parvamnaya, 193
Prakrit, 147 Puskalavati, 47
prakrti, 113 Puspadanta, 68
pramathas, 93, 97 Puspakapura, 203
prana pratistha, 227 Pusti, 127
Pranatosini, 26, 36, 190
Prapaficaganapau, 34 Quilon, 170
Prapancasara Tantra, 26, 34, 36, 191
prasad, 232 Radha, 196
Prasanna Ganapati, 243 radish, 183, 187
prasasti, 132 Rahman Dheri, 43
Prasenajit of Koéala, 46, 55, see also RajarajaI (Cola), 166
Kosala Rajagrha/Rajgir, 56, 61, 70, 87, 92, 104,
Pratihara(s), 95, 153, 154; Pratihara 135, 251
Kakkuka, 153, 168 rajas/rajasic, 238
pratinidhi(s) (of Ganapati), 236 Rajasthan, 43, 109n102, 112, 115, 150-
pratyekabuddha, 56, 60 3, 155, 157, 158, 176, 202
Pravarasena II, 90 Rajatarangini, 122
Preston, Lawrence W., 19, 30, 32 Rajendra I (Cola), 166
pretas, 129 raksasas, 86, 88, 92, 97, 99
Przyluski, J., 17 Rakta Ganapati, 161, 188
pisja(s), 136, 144n174, 148, 194, 216-19, Rama, 130, 154, 176, 195, 220, 240
226-8, 232, 234, 237; Mahapuja, 228 Rama Ganapati, 195
pujari(s), pramukha pujari, 188, 215-18, Ramanuja, Ramanujacarya, 22, 174n109

--- Page 297 ---
298 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Ramanuja-mandapa (Mahabalipuram, — sddhana, 136
TN), 165, 174n109 Sahasralinga lake, 177
Ramadas (Vaisnava brahmana saint), 204, | Sahasrandmastotra (of Ganapati), 201,
219, 235 232
Ramachandran, T.N., 140n41 Saiva(s), 15, 22, 93, 103, 116, 180, 188-
Ramayana, 21, 86-7, 97, 157, 220, 235 9, 195, 218, 232, 243; Agamas, 33;
ram, 157, 247; motif of, 43; as part of a Agamic Saivas, 192; brahmanas, 164;
composite creature, 44 cults, 190; context, 124, 241; ksetra(s),
Rampura village, 158 220, 228; mantras, 187; myths, 103;
rana-diksd, 125 pantheon, 29, 127, 130, 164, 241,
Ranjangaon, 36, 203, 216, 227, 229 252; Pasupata Saivas, 192; philo-
Ranod, Narod, 172n40 sophy, 128; Puranas, 102, 231; saints,
rat(s), 109n102, 118, 182, 240 163; sects, 186, 198, 202; shrines,
rath yatra, 229 temples 123, 131, 136, 155, 164,
Ratnagar, Shereen, 445, 54 174n109, 178, 217; Tanuras, 180, 186;
Ratnapura, 168 Upagamas, 33; yogts, 34
Rauravottaragama, 33 Sakar Dhar, 119, 140n41
Ravana, 86, 97, 157, 220 Sakrai Stone Inscription, 152, 153
Ravi, 134, 136 Saksi Vinayaka, 229
Rddhi, 159, 225, 230, 239 Saktas, 22, 196; sakta conceptions, 115,
ritual processions, 248 see also goddess
Rg Veda, 21, 64, 97, 219 Saku(s), 22, 66, 100, 113, 127, 134, 161-
Rgvidhana, 240 2, 174n86, 190-3, 200-1, 233; worship
Rhinoceros, 52; motif, 43, 47-8; as a of, 193, 201, 239; nine saktis, 130
composite creature, 50; images, 53 Sakti Ganapau, Sakti Vinayaka, 188, 201,
Rhys Davids, 24 233
Rksa (gotra), 45 Sakti Vinayaka temple (Madras), 232
Rnamocaka Ganapati, Rnavimocana Sakya-Simha, 58
Ganapati, 169 Sakyas 58, 94
Rohimsaka, 153-4 Sala tree, 87
rsis, 202 salagrama, 218
Rudra, 93, 96-8, 114, 133, 172n40, 198; — Salakatankata, 86-7, 93, 97
Rudra-Siva, 100 samadhi, 217
Rudracamakam, 221, 232 Samalaji (Gujarat), 123
Rudradeva, Kakatiya king, 168 Sama Veda, 21
Rudragana, 27, 98 Samavidhana Brahmana, 92
rudraksa, 220 Sambandar, 163
Rudrasamhita (Siva Purana), 137 Sambhavanatha, 87
Rudras, 93 Sambhu, 168, see also Siva and Rudra
Rudrayamala Tantra, 35, 116 Sami uree/seeds, leaves, 199, 220, 222,
Rukmini, 132 229, 233
Rupar, 43 sankasta caturthi, 144n174, 218, 224, see
also bhadrapada caturthi, caturthi,
Sabdakalpadruma, 189 GaneSa caturthi and Vinayaka caturthi
sacrifice(s), including blood/animal/ Samkhya, 91, 113; practices, 112
human sacrifice, 94, 138, 148, 241, | Sammoha Tantra, 32, 179-80, 197
249 samskadras, 192
Sadasiva, 128 Samtana Ganapati, 193, 196; sect, 35,

--- Page 298 ---
INDEX 299
176, 193 Sena dynasty, 126, 172n40
Samtana Gopala, 193 Senapati, 127, see also Karuikeya and
Sanchi, 72, 85, 87; stupa at, 84, 93 Skanda
sandal paste, 199, 218, 220, see also  serpent(s), 68, 72, 79n112, 102, 105,
candan 251; as a sacred thread, 135, see also
Sankalapura (Karnataka), 168 nagas, sarpas and snakes
Sankaracarya/ Sankara, 34-5, 176, 192,  Sesa, 200
; 197-8, 243 sevaks (of Ganapati), 154, 236
Sankara (Siva), 94 Shahu, 205
Sankara, Sankaradevi (goddess), 152-3. Shamanism, 48, 65; Shamanistic rites/
Sankaravijaya, 36, 176, 180, 188-93, 196- rituals, 52, 65
8, 233 Shaman, 48-9
Sankarsana, 132 Shastn, Shankar Narain, 188
Sankisa (Uttar Pradesh), 57, 59 Shimoga (Karnataka), 195
Sankisa mound, 104 Shortughai (Afghanistan), 44
sankhas, 70, 194, 233 siddhas, 97
Sankukarna, 99 Siddhi, consort of Ganapati, 32, 74, 126,
Sanskritic tradition(s), 15-16 192, 200, 204, 225, 230, 239, 242,
§anti, 105, 199 25)
Santosi Ma, 15-16, 230, 239, 242, 251 stddhi (success), 130, 159, 237
sanyasi, 199, 216 Siddhi Buddhi Vinayaka temple (Sri),
Sarabha, 114 New Delhi, 194
Sarada, 35, 122 Siddhiksetra, 203
Saradatilaka Tantra, 36, 189-90 Siddhi Mahaganapati t-mple, Titwala,
Saraswati river system, 42 206
Saraswati, 158, 172n40, 225, 230, 239, Siddhi Vinayaka, Sri Siddhi Vinayaka,
242, 25] 20, 237-8
Saraswati Purana, 177 Siddhi Vinayaka temple, Bomhay, 216,
Sarayu river, 177 226, 228, 237
Sarai Khola 43 Sidhtek (Maharashtra), 36, 203, 216, 231
Sarika (goddess), 35 siddhasana, 47
Sariputta, 24 Siddhyayika, 74
Sarnath, 58, 72 Sikhari-Pallavesvaram cave-temple,
Sarpas/ sarpas, 68 Malacheri, TN, 163
sarvatobhadra images, 131 Silada, 113
Sasisekhara, 189 Silaharas, 32, 177, 179, 205
Sastras, 127, 132, 229 Silavandga Jataka, 58
Sastri, Ganapati 25 Silparatna, 201
Satarudriya, 142n98 Silpasastras, 195
Sati (goddess), 98, 230 Simha Ganapati, 194
sativrata, 239 Simhanada, 184
Satavahana, Hala, 104; Satavahana times, — simhdsana, 209n93
151 Sind, 43
sattva/satutc, 238 sindura, 131, 218, 220, 235, 241, 250;
saumya, 238 name of an asura, 218
Sauras, 22 single horn, 51
Scythian, 42 Sirahéila, 122
sect (definition of a religious sect), 196 — Sircar, D.C., 147

--- Page 299 ---
300 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Siri-Gana§ga, 147-8 snanadroni, 178
Sri Kumara, 201 sodasopacara, 219
Sita, 176, 220 Soma, 88, 129
Sicala, 15 Somakanta, 169
Siva, 17, 21-2, 28, 31-3, 42, 51, 62, 87, | Somanandin, 118
90, 93-103 passim, 111-139 passim, Somanatha, 138, 139
142n98, 152, 159, 163-70 passim, Somanatha-Patan, 158
172n40, 174n102, 176, 184-91 passim, Somasambhupaddhat, 34, 166
197-9, 201, 215, 218, 220, 223, 227, somaskanda, 163
228-35, 237-43, 247, 249-50, 252-3; Someésvaramalla (king of the Kalyana
Brahmanical Siva, 125; iconology, branch of the Calukyas), 204, see also
120, Pasupata Siva, 117, 120; Calukyas
pantheon, 222; Siva's family, 241;  Sonari, stupa at, 85
temples, 143n153, 155, 177, 197,220, — sraddha, 134, 149
232; temple priests, 192; Siva's gana, _sresthi, Sresthins, 153, 158
84 Sravak, 51
Sivacarya, 233 Sravana, 137
Sivaism 34, 93, 103, 111-12, 119, 128, Sri, 69, 150
130, 163-6, 184-7, 189, 197, 233, 253; Sri Atharvasiras, Sri Ganapati Atharvasirsa,
Pasupata Sivaism, 112 31, 219, 221, 229, 232, 235
Sivaji, 204, 235 Sridevi, 230
Siva-Kapala, 189 Sri Dipankarabhadra, 181
Sivalinga, 115 Sri-Gana, 147
Siva-Lokesvara, 185 Sri Laksmi, 64
Siva Purdéna, 123-6, 223, 231 Sri Lanka, 60, 72, 165
Siva-Pasupati, 47 Srinagar, 122
Sivaramamutti, C., 142n98 Sri Pratap Singh Museum, Kashmir, 117
Siva Sahasranama, 100 Sri Siskta, 219
Sivasarvasara, 196 Sruti, 21, 138, 191
Skanda, 17, 28, 86, 96-100, 114, 123, 125- — Sritattuanidhi, 169, 194
9, 152, 164, 176, 252; Skanda- — Srividydratnakara, 193
Karttikeya, 111, see also Karttikeya, — srvgi, srngapnya (Siva), 140n29
Kumara, Mahasena and Subrah- _ step wells, 156, 157
manya Sthala Purdnas, 22
Skanda Purana, 103, 120, 123, 138, 182 stotras, 229
skull(s), 120, 183 stupas (Buddhist and Jaina) 58, 71, 72,
sloka, 203 92, 104, 109n98, 117, 247, 251, see
Smartas, 15, 180, 206, 217, 228, 233; also Bharhut and Sanchi
tradition, 22, 186, 197, 233, 243: — stuti, 221
devotees of Ganapati, 202, 216; Subha (son of Ganapati), 230
Yajurvedi Smartas, 232 Subhakarasimha, 184
Smrti(s), 21-2, 94, 138, 149, 198 Subrahmanya, 195, see also Karttikeya,
snake(s), 42, 67, 70, 155-6, 251; motif Kumara, Mahasena and Skanda
of, 43, 72; snake-hoods and snake- Subrahmanya Ganapati, 195
hooded attendants, 73; half-snake — sidras, 93, 138, 139, 186, 189, 192, 199,
half human form, 74, see also Nagas, 203
Sarpas and serpents Sukla Yajur Veda, 92, 96
snana, 217 Sukra, 129

--- Page 300 ---
INDEX 301
Sumatra, 185 Tapa gaccha, 156
Sumbha, 125 tapas, 128
Sumerian culture, 42 Taranatha, 185
sun, 22, 88, 132-3, 200, 247, 250; worship =‘ Taxila, 47, 62-3, 135, 151, 250
of, 144n164, 154; Sun-god, 250; Sun = Tejahpala, 158
Temple(s), 62, 63, 135, 250 Tenkasi, 161
Sunaka (gotra), 45 terracotta figurines/ masks, 53
Supannavatika, 61 Tevaram, 163
Suparakrodi, 92 Thailand, 178
Supratika, 68 Thanjavur (TN), 164
Surpakarna, 128 Theur (Maharashtra), 36, 203, 215-16,
Surya, 131, 135, 198; Surya temple, 135, 231
see also sun Thirucchengattankudi (TN), 163
Susima Jataka, 24, 62, 63 Tibetan Buddhist canon/texts, 25, 65-
Sitasamhita, 150 6, 179, 182-5
Sutrapada (Gujarat), 135 Tibet, 17, 25, 66, 181, 185, 214
Suttanipata, 23, 24 Tilak, Bal Gangadhar, 19, 225, 239
Suvarna Ganapati, 233, 243 uilaka, 218, 233
Suyasa, 127 tiger, 119, 247; motif, 43-4, 47-9, 183; as
Svananda, 201, 203 part of a composite creature, 44, 50;
Svarna Ganapati, 196; sect, 35, 176, 193 tiger mask, 49; tiger skin, 118-22,
svayambhu miurti(s) 122, 195, 203, 229, 183; tiger demon, 118; tiger gana,
234 118
Svayambhuvagama, 33, 34, 161, 191, 234 = Tirthankara(s), 75, 87, 156-7, 247
Svetambara Jainas, 147, 1568; tradition, _firtha(s), 89, 177-8, 199
156, see also Jainas, Jainism Tirupati (Andhra Pradesh), 224, 233
Sveta Vinayaka, 164 Tiruvalamjuti (TN), 164
Swami, 96, see also Karttikeya, Kumara, —Titwala (Maharashtra), 36, 216, 228, 230
Mahasena, Skanda and Subrah-  Toda-Raising, 157
manya tooth relic(s), 60
Syena, 92, 99 totemism, 45
syncretistic images, 201 totems, totemic symbols, 45, 52, 89
trade, 19, 43, 86, 152-4, 161, 165, 170,
Taittiriya Aranyaka, 28, 89, 101, 137, 138 19]
Taksaka, 133 traders, trading class/community, 19,
tamas/tamasic, 238 146-54, 157-9, 162, 166, 169-70, 253,
Tamil Nadu, 67, 161, 167, 179, 191, 216, see also banias, mahajanas, merchant,
218, 239-3, 235, 243; region/idently, Jainas, vantyyas and vantks
163, 179, 187, 189, 218, 232, 233,  Trailokyamalla, 172n40
235, 241 Travancore, 223, 234
Tantras, Tantrism, 18, 20, 22, 34-5, 105, tree, spirits, 52, 247, 249; pair of Arjuna
113, 136, 179, 185, 190, 193, 196, trees, 143n134; motif, 59, 71; tree of
197, 200; puja, 35; tradition, 111; life, 42; marriage with, 66; sacred
texts, 23, 136 tree(s) 71, 148
Tantrasara, 35, 189 Treta yuga, 13, 200
Tantrayana Buddhism 185; Tantric tribal society, 146
Buddhist forms, 189 Trichur (Kerala), 37
tanin, 235 trident, 183-4

--- Page 301 ---
302 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Tripuras, 125, 127 Vaisnava Ganapati, 194
Trisunda Ganapati temple, Pune, 217 Vaisravana, 92, 98
Triton (Cambodia), 120 vaisya, 146, 149, 153, 158, 159, 169,
Trojan culture, 42 171n33, 193, 199, 253
Tucci, G., 140n41 Vajrabhairava, 184
tulsi, 220, 247 Vajradakini, 182
Tumain (Madhya Pradesh), 73 Vajrakapali, 189
Tunta Ganapati, 177 Vajrapani, 182
Turkestan (Chinese), 17 Vajratika, 189
Turkish invasions, 18], 214 Vakad (Maharashtra), 116
turde (motif), 50 Vakataka king (Pravarasena), 90
vakra, 89

Ucchaisravas, 69 vakramukhi, 89
Ucchista Candali, 190 Vakratunda, 89, 101, 137
Ucchista Ganapati, Ucchista Gananatha, _ Vallabha (goddess), 239

161, 162, 190, 196; sect of, 35, 176, Vallam (TN), 163

180, 190-1, 192, 197 Vamana, 68
Ucchi-Pillaiyar temple, Tiruchchira- | Vamana Purana, 124

ppalli, TN, 164 Vamanbhatta, 204
Udayagiri, 104, 119 vamsa, 86
Ujjain, 107n43 van Buitenen, }.A.B., 28
Uma, 114, 163, 184, 230, 239, see also  vanipya, 159, see also banias, mahajanas,

Parvati Jainas, merchants and trade/traders
unicorn (motif), 43-4, 50; symbol of, 52 vanik, 156, see also banias, mahajanas,
Upamanyu, 113-14 Jainas, merchants and trader/traders
Upanisads, 21 Varada Gananatha temple, Cuttack,
Upapurana, 30 Orissa, 206
upasakas (of Ganapati), 196 varada-mudra, 156, 160
Upatantras, 179 Varada Vinayaka (Sri), 20
Uppinapattan (Karnataka), 178 Varaha, 52, 119, 168
urdhavamedhra/urdhvalinga, 119 Varaha-Ghanasyama temple, Bhinmal,
Usmita, 86, 90, 93 150
utsav (festivals), 178, 194; utsauv mirti, Vardha Grhya Sutra, 91

226, 232, 234 Varahamihira, 33
Uttara Kamikagama, 162 Varaha Purana, 124, 126, 137
Uttar Pradesh, 43, 177, 249-50 Varakhana, 158

Varanasi, 21, 37, 59, 98, 109n102, 216,

vahana, 118, 157 218, 220, 225, 229, 230-1, 235-6, 243,
vayjra, 183 254, see also Kasi and Banaras
Vainayaki, 66 Varenya (Sun), 200, king by that name,
Vaurocana of Kosala, 182 201, see also sun
variakha, 132 varna, 21, 112
Vaisnava(s), 22, 160, 219-20, 233, 243; Vanuna, 88

brahmanas, 193; context, 247; deities, | Vastupala, 156, 158

193; images, 174n109; Madhava sect, Vasudeva, 120

221, 223; panthcon, 130; sect, 196, | Vasudeva Raja of Edapilli, 234

202; texts, 243; ftirthas, 132; see also Vasuki, 88, 133

brahmanas and Madahva sect Vatapi, 163, see also Badami

--- Page 302 ---
INDEX 303
Vatapi Ganapati, 163 Vikramaditya, 152
Vatsa (gotra), 45 Vikramasila, 181, 185, 214
Vatsaraja, 150 Vinayakas, 18, 20, 26, 27-8, 32-3, 846,
Vatuldgama, 34 87, 90-105 passim, 10988, 122, 125,
Vayu, 68, 88 129-31, 136, 144n174, 149, 1546,
Vayu Purana, 46, 61, 88, 89, 92, 112, 149 163-6, 174n102, 177-8, 181, 183, 200,
Veda(s), 17-18, 21, 70, 112-13, 127, 138, 229, 237-8, 251; five Vinayakas 103;
192, 198-201, 219, 221, 229, 234 fifty-six Vinayakas of Kasi, 193, 229;
Vedic texts/literature, 21, 91, 93, 97, Vinayaka rites, 26; eight Vinayakas
100, 142n98, 146; deities, 87, 111, and eight sacred places, 203
252: context, 65; culture, 64; fire, Vinayaka caturthi/ Vinayaka caturthi
220; hymns, 219; goddess, 150; vrata, 144n174, 202, 215, 240;
pantheon, 21, 151; period, 56; Vinayaka kalpa, 96; shrine, 155,
priests, 89, 95; religion, 21, 74, 91, Vinayakotsava, 178; see also bhadra-
93, 251; ritual/rites/practices, 39, pada, caturthi, GaneSsa caturthi and
91, 112, 193, 219; sacrifice, 201; sanhasta caturthi
tradition, 27, 91, 93, 111, 113, 198, | Vinayaka temple (Sri), Bangalore, 222;
246 at Tiruvalamjuli, TN, 164; at
Venkateshwara (Lord), 224, 233 Kumbhasi, Karnataka, 193
Vepulla mountain, 87 Vinayakapura, 168
Viddanacarya, 168 Vindyaka Graha Nirmocana, 183
vidruma (coral), 199 Vinayaka Puréna, 33, 233
uidyadevis, 158 Vindhyas, 106n43
Vidya Ganapati, 224 Vimukha, 92
Vidyanusasana, 156 Vir (Maharashtra), 116
Vidyapati, 196 Virabhadra, 114, 122, 126, 129, 152, 224
Vidyarnava Tantra, 195 Vira Ganapati temple (Sri) Amdalli,
Vidyesvarasamhita (Siva Puréna), 137 Karnataka, 196, 216
Vietnam, 120, 178 Vira Ganapati, 196, 243
vighna, 109n88 Vira Raghava, 169
vighnahara rite, 137 Viradhaka, 87, 88, 133
Vighnakaraka, 98 Virupaksa, 88, 92, 93, 123
vighnakartas, 95, 105, 148-9, 152 Visakha, 86
Vighnaraja, 200; firtha, by that name, — visarjan, 228
177 Visnu, 18, 21, 28, 29, 31, 42, 69, 72, 85,
vighna-santusta, 116 94, 97, 98, 111, 114, 121, 124, 127,
Vighnantaka, 94 131, 132, 134, 152, 160, 166,
Vighnavinasana, 157 171n102, 191, 193, 197-9, 218, 223-
Vighnavinayaka, 166 4, 227, 230, 233, 237, 239, 240, 242-
Vighnesa, 137 3, 247, 252; pantheon of 29; temples,
VighneSsvara, 98, 134 197, 232
Vijaya Ganapati, 161, 188 Visnudharmottara Purana, 142n98
Vijayanagar, Vijayanagar period, 168, Visnuism, 131, 165; Puranic Visnuism,
205, 228 132
Vijayapaladeva (king of Kanauj), 155 Visnukundins, 164; Mahendravarman,
Vijayapalla, 132 125
Vijayasena, 126, 172n40 Visnuloka, 132
Vikata, 200 Visranti Grtha, 132

--- Page 303 ---
304 UNDERSTANDING GANAPATI
Visvanathasvami temple, Tenkasi, 16] Yagnaviksepi, 92
Vivehachudamani, 35 yagnopavita, 192
Viveksindhu, 205 Yaksa (name of a yaksa), 92, 102
Vogel, J. Ph., 67 yaksa/yaksas, 70, 74, 87, 93, 98, 100, 102,
vrata, 199, 239 146, 154-6, 251; elephant-headed
Vrddhasravakas, 94 yaksa, 72, 75, 101, 103-5, 109n98,
Vrsabha, 129 109n102, 134, 165, 251, 252
vrsana Sankara, 140n29, see also  yaksi/yaksini, 74, 158
ursasrnga, visani yaksaraja (Manibhadra), 147
ursasrnga, 140n29 Yama, 48, 88, 133
urtra, 68 Yamalas, 35-6
Vrtraha Indra, 68 Yamuna (personified as goddess), 129;
vyaghracarma/ vyaghrajina (tiger skin), river, 177
119, see also tiger yantra, 65, 136
Vyaghrapataka village, 155 Yao (African unbe), 45
Vyaghresvara, 118 Yajur Veda, 21, 90, 96, 97
Vyasa, 200 Yasoda, 124
yatra, 159, 227, 235
; Yaudheyas, 59
water (symbol), motif, 42, 70 yoga, 47, 76n32, 91, 93, 112-13, 136, 199;
Wilkinson, 25, 181 . .
’ yogic figure, 52; practices, 112
wheel, motif, 42
. yogagana, 98
winds 181 93-4. 98 vogi(s), yogins, 93, 128, 199
rant, 27%, Yogindra Matha (Sri), Moregaon, 30, 32
Yogindra (Sri), 30
yajna, Yagnas, 90, 147 yons, 190
Yagnapati, 201 Yudhisthira, 98
Yagnavallkya Smrti, 28, 95-6, 99, 102, yuga(s), 13, 149, 200
144n164 Yupakesi, 92

--- Page 304 ---
_ aad s
\ 5 i r ’ .
= a! q . -
ls _ .
i | -
LJ
-T
“ = .
= | .
. ¥
sae a
. ', : ”
=
- 1
i! :
r
Ci
1” . -
os
»’ ;
fo - _
s :
r
“~
' :
- . -,
a Ww t
- €
| id
° F . -
_|
~ as = .
a ° . a
- ' _. _

--- Page 305 ---
; a in
. 7 -
° ) a -= a 7
=: t s ' -
° . ‘ . -- -
_-, = a F
. ms (f, -
‘ an
“le -
a ao.
> a ~ — '
1
~~ ' | -
mm, an | »e, ' 4
o rm _— . ; 1
-4 x = - + =
; aw wr - F -
‘- ‘ ’ " wis, m. _2
a bk 7 ae
. -
’ - J -
dy ,
-  , a
. a -
i]
| i eg '
A] ' "
; *y 1 ] _
y 4 -
° a ‘

--- Page 306 ---
ArsiRAAR earo obtained a Masters
degreaytifrench from Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi and a Masters
degree and Ph.D. in History from the
University of Delhi. Besides History, her
fields of interest include Indian
Philosophy, oral traditions and folk
religion, contemporary Indian religious
movements and faiths, and European
and Indian languages.
Jacket illustration
Courtesy, Nativnial Museum, New Delhi.
Jacket design by Surita Karandikar
ISBN 8177 304-195-4 -

--- Page 307 ---
RELATED MANOHAR TITLES

IsRAEL SELVANAYAGAM

Vedic Sacrifice: Challenge and Response

N.N. BHATTACHARYYA

Ancient Indian Rituals and their Social Contents
History of the Tantric Religion:

A Historical, Ritualistic and Philosophical Study

) Guntuen-Dietz SONTHEIMER

Folk Culture, Folk Religion and Oral Traditions
as a Component in Maharashtrian Culture

A. EscHmann et al. (eds)

The Cult of Jagannath and the Regional Tradition of Orissa
Gasrietca E:chincer Ferro-Luzzi (ed)

Rites and Beliefs in Modern India
Avr Hicreserrec (ed)
Criminal Gods and Demon Devotees:
Essays on the Guardians of Popular Hinduism
