67. Brahmanaspati

He holds grains of rice, Phaseolus Mungo, sugar (jaggery), curd, ghee ie. clarified butter, other foods, nice modaka sweets, laddoo sweets, mango, coconut, bananas, mandakyas and parpatas (kinds of snacks) pomegranate, the fruit of Feronia Elephantum, payasa a sweet drink made of milk and rice, apoopa (a sweet dish) and jackfruit in his hands. He holds modaka in his trunk, he has a mark made of vermilion on his forehead, he is seated comfortably, he wears red clothes and has red fragrant pastes applied on him, he is bright vermilion red in complexion, has an elephant face, wears an yellow shawl, he is adorn with the garlands made of different shades of red flowers and is handsome, I contemplate on him who is fond of modakas and has three eyes.

For accomplishing righteousness (dharma) lord urukrama (lord Vishnu)
created various yagyas (sacred fire sacrifices) in the world. In the beginning of every yagya, brahmanaspati Yagya must be performed, that is the order giving to the vipras (the brahmins with great and special intelligence in understanding and application of Vedic knowledge) and Devas (gods) based on the Vedas. The yagya purusha (the personification of sacred fire sacrifice who is a form of lord Vishnu) performed brahmanaspati yagya with gods and sages.

That yagya has no yupa stambha (the column were the animal (or generally goat) is tied and sacrificed. Hence only this yagya is the favorite and most pleasing for lord ganesha. The materials of sacrifice is modka sweets and seven other different materials called the ashta dravya (eight materials used in the yagya). Lord yagya gave oblations of these eight materials using specific mantras which invoke Ganesha. For the yagya kunda, the sacred pot of yagya fire, the lord ganesha manifested and blessed the gods and the yagyas (deities of yagyas) with various boons. The form in which the lord appeared from the yagya kunda is known as modaka priya (he who loves modaka sweets). He is also known as brahmanaspati. (the lord of all yagyas, vedas). The lord fulfils all the wishes of his devotees.




