123. Ucchishta Ganapati

He has four hands and has red complexion, holds lasso, elephant goad, a vessel filled with modaka sweets and his tusk and is seated on lotus. I pray that blissful ucchistaganésa.

He who was born from the mind of lord Gunesha (the lord of svananda) in the form of a small child is ucchista ganapati says the ucchista ganapati kilaka stotram

Vinayaka tantra describes in detail about ucchista ganapati as given below. The supreme reality is remembered by the name svanandesa who is the manifestation of the sound of Omkara in the form of elephant faced lord. The lord of the gunas (three modes of nature). From svanandesa, the supreme lord who is the lord of all worlds manifested. That supreme lord gunesha has his eyes everywhere says the Vedas. The lord is all knowing and omnipresent and omnipotent says the Vedas. His form is made of suddhasatva - purest satva that is not mixed with the other gunas. The eeshwara who has his associaton with maya he is the supreme lord gunesha, from his gunas (three modes) brahma the creator, Vishnu the protector and rudra the destroyer were born. By guenesha they were appointed in their respective duties. At various stages, they got affected by ego and were hindered by obstacles. They sought refuge in Gunesha to accomplish their tasks free of impediments.

Lord Gunesha took a partial form and became his own son. With a form,
which appeared as though limited (can also be interpreted as dwarf like form with elephant face and childlike form. Gunesha gave the lordship of the subtle ether. (sookshma vyoma) the lordship and controllership of obstacles and impediments, the leadership of ghanas who are indestructible even in the time of great dissolution to his elephant faced son. The great and those who remain undestroyed even in the great dissolution are called uccista ghanas.

Because this son of gunesha is the lord of all those ghanas, he is called uccista Ganapati. He always lives in the middle of the amruta sagara (the ocean of nectar that stops death) along with his Ghanas. He married Sarasvati the daughter of Brahma (neela saraswati) and pushti Lakshmi the daughter of Vishnu. Ucchistaganapati is the one who helps his devotees attain all accomplishments.
