33. Umangamalaja

He holds lasso, modaka, elephant goad, his tusk in his hands and big coconut in his trunk. He is in the complexion of neelotpala flower tusti (happiness) and pusti (strength and energy which helps in development) stands on both sides of him, he has a big belly bears a moon on his crest he is the lord who emerged from the wastes of turmeric and other fragrant pastes which were applied by goddess uma in her body.

The great Ghana (attendant) of Shakti, the devotee of goddess Shakti who was born from the body waste - used turmeric sandal paste of goddess uma’s body became the gatekeeper of goddess uma's palace. Lord shiva cunningly. killed him (out of anger, as he stopped Shiva from entering the palace) goddess parasakti on knowing it became really angry she took a vow that she will cut of the head of lord shiva by ordering her child (the Ghana who died).

The terrified gods sought refuge in goddess shakti. Shakti along with all the gods pleased lord ganesha, a celestial voice spoke from space and commanded that three elephant heads must be bought and attached to the body which is lying dead by chanting he the omkara. Then, they all chanted the great one syllable seed mantra of ganesha, the great king of obstacles (vighnaraja - lord ganesha) entered the body of the Ghana. (Who was born from the bodily waste of goddess uma) and henceforth that form of ganesha is known popularly in the world as malajata or umangamalaja.

Following the order of parasakti malajata defeated shiva, pushed him on the ground and climed on him, and broke four of his heads.

Then by the advice and order of lord Vishnu, brahma created the coconut which looked like the head of lord Shiva, with three eyes) and gave it to malaja. Everyone (gods and sages) requested malaja to release and let lord shiva live. Malajata broke the coconut instead of shiva's fifth head and setshiva free and let him live. Lord Ganesha gave many boons to lord shiva who had one head. Along and since then lord ganesha is pleased by breaking the coconuts snd offering it in worship to him. This form is umangamalajat popular in the sacred scriptures.

Note: One must understand the tantric and philosophical nature of this story and must not disrespect shiva. In this context shiva is the symbol of the jeevatman who is bound by false ego and not the supreme reality.

Umangamalaja is the destroyer of all obstacles and the giver of happiness and opulence, completeness.

