Chapter 1 : Description of the Meditation on Shakti

Shri Ganesha, salutations to You.

Shaunaka said: O Suta, you are highly wise and have narrated the most wonderful greatness of the elephant-headed Lord (Lambodara), by which I have attained satisfaction. Oh, the greatness of Ganesha is the source of all joy; merely by hearing it, one attains union with the Supreme Brahman. Now, O knower of secrets, please narrate the greatness of Vikata (Ganesha), which is the essence of the nectar of Yoga and grants all accomplishments. What was previously narrated by the sage Mudgala to Daksha? O dear one, tell me in detail what Daksha asked. We are all particularly satisfied by your company, and we feel fulfilled just by hearing these stories.

Suta said: O Brahmana, O crest-jewel of the Bhrigu lineage, you have asked well. You are truly a seeker of the essence, O Shaunaka. To fulfill your desire, I shall narrate the character of the Lord of the Ganas, which grants the state of Brahman. According to the Vedas, there is nothing higher than Ganesha; however, those with little merit do not develop devotion toward Him. I shall narrate what the great Yogi Mudgala told Daksha when he was asked about Yoga. Listen, O Brahmanas.

Daksha said: My birth and actions are blessed, for by the grace of merit, I have attained your vision, O Lord, and the supreme Yoga of Mudgala. Now, O wise one, tell me the greatness of Vikata. Hearing of Lambodara increases my thirst. Who is this Lord of the Ganas? What is His nature as Brahman? By what Yoga is He attained, and how many are His incarnations? Why did He come to this earth, and for what purpose? Which demons did He slay, and how is He praised by the gods? O bestower of honor, tell me these and other various deeds of His. Great souls like you are the ones who benefit others. Wise men consider you as a boat for those drowning in the ocean of worldly existence. There is no doubt in this; please deliver me now.

Suta said: Pleased by the humility and devotion of Daksha, Mudgala spoke to him. Listen to this joy-giving account.

Mudgala said: You are blessed, O Daksha, for by your questions filled with devotion, you increase the greatness of the Lord of the Ganas. Since you are the son of Brahma, it is no wonder. I am pleased with your devotion and shall tell you what is beneficial. I will briefly tell you the greatness of Vikata, which leads to the state of Brahman and grants all accomplishments. Listen to this ancient and wonderful history regarding the Creator.

In the peaceful realm of Shakti, the primordial Maya, the Great Shakti, resided, being served by goddesses and their lords. Once, seeing Her engaged in the worship and strict observance of Ganesha, the supreme Shaktis—Mahakali, Mahalakshmi, Mahasaraswati, and others—asked Her.

The Shaktis said: You are the direct manifestation of all, the revealer of the world and Brahman. By meditating on You, one becomes Brahman. Wise men call You the bestower of Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha. In the Vedas, You are the root of all powers. Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, and others became capable of all their functions only through Your practice, O Sati. You are the giver of the fruits of actions and penance. According to the Vedas and scriptures, there is nothing beyond You. Why do You, who are always in observance, meditate upon Ganesha, the one in the form of an image? Why do You always chant His names, O Mother of the world? Are You doing this to delude all beings or to hide a secret? You are the supporter of all existence, there is no doubt. Tell us, why do You make us feel deluded? We ask You now, casting aside all hesitation. We are always amazed to see You thus. We are but servants of Your feet; there is nothing higher than You. We know this through the Vedic path; please tell us now.

Mudgala said: Asked by the three principal Shaktis, the supreme Shakti spoke to them with affection. Listen to this great secret.

The Adi-Shakti said: Listen, all you Shaktis, to the secret residing in my heart, which is the source of all accomplishments and most wonderful. I am present everywhere because I am a part of Ganesha and have taken refuge in the state of the Ganas. In the beginning, we four—Shambhu, Vishnu, Ravi, and the Goddesses—originated from Ganesha. Everything, including names and forms, is from Me, and it is of the nature of Brahman. I am established in the state of Brahman, there is no doubt. The destruction and creation of names and forms are well-known; Brahman is established there as the essence of bliss. In the midst of creation and destruction, the substratum is the Self. The Sun, the Goddesses, and the supreme Brahman are all of the nature of Truth. Vishnu is established in the balance of the manifest and unmanifest. Shiva is called the fourth, the form of 'Neti' (not this). The fifth is the bliss of the Self, attained through the union of the four, which is achieved by the Yoga of self-realization. The absence of Yoga is the lack of these five. The union of union and non-union is called the Yoga of Ganesha. He is called the mover of the five functions of the mind. See Him through the path of Yoga as the Chintamani. Maya is the power of delusion, and the intellect that holds this delusion is described in the scriptures. The master of both is Ganesha, residing in the city of Self-Bliss. He is the embodiment of the peace of Yoga, the giver of gains and profits in the heart. The syllable 'Ga' represents union, and 'Na' represents non-union. The Lord of the Ganas is the master of both, and we are His manifestations. Therefore, I worship Him with devotion; there is no doubt. I do not do this to delude, nor to hide a secret, O great Goddesses. I have told you all about my observance. I meditate on the Chintamani in my heart with devotion. The elephant-headed Lord is not visible to those whose minds are deluded by desire, nor to those who are devoid of devotion, even if they worship Him. Those covered by the veil of ignorance call Me the Supreme of the Supreme. We are all His Ganas—Shambhu, Vishnu, and others. The elephant head represents the attributeless form, and the body below the neck represents the qualified Brahman. In their union, He is the bearer of the body.

Having said this, the Shakti who dwells in Self-Bliss became silent. The Shaktis were astonished.

Thus ends the first chapter of the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana, titled "Description of the Meditation on Shakti."

Chapter 2 : Granting of Boons to Shiva and Vishnu

Mudgala said: Having heard the ancient yoga from the mouth of Mahakali, the goddesses were astonished and, filled with joy, spoke again.

The Shaktis said: O Mahamaya, you have spoken of that which destroys all doubts. Having heard this yoga of Ganesha from you, we have become endowed with knowledge. O Ganesha-lord, you have explained that those whose minds are deluded by desire can never perceive Him, even after hundreds of millions of births. Those creatures and even lords who are devoid of the attainment of Ganesha, their birth is considered by the wise to be especially fruitless. Alas, having attained a body endowed with knowledge that grants all goals, those who do not worship the Lord of the Ganas, who is the bestower of all, are to be known as being like donkeys, devoid of knowledge. Due to their nature being filled with desire, they abandon the Lord of the Ganas. O Shakti, speak in detail about the character of desire, and also how to destroy desire, by which Dhundhi (Ganesha) can be attained. You are our highest limit, standing in the form of a Guru. O Mother, grant us the Lord of Obstacles, we shall all worship the Lord.

Adi Shakti said: By the mere worship of that incarnation of the Lord of the Ganas, the wicked desire of Vikata (Ganesha) is destroyed instantly. I shall tell you a history that occurred long ago, by which people will forever be free from the agony of desire. Once, on the best of mountains, Kailasa, Shankara, of his own will, assumed a fierce form to enchant Parvati. Not seeing Shankara, she became filled with grief. In the meantime, Indra arrived there to see him. Seeing the Lord of Kailasa with a fierce face, and thinking him to be a demon, he became filled with anger. Mahendra suddenly released his thunderbolt to kill him, but upon reaching the body of Shiva, it became fruitless. Then, Shankara, filled with anger, opened his third eye to burn the Lord of the Devas himself, releasing fire. Seeing the fire suddenly, he remembered Brihaspati. Knowing this, he immediately went and bowed to Maheshwara. Having propitiated the Lord of Girija, he made the terrified Indra, who had abandoned his pride, fall at his feet. Indra praised the Lord with various hymns and begged for forgiveness, and Maheshwara forgave his offense born of ignorance.

Then Agni, born from a part of Shiva, came and bowed, saying, "O Maheshwara, what shall I do? By your command, O Mahadeva, I have abandoned the wicked Lord of the Devas; command me, O best of Lords, what is to be done. I have emerged from your part, I shall not be fruitless; by your command, I shall consume the entire universe." Hearing those words of Agni, Shankara said to him, "Fall into the ocean, my son, in the form of a demon. You will be invincible to all and will become immensely powerful. Becoming the lord of the three worlds, you will cause the decline of Dharma. Vrinda, the wife of Dharmadhvaja, will be your wife. She is Sati, cursed by Ganesha to see her husband. Janardana will make her devoid of chastity; then, by the strike of my discus, you will die, there is no doubt. Then, becoming part of my body, you will take my form. As you were born from a demon-like form, become that."

Having said this, O Shaktis, Mahadeva threw him into the ocean, and a terrifying sound arose there. Then, a child endowed with radiance was born there. From his seed, Brahma came and named him Jalandhara. The ocean himself performed his sacred thread ceremony and other rites. Demons like Kalanemi became his followers. By the boon of Shiva, he conquered the circle of the universe. Then Jalandhara forced the gods into exile in the forest. The demon also saw Vrinda, who was performing penance in the forest. O Shaktis, he married her through the Gandharva rite. The demon always delighted in her, being greatly deluded by Maya. She, with her mind fixed on him, did not realize the time passing. Then he made the earth devoid of rituals, and the gods and others became afflicted by fasting.

Once, Narada went to the demon king. The yogi, having been worshipped by him, said to Jalandhara: "You are blessed, O son of the ocean, the creator of all jewel-like pleasures. Yet, listen, O lord of demons, there is no jewel of a woman in your house. There is none equal to Parvati anywhere; she is a jewel, without doubt, favored by Shankara." Having said this, the great yogi Narada disappeared. Hearing this, he became tormented by the arrows of desire. He sent a messenger to Shankara, and the wicked Nishumbha came to Mahadeva.

Nishumbha said: "O Shiva, you are adorned with signs like nakedness; you are not worthy, O Lord. Parvati, who is like a jewel, is always fit for the master of the universe, Jalandhara, who is now endowed with all prosperity. Give the daughter of the mountain to him, O Lord. If not, the powerful and angry Jalandhara will kill you and take her by force, there is no doubt." Hearing his words, Sadashiva, filled with anger, took his trident and prepared to kill Nishumbha. Then, the demon king, filled with fear, fled through Maya and told the story in the assembly. Hearing what Nishumbha said, Jalandhara, filled with anger, went with his army to fight. Seeing him arrive, the powerful Mahadeva, along with Vishnu and others, went to fight the demon king.

A most terrible battle between the gods and demons took place, which, O goddesses, can never be described. For a whole year, it was most fierce. Then the demon, by Maya, deluded Maheshwara, captured him, and threw him into a cave. Placing Kalanemi and others on the battlefield, the demon went to Parvati, assuming the form of Shankara through Maya. Seeing him arrive, the great Sati, through her knowledge, realized it, and seeing his trembling limbs, she disappeared herself. She remembered Mahavishnu and went to the Himalayas. Seeing him arrive, she told him the whole story. Hearing this, Kesava, the slayer of great enemies, consoled her and went to delude Vrinda by assuming the form of Jalandhara. Seeing him in the form of Jalandhara, she realized it was Vishnu and cursed him: "O Mahavishnu, become a stone."

Then, Vishnu, filled with great fear and the curse, came to the holy site and worshipped the Lord of Obstacles. Shankara, in the cave, also became alert and, through intense meditation, propitiated the Lord of Obstacles. Ganesha came to him to fulfill the granting of the boon. Seeing him, Shankara first bowed with devotion. He praised Ganesha, the bestower of all accomplishments, with various hymns and, bowing with folded hands, told him the story. Then Dhundhi gave the discus named Sudarshana from his own hand to that great soul and said to Sadashiva: "Remembering me during the time of battle, kill the demon with this discus. Protect everyone, O Mahadeva, you will be victorious." Having said this, Ganesha disappeared. Then Shankara, taking the discus, came out of the cave himself.

In the Dandaka forest, Vishnu also went to the Lord of Obstacles. The Lord of Ganas granted him a boon in a visible form.

Shri Ganesha said: "Do not worry, O Vishnu. You went without remembering me before; because of that, you became cursed and have now come for refuge. Here, through penance, I became the grantor of boons to you before. Because of that, I forgive your offense now, O Madhava. You will become a stone, there is no doubt. In your full form, be the Lord of Devas, assuming your own shape. Men will worship you, the Lord, in the form of a stone. You will remain there in your divine form, there is no doubt. Again, meditating on me in your heart, assuming the form of Jalandhara, go to Vrinda, O Mahavishnu; she will be under your control." Having said this, Ganesha, who is fond of his devotees, disappeared. Vishnu, becoming Jalandhara, went to Vrinda, O Shaktis.

Chapter 3 : Attainment of the Kingdom by Kamasura

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Primordial Shakti said: When Janardana (Vishnu) arrived in the form of Jalandhara, accompanied by many heroes and surrounded by such servants, the citizens and all his friends honored him. Having defeated the great Lord Maheshwara, they spoke to him who had arrived. Then, deluded by the illusions of Ganesha, Vrinda approached him and, filled with joy, worshipped the Supreme Lord.

Captivated by her, Keshava (Vishnu), seeing her endowed with virtues, incomparable in beauty, and radiant with the fullness of youth, enjoyed with her in private. She, too, filled with affection, enjoyed with him, becoming completely overwhelmed. Now, I shall narrate the account of Shankara; listen, all you Shaktis, to how he was affected by Ganesha’s illusion.

Shankara, filled with anger, fought against that enemy. With his discus, he severed the mighty forces of the demons. Jalandhara himself fought against him, aided by illusion. The demons and the gods fought against each other. Meanwhile, Vishnu enjoyed with Vrinda in joy. At that time, Jalandhara was killed by the discus.

Then, the gods and the best of sages praised the supreme Shankara. Along with them, he went to Kailasa, the lord of mountains. Consequently, humans became righteous, and the world was filled with joy due to their respective deeds. Vishnu remained constantly engaged in play with her. The demons arrived there and reported the great event. They said that the powerful demon Jalandhara had been killed by Shankara. Hearing this, they were all astonished, wondering who was playing with Vrinda.

Then, Vishnu vanished, and Vrinda, having set fire to her body, departed for the supreme heaven. Seeing this, Vishnu, filled with delusion, wept there. Remembering the character of Vrinda, he was deeply infatuated by illusion. Janardana lamented, clinging to the ashes of Vrinda. All the demons who had gone to the netherworld became filled with fear. Though addressed by the gods and sages, Vishnu did not regain consciousness. Tormented by the arrows of Kama (desire), he wept, remembering her intensely.

Then, the semen of that great Vishnu, tormented by the arrows of Kama, fell upon the surface of the earth, appearing brilliant and potent. From it, a person was born who transcended the form of Kama. He wandered upon the earth while Vishnu remained there. Then, that Vrinda was earnestly prayed to by the gods and sages, saying, "Become the wife of Vishnu, who has worshipped you through penance."

She said "So be it" and became a tree. Vishnu, in the form of a stone, married her, the auspicious one. On the twelfth day of the bright fortnight of Kartika, she married Janardana, and the great goddess was delighted by him. Taking her, Lord Keshava went to Vaikuntha. All the gods and others were filled with joy.

Thus, Kama (the entity) was born, endowed with great power. He wandered in the forest, where Shukra arrived. He gave the Shiva-Panchakshara mantra to that great soul. Having gone and bowed to him, he performed penance in the forest. Through severe penance, he constantly pleased Shambhu. Without food, he daily chanted that supreme mantra. Because of his severe penance, the gods and humans were bewildered; they could not remain stable for even a thousand divine years.

Then, prayed to by the gods, Maheshana (Shiva) went there with joy. He awakened the lord of the demons and told him to ask for a boon. Then, seeing Shankara, he bowed with folded hands. Rising, he worshipped and praised him with devotion. With the Rudra-stotra originating from the Yajurveda, Kamasura pleased Shankara with a sincere heart. Seeing Shankara satisfied, the great demon, with eyes blooming with joy, spoke to the giver of boons, who is fond of his devotees.

Kamasura said: If you are pleased and are a giver of boons, O Maheshwara, grant me your devotion and the kingdom of the universe. May I have no fear from those who are endowed with the powers of creation, sustenance, and destruction. O Lord, make me powerful in such a way. O God of gods, ensure that my death does not come from those who are the creators, sustainers, and destroyers. Make me healthy, victorious in battle, and superior to all in influence. May whatever I desire be successful through your grace at all times. Salutations to you, O Supreme Lord.

Shakti said: Hearing the words of Kamasura, Shankara, with an astonished mind, spoke to him, bound by his penance.

Shiva said: O best of demons, that which you have asked for is difficult to obtain and causes distress to the gods, but I shall grant it, satisfied by your severe penance. All the boons you have requested, O great demon, shall be successful by my word, and you shall become supreme. Having said this to the great demon, Shiva vanished and remained there as the great Lord.

Filled with great joy, he went to seek refuge and bowed to his guru, Shukra, who knows all. He narrated the event, and the great sage, the teacher of the demons, was also delighted. He married the daughter of Mahishasura, named Trishna, who was beautiful and endowed with all virtues. Then, summoning all the demon hosts who had arrived from all directions, Shukra anointed him. With Vedic mantras and according to the prescribed rites by the Brahmins, Kamasura became king, happy and luxurious in his royal splendor.

He had five mighty ministers: Ravana, Shambhara, Mahisha, and the arrogant Bali. He built a city on earth endowed with all beauty, and at the suggestion of Ushanas (Shukra), he named it Ratida. The demons, Danavas, and Rakshasas went there to reside. It shone with great splendor, inhabited by all four varnas.

Thus ends the third chapter of the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana, describing the attainment of the kingdom by Kamasura.

Chapter 4 : The Description of the Victory of Kamasura

Salutations to Lord Ganesha.

The Primordial Goddess said: Once, the mighty demon king Kamasura, accompanied by Bali and other prominent demons, spoke with great joy.

Kamasura said: O Bali, Ravana, and others, listen to my words which are beneficial and righteous, if you find them agreeable. By the pride of the boon I have received, I shall certainly conquer the entire universe. With your support and the protection of Shukracharya, the power of my boon will never go in vain, and we shall never face defeat.

Hearing these words of Kamasura, the excellent demon lords, filled with joy, spoke to him with folded hands.

The demon lords said: You have spoken well, O noble one. We are all extensions of you, and by your prowess, O Lord, we shall conquer even the great lords of the gods. No one in the universe can match your valor, and with Shukracharya as our guide, we are invincible.

Then, all of them approached Shukracharya, the master of diplomacy, and after bowing to him and honoring him, they set out together. Accompanied by a vast and beautiful four-fold army, Kamasura shone like the moon surrounded by stars. Heroes riding various vehicles, armed with weapons and trees, and some carrying mountains, marched forth, intoxicated by the spirit of war. Just as the ocean covers everything with water, that countless army appeared to cover the earth.

Wherever Bali, Ravana, and other powerful demons went, the kings were unable to fight their armies. Some kings sought refuge, others died, and some, filled with fear, abandoned their kingdoms and fled to the forests. Having thus conquered the earth with its seven continents, the demon lords were filled with joy and victory. Then, entering the netherworld (Patala) and subduing Shesha and the Nagas, they proceeded to heaven, which was filled with the gods.

Seeing the wicked Kamasura arriving with the great demons, all the gods became terrified. After consulting with their preceptor, the gods, including Brahma and Vishnu, abandoned their kingdoms in fear and went to Lord Shankara. Seeing Amravati (the city of Indra) deserted, the demon lords, led by Kamasura, entered it. Kamasura sat on the throne of Indra, surrounded by the demon lords, and stationed them nearby.

Then, accompanied by them, he went to the abode of the Creator (Brahma). Seeing it in a similar state, he occupied the throne of Brahma. For some time, he and his wicked companions enjoyed various pleasures there. He then went to Vaikuntha, surrounded by the demon lords. Seeing it empty, he was filled with joy and reveled there with the prominent demon chiefs.

Then, the demon, deeply deluded by arrogance, spoke to his followers. Kamasura said: Tell me, O demons, is there anything I have not conquered? Vishnu and the other lords of the gods have fled like cowards. No one has come to the battlefield to fight. Since the gods are devoid of war, we have become the victors.

Then, Shambara, the demon, instigated by the other demon chiefs and acting for the welfare of the asuras, spoke with hostility. Shambara said: Conquer Lord Shambhu (Shiva), who is surrounded by the chief gods; only then will you become the true king of the universe. Do not think that Shiva, the giver of boons, will spare you. Listen to this beneficial advice, which is in accordance with one's own duty and brings happiness to all. The gods are established in their duties to bestow the fruits of actions; know that they remain in their own dharma, otherwise, the gods perish. This world functions by His command, and there is no doubt that you have become powerful through your own actions. We lack the power of penance, and that is why, O King, we have taken refuge in you. Therefore, surrounded by the demon lords, conquer Shambhu. See, O demon king, how Shambhu, the lord of the gods, stands with the gods as our enemy. The gods and asuras are defined in the Vedas, O respected one; Shiva is said to be the embodiment of the gods, how could he be favorable to the demons?

Hearing the words of Shambara, the mighty Kamasura, deluded by his nature, considered them to be the truth. Surrounded by his armed demon chiefs, he immediately marched towards Shankara. Realizing he had arrived, Shiva became anxious. After deliberating with the gods and seeing the terrifying form of Kamasura, Shiva abandoned his Kailasa. Filled with fear, the Lord lived in forests and caves wherever he could.

Then, the wicked Kamasura, seeing the great city of Shiva empty, entered it with his demon chiefs, filled with joy. Ascending the peak of Kailasa, the mighty Kamasura enjoyed the pleasures created there along with the asuras. Having thus conquered the universe, he rejoiced and considered himself fulfilled.

After a long time, he made his eldest son, Shoshana, the lord of Kailasa, free from fear. He made the wicked Dushpura the lord of Vaikuntha, and his youngest son the lord of the powers. The great demon made Bali the lord of the solar realm and Ravana the lord of the realm of power. He made the wicked Shambara the lord of Brahmaloka and the battle-hardened Mahisha the lord of Indra's realm. He fearlessly installed Durmada in the city of Yama. In this way, he established various asuras in different worlds.

He himself, accompanied by all, came to the earth and ruled his own kingdom with force. Intoxicated by women, wine, and meat, the mighty one enjoyed the pleasures of the three worlds with his friends. He did not realize how time passed, as he was deceived by time itself. Filled with pride, he considered himself immortal. Thus, the wicked Kamasura, arrogant with power, brought all of creation under his control.

Thus ends the fourth chapter of the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Purana, titled "The Description of the Victory of Kamasura."

Chapter 5 : The Meeting with Sage Mudgala

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Shaktis said: Oh, how truly wonderful is the power of Kamasura. Without even using weapons, he has conquered all of creation through illusion. We have never heard from your lotus-like mouth about such a great demon. Now, O Devi, please tell us the difficult way to destroy him.

Adi Shakti said: O Kali and other Shaktis, listen to my beneficial words. Hear how the Lord of the Ganas (Ganesha) conquered him, who was invincible to all others. Once, when the great king Kamasura was in his assembly, all the demon lords bowed to him with folded hands and said with respect:

The demons said: O Great King, you have surely accomplished your purpose. Still, listen to our words, which are beneficial for all. After conquering the moving and non-moving world, the demon lords established a kingdom, but in time, they were all killed by the gods who practice deceit. Therefore, O King of Kings, you too should strive to kill all the gods, starting with Shambhu (Shiva), who have taken a hostile stance. The immortals are called gods because of the power of Vedic rituals; they will never die by weapons and the like. Therefore, O great demon, listen to this strategy for destroying the enemy: the immortals will surely die if their rituals are stopped. All gods depend on rituals for their food; when the food is destroyed, they will perish. Do as was told in the Vedas long ago, O giver of honor. By doing so, we will become free of thorns and live as immortals ourselves, without a doubt, by your grace.

Hearing their words, Kamasura was pleased and said, "Well done, well done, you have spoken well." Now, all the demon lords must stop the rituals. O mighty ones, go to the earth by my command. Saying "So be it," the demon chiefs bowed to him and, filled with arrogance, went to the earth and stopped all rituals. They tormented the Brahmins and others, and those wicked, invincible demons made everyone abandon their duties of caste and stage of life (Varnashrama). The wicked ones created images of Kama (desire) and established them everywhere—in every country, city, and village—declaring them worthy of worship by the people.

Then, all the people who followed the Varnashrama dharma cried out in distress. Terrified by the demons, they stopped performing their daily ablutions and rituals. There was no Swaha, no Swadha, no Vashatkara; the Brahmins and others lived devoid of their duties. Some groups of sages and goddesses took refuge in deep forests, living there free from anxiety, devoted to their own dharma. Then, the great gods, deprived of their offerings, became emaciated. Filled with grief and trembling with fear, they gathered together. They pondered how to destroy Kamasura, but they found no solution and became deeply sorrowful.

Just then, the great yogi Mudgala, who knew the ultimate truth, arrived there. Seeing the wise sage, the gods were delighted. Shiva, Vishnu, and the other gods, along with great sages like Bhrigu, stood up, bowed to him, and worshipped him with respect. After making the sage sit comfortably, Shiva, deeply troubled by anxiety, asked him with humility:

Shri Shiva said: We are blessed, O great yogi, by your presence, O Lord. You are the worshipper of Ganesha and a purifier of all. In the beginning, our guru was the supreme Bhushundi; through him, we were enlightened with joy. That great sage’s guru is the bestower of all accomplishments, the foremost among the worshippers of Ganesha, who exists in all. O noble one, please save your disciples now. If you do not, you will see us gods dead, deprived of food. We have been displaced from our abodes by the wicked Kamasura. Now, due to the cessation of rituals, we are deprived of food. O sage, how can death come to those who are the creators, maintainers, and destroyers of the universe? It should not happen to those who possess these powers. Therefore, O chief of yogis, O great guru, tell us the way. We will act with speed to destroy Kamasura. For the protection of the universe, perform this supreme task. Destroy the wicked one through your guidance. Just as you destroy ignorance through the teaching of knowledge, in the same way, O Lord, no violence will ever befall you.

Hearing these words of Shankara, Mudgala, out of compassion and remembering Ganesha, spoke:

Mudgala said: Listen, O Shambhu, Lord of the world, Vishnu, and other gods. I will tell you the way to destroy Kamasura for your benefit. You are the direct form of Ishwara and a part of Ganesha, O Sadashiva. What can I say before you, O giver of honor? By your mere sight, people become fulfilled; there is no doubt, O Lord. What can I say to you, who are the remover of fear? Nevertheless, I will speak to follow your command. All you gods, worship Ganesha with all your heart. He is the Lord who resides in Svananda, free from the three qualities (Gunas). He will destroy this great demon in half a moment. Go now to the place where you, O Shambhu, and all the gods and sages attained success before. In the land of Svananda, O noble ones, worship the elephant-headed Lord Mayuresha according to the rituals, for he is the bestower of all success. Perform supreme penance with the single-syllable mantra. In a short time, the Lord of obstacles will be pleased himself.

Having said this, the great yogi Mudgala bowed to them and departed as he pleased, absorbed in the worship of Ganesha. Then the gods and sages were filled with joy and went to the Dandaka forest to meet Mayuresha.

Thus ends the fifth chapter named "The Meeting with Sage Mudgala" in the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 6 : The Meeting of Bhrushundi and the Five Deities

The Shaktis asked: How did the region named Mayura become the embodiment of self-bliss? Tell us this, for we are filled with great curiosity. How did Shiva and the others attain perfection in the past, O Mother of the Universe? Tell us how Bhrushundi became their teacher. What kind of supreme region is this, by whom was Gajanana (Ganesha) installed there in ancient times, and who attained perfection there? O Shakti, tell us the greatness of Mayura, which grants all perfections, and by which a person attains their desired goals in a short time.

Mudgala said: Being asked thus by the Shaktis, the Great Maya, who was filled with devotion, spoke to them with great respect. She said: I will tell you what you have asked, which grants all perfections; hearing it undoubtedly bestows the state of Brahman.

The Adi Shakti said: I will tell you a most wonderful history here, which is an excellent dialogue between Bhrushundi and Shiva and the others. Once, when the dissolution occurred and all movable and immovable things were destroyed, Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, and the others naturally merged into the void. Then, due to the intensity of the dissolution, the five elements and the Shaktis were dissolved everywhere, and everything became a void. Then the waking Brahman, the gross elements, merged; similarly, the subtle, the dream-state, and the causal state of Brahman also merged due to the force of dissolution. Then, the nature-form merged into the Purusha. The Purusha remained in the state of oneness with the Self in Brahman, and Brahman remained in the Supreme Self.

When such a great dissolution occurred, the region known as Svananda remained in its own self-aware form, granting the state of Brahman. At that time, Vigneshwara himself, absorbed in Yoga-nidra, slept in the Mayura region, assuming that form. After a long time had passed, he awoke. From his breath, the Vedas, beginning with the syllable Om, were born. Praised and awakened by them, he created everything again—Prakriti, Purusha, and the various elements. He created the three-fold qualities, the gross and subtle forms, and the three-fold cosmic form (Virata), which gave birth to various differences. Thus, the three-fold form became diverse, and the Brahman, consisting of the five elements, shone forth.

In the beginning, the five elements were distinct and organized; I will tell you of their creation. From his navel, Brahma, the grandfather of the world, was born; from his mouth, Vishnu, the protector, was born; and from the four-armed Ganesha, Shiva was born from his eyes. I, the Sun, was born from his left and right sides. Thus, the five ancient deities were born. Being associated with ignorance, they did not know their own nature or the Supreme at that time. To attain knowledge, the deities performed great penance. After a thousand divine years, the Lord of the Ganas was pleased and showed them the single-syllable seed mantra residing in their hearts.

Having received the mantra, the deities chanted it and worshipped Vigneshwara. After a hundred years had passed, the elephant-faced Lord was pleased. First, he showed his form in the heart of Shankara—a form that was human-like yet elephant-headed, complete and marked with four arms. Seeing this, Shiva was amazed and thought in his mind, "Who is this human-elephant form residing in my heart?" As he began to ask, the form disappeared. Then he again became absorbed in the meditation of Ganesha. He could not see that auspicious form again. Disturbed in mind, he went to Vishnu. Then Vishnu also rose from his meditation, and Shiva told him the story of what was in his heart. Vishnu also told Shiva about his own meditation. In this way, these five deities met and spoke.

Thinking among themselves, they were amazed and asked, "Who is this human who appeared in our meditation?" Then they praised the Lord, saying, "Salutations to whoever you are. O Ocean of Compassion, be pleased, for you are the root form of all." Then those mighty ones heard a voice from the sky, which brought happiness to Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, the Shaktis, and the Sun.

The voice from the sky said: I am Ganesha, the mover of the mind of the great gods. I am indeed the one whose terrible penance you performed. Being pleased, I first showed you the single-syllable seed mantra in your hearts through your penance, and you attained perfection by chanting it. You do not have the authority to see me directly, as you lack the power of Yoga; therefore, I disappeared. Ask Bhrushundi, the great devotee, everything directly. Go and bow to him; he will be the giver of knowledge. Knowing this, O gods, you will become capable of seeing me; there is no doubt that you will attain perfection.

Having said this, the Lord of Ganesha became silent and disappeared. Shiva and the others bowed down and went to that great sage. Vishnu and the others saw him residing in a pure hermitage. They bowed to Bhrushundi and stood there filled with joy. With folded hands, they all spoke to the sage, who was adorned with a trunk, who remained as the one, complete, and full of the bliss of Yoga.

The Deities said: Our birth, penance, learning, and knowledge are blessed by the sight of your feet. You are blessed, O one who is beyond the beginning, middle, and end among yogis. The sage, knowing them to be divine, worshipped them. Having offered hospitality, Bhrushundi, who knew the supreme truth, said: You are the root forms of the worlds and the Lords of the world. You have come to my hermitage due to the greatness of my fortune. Why have you come, O gods? Tell me your task, O protectors of the world and Supreme Lords, who know the beginning, middle, and end.

The Shaktis asked: How was Bhrushundi free from dissolution during the great dissolution? Tell us, O Shakti, the most wonderful story of that sage.

Mudgala said: Hearing the excellent question of the goddesses led by Mahalakshmi, the Mother of the Universe, filled with joy, told them. I have already revealed the beautiful story of Bhrushundi in the past. Hearing it, they were free from doubt and asked with humility.

Thus ends the sixth chapter entitled "The Meeting of Bhrushundi and the Five Deities" in the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 7 : Description of the Nature of Svananda Kshetra

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Shaktis said: O Shakti, we have heard the wonderful and primary story of Bhushundi, and we are undoubtedly satisfied. Now, tell us the dialogue between the sage and the gods, which is joyful and in which the pure knowledge of Vighneshwara is sung.

Adi Shakti said: Listen, all you Shaktis, to the ancient story, which removes all sins, is meritorious, and bestows all accomplishments. Hearing the words of Bhushundi, Shiva and the other gods were delighted, and having bowed to him, they asked about the events that occurred in the past.

Shiva and the others said: O Master, who is this Ganesha, who wears the form of a human-elephant? Tell us his knowledge and how he stirs the mind.

Bhushundi said: The letter 'Ga' is said to denote the union, and the letter 'Na' is known as the negation of union; the Lord of both is Ganesha. In the Vedas, the imperishable state is called the elephant, and his head should be known as that which is created by Maya. This entire world, which is subject to destruction, is his body form below the neck; there is no doubt that in the union of these two, he is Gajanana. The four arms of that great soul represent the four goals of life (Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksha); hence, he is famously called the four-armed Ganesha. The feet of that great soul are the individual soul (Jiva) and the Supreme Soul (Paramatma); hence, he is called the two-footed Lord of the Ganas according to Vedic discourse. From his belly, the universe, Brahma, and the great gods have emerged; therefore, he is truly called the pot-bellied Ganesha. The delusion-giving Maya-Siddhi of the Lord of the Ganas is said to have emerged from his left side as a form of Yoga. The supreme intellect, which is full of five types of consciousness and holds delusion, emerged from the right side of Ganesha as the form of knowledge. Ganesha, the Lord of both, is himself the embodiment of Yoga and peace; he took a body out of affection for his devotees. He is the knowledge-seeker for the sake of your tasks; worship him, and through him, everything will be auspicious.

Hearing this, the gods were astonished, and bowing to him, they addressed their teacher Bhushundi with amazed hearts.

Brahma and the others said: You are Ganesha himself, adorned with the trunk; you are our primordial teacher and the giver of wisdom; we bow to you. By your words, we have become wise in the meaning of Ganesha and have become his successful devotees, O great Yogi. Now, tell us the greatness of his worship, the place, and the method involving mantras, O great sage.

Bhushundi said: You, O great gods, have previously attained the state of Samadhi by becoming one with the Brahman, which is devoid of distinctions. Now, in the Dandaka forest, there is such an excellent region called Svananda; dwell there, absorbed in Ganesha. Create an image of Ganesha as you have seen in your own hearts, worship it according to the prescribed rites, and you will attain accomplishment.

Having said this, the great Yogi Bhushundi became silent. The gods, the best of Ganesha's devotees, spoke to him again.

Shiva and the others said: O Brahmin, where is this region located when the dissolution arrives? What is its greatness, O best of Yogis? Who established the image of Ganapati there in the past, and why did Ganesha manifest on earth? Tell us the greatness of that place where people attain accomplishment by serving Vighneshwara, for you are all-knowing, O great sage.

Having heard their words, Bhushundi, who knows the essence of all scriptures and the considerations of Ganapatya, spoke again.

Bhushundi said: The region of Ganesha is said to be of three types; listen with one mind as I explain their differences. The region of the Lord of obstacles is remembered in heaven, in the abode of Shambhu, in the netherworld in the palace of Shesha, and on earth in Mayuresha. I will tell you the greatness of the one on earth, which is eternal and always for the success of actions, O gods.

Prakriti is all-formed, and Purusha is known as the Self; the union of these two is called Svananda. It is attained by humans through self-realized Yoga; know that this is the region of the Lord of the Ganas on earth. Ganesha, the embodiment of Yoga, resides there himself; it is created by his own Maya to bestow Brahman. It is impossible to describe his form, which is his own bliss; know that this region is the best, as it is the union of all regions.

Then, by his own will and Maya, Ganesha created four types of regions for the sake of play. From his western part, the formless, supreme, power-filled Brahman emerged; it became two-fold by nature, O great gods. Rati is called the embodiment of enjoyment, and Kama is the one who deludes all; the union of these two is called the door. The supreme Rati that arises in the hearts of all people deludes their minds, and they wander, attached to objects. The great Purusha, Kama, resides there in the form of an agitator, through whom all people are devoted to various tasks. When the enjoyer and the enjoyment are free from delusion in the heart, one attains the Shakta Brahman, which is the supreme non-dual truth. Through that door, Yogis, having mastered Vighnesha, attain him; this is what the scriptures call the door.

From the northern part of Ganesha, the solar Brahman, which is always the speaker of truth, emerged by nature, O best of gods. It became two-fold due to the distinction between action and knowledge; listen to its method according to the will of the Lord of the Ganas. The entire world is based on action, and action proceeds from creation; in the end, everything is subject to action because of its absorption in the scriptures. The supreme earth stands as the basis, and the great Maya, the consort of the Sun, is the form of action. Varaha is the form of knowledge, and because of his constant detachment, he remains in the categories of action; he is the one who denotes the Sun. Some are attached to action, while others are devoted to knowledge; they wander in these two states, bound by delusion. When a person abandons the delusion of action and the delusion of knowledge, in the union of the two, he attains the nectar-like Brahman, which denotes the Sun. Or, through the solar path, it is attained by the best of devotees; this is what they call the door of Ganapati. Through that door, the best of Yogis go to the Lord of the Ganas; the wise call that door the northern part.

Then, from the eastern part of Ganesha, the supreme, full, and equally radiant Brahman, which is the embodiment of the bliss of Brahman, emerged. It stands in equal form in both truth and untruth, O gods; it is the Vaishnava form, respected by all, and it appeared in two ways. Lakshmi is called the embodiment of beauty and specifically the form of glory; she made it two-fold, endowed with beauty. O best of gods, nowhere is equality seen with Lakshmi; that beauty is the supreme Maya, called delusion by the wise. Where there is Lakshmi, there all glory is established; Lakshmi is read everywhere as the embodiment of both enjoyment and liberation. Vishnu, the agitator, is established in equality with her; he is the enjoyer of bliss and appeared as the holder of dual Maya. In the union of these two, the Brahman described in the Vedas is attained by the Vaishnavas as the supreme bliss. O gods, this door, which holds bliss, is called the eastern part of the region of Ganesha.

Then, from the southern part, the supreme, unmanifest Brahman emerged; because of the "neti, neti" (not this, not this) nature, it is the form of the three. That is the Shaiva Brahman, natural and accepted by all; by Maya, it became two-fold in the nature of man and woman. The wise call the great Maya, who is the form of his own will, Parvati; there is no doubt that she creates three types of herself by her will. There, Shiva, who is free from delusion, is called the supreme; he is independent, and the fourth Brahman is spoken of for the Shaiva devotees. In the union of these two, the unmanifest Brahman is declared; it is the southern door through which the Lord of the Ganas is attained.

The union of these four is called Svananda; it is attained by Yogis through self-realized Yoga. That is the region of the Lord of the Ganas, called Svananda; it is said to have four doors and bestows all accomplishments.

Chapter 8 : The Description of the Origin of Various Sacred Fields (Kshetras)

Bhushundi said: O leaders of the gods, the four-doored sacred field has been described. Now, I shall briefly explain the expansion of these doors. At the eastern door reside the two deities, Lakshmi and Narayana. Out of respect, they created various sacred fields for their respective abodes. By the grace of Ganesha, various Vaishnava sacred fields were created in the universe in ancient times. Similarly, Lakshmi created various sacred fields, which are known in the scriptures as the abodes of Lakshmi.

At the southern door reside the deities Shakti and Shiva, along with other immortals. By the grace of Ganesha, they created their own supreme sacred fields. Shankar created the Shaiva fields in the universe, and Shakti created various Shakta fields. At the western door, Rati and Kama, through the influence of Vighnaraja (Ganesha) and his divine illusion (Maya), created their own sacred fields. The fields of the Matrikas were created by Rati with effort, and the fields of the Dikpalas (guardians of the directions) were created by Madana (Kama).

At the northern door reside the supreme deities Mahi (Earth) and Varaha. By the grace of Ganapati, they created their own sacred fields. All the fields that were created on Earth were thus created by Varaha, including various solar (Saura) fields. The gods, along with their families, performed great penance. Being the knowers of the fields and united with them, they meditated upon the great Lord Ganesha by chanting various mantras and pleased him with intense devotion daily.

The gods, along with their respective sacred fields, observed fasts and worshipped the Lord of the Ganas, who resides within the fields, with undivided attention. When a hundred years had passed in this manner, the elephant-faced Lord became pleased and arrived to grant boons to those chief deities and their fields. Seeing him, they stood up immediately, bowed to Ganesha, and worshipped and praised him with necks bent in devotion.

The gods of the fields said: Salutations to you, O Lord of the Ganas, who resides in Svananda (the bliss of the self), who is the creator of Brahma, and who is without beginning, middle, or end, yet is the embodiment of the beginning, middle, and end. Salutations to you, O Ganesha, the bestower of worldly enjoyment and liberation, the one who engages in various plays, and the King of the elders. Salutations to you, the creator and destroyer, the vessel of illusion, the Lord of qualities, and the mover of all qualities. Salutations to you, O Lord of Lords, the giver of illusion, the embodiment of all yoga, and the Lord of Yoga. Salutations to you, O Lord of Siddhi and Buddhi, the embodiment of Siddhi and Buddhi, the bestower of Siddhi and Buddhi, and O Chintamani.

In your eastern form, you are Vishnu; in your southern form, you are Shiva; in your western form, you are Maya; and in your northern form, you are the Sun. O Ganesha, you create these four types of forms and play eternally. Who is capable of praising you, who are of such diverse forms? We are blessed, we are blessed to have seen the elephant-faced Lord, the one named Brahmanaspati, the supreme mover of the Vedas. O Lord of gods, since even the Vedas with their limbs are unable to praise you, what can we say? Therefore, we bow to you.

Having praised Ganesha in this way, the gods, along with their fields, bowed to him with great joy and devotion. Then, the Lord of the Ganas, who is fond of his devotees and was pleased by their penance, spoke to them.

Shri Ganesha said: O noble ones, O chief deities of the fields, ask for a boon. Pleased by your penance, devotion, and prayers, I shall grant your desires. Whoever reads or listens to this prayer composed by you shall become dear to me. It grants worldly enjoyment and liberation, increases wealth and grain, bestows sons and grandsons, and leads to complete success. One who reads this excellent prayer while being in my presence will undoubtedly attain the merit of all sacred fields.

Hearing the words of Ganesha, the gods were filled with joy. They bowed to him and said with devotion: O elephant-faced Lord, if you are pleased and are a bestower of boons, then may we always have devotion to your lotus feet. Tell us, O Ganesha, why were we all created? Tell us our duty, and we shall perform it, being bound by your command. O Lord with the large belly, give us a place to reside in Svananda, where we may worship you daily with devotion. O wise one, grant us all our own knowledge so that we, being under your command and filled with knowledge, may serve you.

Bhushundi said: Hearing their words, Ganesha, the ocean of compassion, spoke to those noble and devoted gods.

Shri Ganesha said: My sacred fields shall grant Dharma (righteousness), Artha (wealth), Kama (desire), and Moksha (liberation). By my boon, they shall be capable of fulfilling the tasks of those who serve them. Some will grant righteousness and wealth, while others will grant desires or liberation, depending on the division. Some will grant immediate results upon death in those places, while others will grant the supreme state through a gradual process. Similarly, the gods residing there will grant fruits through worship and by their mere sight, as they are fond of their respective fields.

The Lord of the Ganas gave them various names, such as Kashi, Prayaga, and others, which are impossible to list fully. Ganesha, the ocean of compassion, further said to them: You shall reside in your respective places with a portion of your divine essence (Kala). However, with your full essence, you shall reside here in my sacred field of Svananda, and by dwelling here, you shall worship me constantly. O respected ones, while residing in your own fields with a portion of your essence, you shall worship me in this field with your full essence. You shall undoubtedly be efficient in your respective duties, being devoid of pride and filled with devotion to me.

Those wise humans who perform the rituals of all the sacred fields on Earth and worship the gods according to the prescribed methods will, through that purification, attain residence in my sacred field. Upon their death in my field, they will become one with the Supreme (Brahman). Having said this, Ganesha, the Lord of Brahma, disappeared. The fields remained there, filled with joy.

After worshipping Ganesha, the gods returned to their respective places. All the deities, along with their fields, became filled with knowledge. As the elephant-faced Lord had instructed, all the great gods acted accordingly and returned to him with joy. There, those gods, along with their fields, resided in their subtle forms and worshipped him daily in the Svananda field with respect. Whoever listens to or reads this account of the gods and their fields will be granted residence in the sacred field by the Lord of Obstacles.

Chapter 9 : Description of the Procedure for the Mayuresha Gate Pilgrimage

The Devas asked: O Lord of Ganesha, since there are gatekeepers at the gates, please tell us the method of worshipping them and the Lord of the Gate.

Bhrishundi said: In the center of the sacred field resides Ganesha, the granter of all desires. He is the Lord, possessing an elephant trunk, a beautiful face, and four arms. He has a large belly, large eyes, three eyes, and sits in the Swastika posture. He holds a noose and a goad, and is adorned with a tusk and a gesture of fearlessness. He is decorated with various ornaments, garments, and a sacred thread made of a serpent, and his ears are like winnowing baskets. On his left side sits Siddhi, the giver of all things, the immortal one, who is two-armed and holds a fan. On his right side sits Buddhi, the two-armed embodiment of knowledge, eager to serve and holding fragrant substances. In front of him is the mouse, and a peacock also shines there. Behind him stand the Ganas, such as Pramoda and Amoda.

One should worship Ganesha, the granter of all success, using both Vedic and Puranic mantras ending with "Namah." Then, one should go to the eastern gate and worship the Lord of the Ganas stationed there, along with his Shakti and family. One should worship the two-armed Lord of the Ganas and his two-armed consort, Manjari, who is the embodiment of the world, with devotion. I shall now describe the meditation for this: meditate on the elephant-faced Lord, holding a lotus in one hand and embracing his beloved with the other. His cheeks are flowing with ichor and surrounded by bees; the Devas should meditate on this Lord of the Ganas, who is the embodiment of eternal bliss. One should also meditate in the heart on his two-armed Shakti, who is embraced by him on the right and holds a lotus in her left hand. She grants the desires of devotees, is complete, filled with eternal bliss, and is the Maya that destroys the worldly sorrows of those who practice devotion.

The Devas asked: O best of Gurus, you have spoken of Manjari, the beloved Maya of Ganapati. Please tell us the knowledge regarding her true nature.

Bhrishundi said: The word "Jara" is used everywhere to denote one who is unfaithful or a paramour. In all such contexts, it is considered to have multiple meanings. In all these, the Atman (Self) remains as the one true Purusha. It has no connection to the illusion of being a paramour. Yet, the Atman, residing in the body and deluded by Maya, takes on the form of duality. The supreme Shakti herself plays by deluding the soul, constantly showing the "paramour" aspect of the Atman. Manjari is known as the one who reveals this "paramour" aspect to me. Ganapati, residing in the duality of play, always sports with her. Their mental sons are considered to be Lakshmi and Narayana, who stand nearby at the gate, granting righteousness. O Lords of the Devas, their worship should be performed according to the prescribed rules, for through it, one attains eternal righteousness.

I shall now explain the pilgrimage procedure that grants all desires. By performing this, O Devas, you will attain success. The gate pilgrimage is said to begin on the first day of the bright fortnight of the month of Bhadrapada. One should bathe in a great river in the morning and worship Ganesha. Then, after bathing again, one should worship the Goddess of the Gate. After bathing once more, one should worship Ganesha himself. One should remain fasting and act as a guardian of the divine. Following the rules, one should constantly remember Ganesha. On the second day, one should worship the southern gate. At that gate, Ganesha is described as two-armed, and the Shakti is also two-armed; both are to be meditated upon as before. The Shakti there is known as Viraja. I will tell you the meaning of this, which brings knowledge and happiness: The three-fold nature of impurity is known as "Raja," but that which is free from delusion is called "Viraja" or Brahman. The Goddess Viraja, united with Ganesha, is the supreme one. Their mental sons are considered to be Parvati and Shankara. One should worship them with all one's heart; there is no doubt that through this, all goals are achieved.

On the third day, one should worship the deity of the western gate with prescribed rituals and fasting. The Goddess and the Lord of the Ganas are to be meditated upon as before. The Shakti there is known as Ashraya, the supporter of all. Their mental sons are known as Rati and Kama. One should worship them to attain one's desires. On the fourth day, one should go to the supreme northern gate and worship the gate-Shakti, who grants both worldly enjoyment and liberation. The meditation for the Goddess and the Lord of the Ganas is the same as before. Their mental sons are known as Mahi and Varaha. One should worship them according to the rules as before. By this pilgrimage alone, a human attains liberation.

On the fourth day, one should worship the Lord of the Ganas at noon while fasting. One should keep a vigil at night and break the fast on the fifth day. A person who does this with Brahmins will attain the four-fold fruits of life. One should perform this gate pilgrimage in the bright fortnight of the month of Magha, and similarly in the month of Jyeshtha; this is known as the three-fold annual pilgrimage. Alternatively, one may perform this gate pilgrimage every month in the bright fortnight to attain all goals. Or, if one has come for the pilgrimage of the Lord of Ganas, one may perform the gate pilgrimage at that time. There is no strict rule regarding the month, fortnight, or lunar day; one can perform the pilgrimage in four days according to the procedure.

I will tell you another method of the gate pilgrimage, which grants the four-fold fruits to those with physical strength. On the bright fourth day, one can perform the four-fold pilgrimage within a single day. Starting from sunrise, one should perform a brief worship and conclude it before sunset. One should perform the worship of the Lord of the Ganas with devotion on that day. Or, if someone has come for the pilgrimage by their own choice, they can perform the pilgrimage in one day with devotion. There are no rules for the elderly, the sick, or children; they may perform the pilgrimage as they wish. Or, a person may perform the pilgrimage through a Brahmin, moving from gate to gate. By worshipping Ganesha at the gates according to one's capacity, one attains the four-fold fruits.

Whoever worships Ganesha at the gates, wherever they may go, will attain righteousness, desire, wealth, and liberation. At the time of death, their final thought will lead them to their ultimate destination. They will not be subject to the transformations of the earth or the distinctions of high and low. Whoever hears this greatness of the gate pilgrimage will, through the power of this purification, attain both worldly enjoyment and supreme liberation.

Chapter 10 : The Description of the Mystery of the Gates

Salutations to Lord Ganesha.

The five deities asked: O great Yogi, please explain in detail the glory of this sacred site, which is known as Svananda. What is its extent? Furthermore, O Lord of Yogis, tell us about the four goals of life—Dharma (righteousness), Artha (prosperity), Kama (desire), and Moksha (liberation)—and how a person can attain the knowledge required to achieve them. Why is Dharma established in the eastern gate, Artha in the southern, Kama in the western, and why is Moksha situated in the northern gate, O great sage? How are these four divided among the four Brahmas? Explain this to us.

A person first attains the Shakta state, then the Saura (solar), then the Vaishnava Brahma, and then the Shaiva state through meditation. Thereafter, one undoubtedly attains the Ganesha-Brahma. By following this order, a person established in the path of Yoga becomes one with the Divine. However, you have previously stated that a person should first follow the Vaishnava path at the gate. Then you mentioned the Shaiva, Shakta, and Saura paths in a different order. Why is this reversal? If one bypasses the Shakti and Surya paths to reach the Vaishnava state, will one not suddenly become confused and fall from the path?

Shakti said: Being asked thus, the great Yogi Bhrishundi, who knows the ultimate truth, spoke to those great deities. Listen, O Shaktis, to what he said.

Bhrishundi said: Dharma is the form of one's own duty and the giver of all accomplishments. Artha is known as the form of capability and the provider of all things. Kama is the enjoyment of the body, which is dear to the heart and provides happiness. Moksha is described as the state of being free from the four bodies. Dharma is impartial and always provides fruits according to one's actions. O Lords, Dharma does not distinguish between one's own and others; one receives the fruits of their own good or bad deeds. The Vaishnava Brahma is impartial, and therefore, Dharma is established in the eastern gate, illuminating all duties. If a person is first established in their own duty, they will undoubtedly attain everything, as Dharma is the root cause. Dharma is composed of the limbs of Vishnu and is sheltered in the eastern gate; therefore, one should first approach the eastern gate for the sake of Dharma.

Artha is the form of capability, and there is nothing greater than the Lord. Because the Lord is capable, Artha is sheltered there. If any deities exist in a state of capability, they are all parts of His essence; there is no doubt about this. Among all scriptures, Shiva is declared to be the only Lord. Artha originated from the limbs of Shiva, and therefore it is sheltered in Him. By practicing Dharma, a person becomes capable, and this is the prescribed order for all actions. The pilgrimage starting from the second gate (the southern gate) is described by those who know the truth as the path to all accomplishments for humanity.

Kama is described as the nature of enjoyment, providing objects for the body. Shakti is the immediate cause of these objects. Because Kama originated from the limbs of Shakti, it remains sheltered in Her, increasing all desires. A person first takes refuge in Dharma and becomes capable; then, they enjoy all the various pleasures of life. Therefore, the third gate is the giver of the fruits of enjoyment, which the wise should always know in the context of pilgrimage.

Moksha is described by the wise as being free from birth and death. The Sun, which provides the path of light, always resides there. The soul is said to be the Sun, and from it, liberation is attained. Therefore, liberation resides where one takes refuge in the Sun. A person who is satisfied with desires and Dharma eventually desires liberation, becoming free from thirst for worldly things, O best of deities. One who is filled with worldly desires cannot attain liberation. Therefore, the fourth gate is described as the gate of liberation.

I have told you the mystery of these gates, O Lords. Hearing or reading this brings complete happiness. Based on the authority of this sequence, one should first take refuge in Dharma, and the gate created by Ganesha should be approached through the Vaishnava path.

Thus ends the tenth chapter titled "The Description of the Mystery of the Gates" in the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Mahapurana.

Chapter 11 : Description of the Dimensions of the Sacred Territory

Bhṛśuṇḍi said: The sacred territory of Ganesha is described in the scriptures as being quadrangular in shape. It is essentially the manifestation of Brahman itself and extends for twelve yojanas. To the east of Ganesha, at a distance of one hundred bows, lies the first gate, which is twenty-eight units in length, though it is said to be slightly less than half of that in some contexts. To the south of Ganesha, the gate is twice the size of the eastern one, a fact that should always be known by the wise. To the west of Ganesha, the gate is twice the size of the southern one, though the wise have noted it is slightly smaller than that. To the north of Ganesha, the final gate is situated, which is slightly less than a quarter smaller than the western gate.

O best of gods, this is the extent of the territory as described. The Ganesha-kshetra is considered distinct from the nine divisions of the world. O best of deities, these sacred territories are the most excellent during the times of dissolution; they do not perish because they are protected by their own presiding deities. During the time of the Great Dissolution, the elements, along with the three gunas, are swiftly dissolved by the power of Time, the Supreme Soul. At that time, all these sacred territories, along with their respective deities, are known by the yogis of old to be dissolved. However, the Ganesha-kshetra remains eternal and indestructible due to its inherent power.

The gods asked: O best of the masters of yoga, this territory is described by those who know the Vedas as being subject to decay. How can it be devoid of destruction? And since Svananda (the bliss of the Self) is present in all unions, how did this territory come to be called Svananda?

Bhṛśuṇḍi said: The Ganesha-kshetra is not merely a worldly place; it is universally honored in the scriptures. Because it is the territory of Brahmanaspati (the Lord of Brahman), it is remembered as the form of Brahman itself. Just as the form of Svananda is known to be self-manifesting, so too is the Svananda-kshetra described as having the form of Brahman. The body is the form with attributes (saguna), while the head is the form without attributes (nirguna). The territory is described as the union of these two. Illusion (Siddhi) is the sustainer of the body, and the intellect (Buddhi) is the container of that illusion; thus, the territory is remembered as such. Because it is free from attachment, it is known as the source of the joy of both the masculine and feminine principles; thus, the territory of Ganesha, Siddhi, and Buddhi is described.

What more can be said? Nothing belonging to Ganesha is mundane; his territory and all that is within it is composed of Brahman. Whatever belongs to the Lord of the Ganas is an expression of Brahman. The worlds and all else are called Brahmanaspati by the great sages. The territories that arise from the Ganesha-kshetra are fruitful for those who die within them, O gods. They are said to grant dharma, artha, kama, and moksha. The Ganesha-kshetra is the fifth Brahman, granting the state of being one with Brahman. By traveling to the gates, one attains the highest dharma, artha, kama, and liberation. A person who dies in this territory is immediately cleansed of all impurities and, without a doubt, becomes one with Brahman.

This Ganesha-kshetra is composed of both gods and demons and is a testament to Brahman. It was realized by Shiva and others, and thus it is known as a divine territory. Because it is situated at the crown of the lotus (the head), it is also called the Asuric (divine-demonic) territory. The union of these two is the self-manifesting truth. Whoever makes the pilgrimage to the four gates will attain happiness wherever they may go. Whoever comes from anywhere and performs the pilgrimage to the gates of Ganesha’s territory will attain everything. One who performs the gate pilgrimage daily while residing in the territory will be honored by all and will eventually become one with Brahman. There is nothing in the universe equal to the Ganesha-kshetra; it is the fifth, beyond the four, and is the embodiment of the four.

The wise have described the Ganesha-kshetra as being of three types—external, internal, and others. O leaders of the gods, listen: The inner sanctum of Ganesha is half a yojana in size, where the incarnations of Ganapati reside. The Ganesha-forms, such as Mudgala and others, reside there, and others come to serve the Lord of the Ganas. That square area, adorned with four gates, grants success to devotees and fulfills all desires.

To the east of Ganesha, at a distance of slightly less than six hundred bows, is the gate that grants all desires. There, Buddhi herself resides, served by all forms of knowledge; by worshipping her with the arts, a person becomes wise. To the south of Ganesha, at twice the distance of the eastern gate, lies the great gate of the inner sanctum. There, the Ganas, such as Pramoda, who are immersed in the bliss of Brahman, reside, granting the position of Gana-hood through worship. To the west of Ganesha, the gate of the inner sanctum is twice the distance of the southern gate. There, Siddhi herself resides, granting various accomplishments through worship. To the north of Ganesha, the gate is described by the wise as being a quarter less than the western gate. There, the sixty-four Yoginis reside, accompanied by their families and the Mothers who have attained yoga-siddhi. By worshipping them, a human attains yoga, the power of invisibility, and the fulfillment of all desires.

The person who performs the pilgrimage to the inner sanctum daily, or on the fourth day (Chaturthi), attains the fulfillment of all desires. When a devotee comes for the pilgrimage, they should perform the circumambulation of the inner sanctum with devotion. Beyond the inner sanctum is the temple territory, where the gods reside, eager to serve. It is considered to be a square of three yojanas, and I shall describe its four gates briefly.

To the east of Ganesha, at a distance of fourteen hundred bows, is the eastern gate. There, the great King Bhairava, naked and terrifying, holding a trident and with matted hair, stands in his own radiance. By worshipping him, humans attain their desires and are freed from the torments born of various karmas. At twice that distance to the south of Ganesha, Shiva, known as Nilakantha, stands as the guardian of the southern gate. One who worships him is freed from all bonds and poison. To the west, at twice the distance of the southern gate, stands the gate guardian known as Krittivasa. By worshipping him, demonic karma is destroyed, and one attains their desires. To the north, at a distance a quarter less than the western gate, stands Bhimeshvara. One who performs the pilgrimage to him becomes healthy and full of vitality.

I have described the third form of the territory in detail. It is the holy Mayura-kshetra, adorned with four gates. The divine territory, extending one yojana in all directions from the center, is known to grant the four goals of life. A person who dies in the eastern part of the territory goes to Vaikuntha, for it is the Vaishnava-kshetra. One who dies within a yojana to the south goes to Kailasa, for it is the Shaiva-kshetra. One who dies within a yojana to the west of the Mayura-kshetra goes to the realm of the Goddess, for it is the Shakta-kshetra. One who dies within a yojana to the north goes to the solar realm, for it is the Surya-kshetra.

I have thus described the greatness of this territory with its dimensions. Hearing or reading this destroys all sins. Go there, worship the Elephant-faced Lord, install an immovable image, and you will surely attain success.

Chapter 12 : Description of the Auspicious and Inauspicious Effects of Residing in Mayurakshetra

The Devas asked: O highly fortunate one, in the previous Kalpa, people attained perfection by performing the pilgrimage to the door of Mayura. Please tell us about that. Also, tell us about the perfection attained by those who die in this divine land, and who attains perfection by performing the pilgrimage to the single door? Hearing this wonderful story increases the joy in our hearts. You are omniscient and know the beginning, middle, and end; there is no doubt about this.

Bhrishundi said: O best of the Devas, listen to the beautiful story that happened in the past. Having bowed to my Guru Mudgala, I will narrate it briefly. In the Dravida country, there was a Brahmin who was devoid of knowledge. In that same place, there was a foolish man born of a low caste. Both he and his parents were destitute and abandoned by their friends. Leaving their homeland, they wandered the earth. By divine coincidence, they arrived at Mayura and stayed there happily among the people. At dawn, after bathing, they took leaves of Shami and Durva and went with affection to worship Vighnesha. The low-caste man gave his Durva and other offerings to the Brahmin, and the Brahmin worshipped the Lord of the Ganas with devotion, though he was devoid of formal mantras and proper ritual materials.

O best of the Devas, they then joined the crowd and respectfully performed the pilgrimage to the door of the inner sanctum. Arriving at the eastern gate, they worshipped Buddhi and then Ganesha, and stayed there. They remained fasting according to the rules, but on the second day, being hungry, they did not perform the pilgrimage. They left the wonderful field in joy. Suddenly, they became filled with knowledge and wisdom. Remembering their past lives, they reflected deeply, saying, "Alas, the greatness of this field cannot be described. We performed the pilgrimage to the single door and attained knowledge and wisdom; how can we praise it enough?" They then went to their own city and became respected by all. Due to that purification, they became devoted to the worship of Ganesha. By the power of their devotion, they eventually went to the realm of Svananda, saw Vighneshvara there, and became one with Brahman.

In this way, many people attained perfection at the door; it is impossible for me to describe it even in a hundred years. There is no doubt that those who performed the pilgrimage to other doors also attained the fruits as described, though it is impossible to narrate it all. I will now tell you about the perfection of those who die in the Mayura field. O chief of the Devas, listen, for it increases all satisfaction.

In the past, a Shudra named Dhumra came there by fate, afflicted with leprosy. He lived on leftovers and was addicted to begging. He died within a month, suffering greatly from his disease. Yet, he took refuge in Svananda and became one with Brahman. Thus, many people became one with Brahman in the Mayura field. O best of the Devas, it is not possible to describe their character; there is no doubt they attained the fruits as promised.

When sinful people who reside in that field die there, they have no fear of Yama. The one named Nagna-Bhairava is the appointed guardian of the field, and he is the eternal punisher of those who dwell in Mayura. The entire field of Vinayaka is under his control; he purifies the sinner and establishes them in Svananda.

The Devas asked: Who is this Bhairava in the form of a naked one, and what is the nature of the suffering for sinners in Mayura?

Bhrishundi said: He is devoid of the attachment of Maya and is always like a witness; that is why he is called "Nagna" (the naked one), the foremost among the Ganas. All elements of the world tremble before him, and the world functions because of his fear. Brahma, the creator, Vishnu, the protector, Hara, the destroyer, and the Sun, who shines daily—all exist and perform their duties out of fear of him. The power of delusion also exists because of his fear. Everything stays in its place and performs its duty because of him; that is why he is called Bhairava. Created by Ganesha through Maya, he is the giver of all goals. He is the protector of the Ganas, but a source of terror to others.

The inner sanctum of Ganesha is said to be his secret form. Therefore, O Devas, one should always stay there with effort. One should perform worship and good deeds there; a human should not engage in falsehood or lust there. O protectors of the Devas, one should not urinate or defecate there; one should always remain with a Ganesha-like consciousness. Just as the merit in this field is said to be greater than in any other land, the sin committed there is also greater. Therefore, a noble person should not commit sins in this field; one should perform meritorious deeds according to the scriptures.

The sin committed in other fields is destroyed instantly, but in the fields of the five Devas (like Brahma), the sin committed by humans in Mayura is considered "Vajralepa" (indelible). I will tell you the method, O best of the Devas, so that you may be free from doubt. The sin committed in Mayura is destroyed in the temple; the sin committed in the temple is destroyed in the inner sanctum. The sin committed in the inner sanctum is destroyed by the power of the door pilgrimage and the circumambulation. There is no doubt about this.

However, the sin committed during the door pilgrimage itself becomes indelible. It will destroy the person only after giving them suffering. A person who commits sins from birth until death in the Mayura field will have to undergo suffering. For ten thousand years, the leader Nagna-Bhairava will purify the human by giving them Bhairava-like suffering. There are three types of suffering from that great-souled Bhairava. O great lords, listen as I tell you briefly. There are fire pits and other things in the Bhairava site; it is said to be more terrible than the suffering of Yama, and it is impossible to describe. First, he gives that, and then the fearsome Bhairava gives suffering equal to Yama. Then he gives the suffering born of ghosts and spirits. After that, he purifies the human and establishes them in Svananda. He himself gives forty thousand years of Bhairava-suffering, then three thousand years of Yama-suffering, and then three thousand years of suffering born of the demonic womb, says the angry, trident-wielding lord Nagna.

Thus, I have told you of the great fear born of suffering, so that a person residing in the Mayura field may know what happens after death. The wicked people who reside in the Ganesha field will be cast out by the Lord Bhairava himself, who is the source of fear. But he will gather the virtuous ones in his heart, O great lords, and Bhairava will protect those who dwell in the field with respect. Those who reside in the Mayura field and have taken the vow of renunciation of the field will not have even a trace of sorrow. Lakshmi makes them righteous, Parvati and Shankara grant them various riches, Rati and Kama grant them various desires, and Varaha grants them eternal knowledge. Therefore, abandoning everything, one should take refuge in Mayura. O Devas, the wise call such a person one who has become Brahman.

A creature wandering in various wombs, attached to wife, children, and the nourishment of the body, if he attains a human body and resides in the Ganesha field, he should be known as one who is no better than a donkey if he does not realize this. The fifth form, which is Brahman, is considered to be present on this earth. Those who do not serve it in the form of the field are like animals. The chief Devas in heaven desire a human body, thinking, "We will go to the Mayura field and die there by good fortune." By dying there, one attains the supreme fifth state of Brahman. Those who desire Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha should seek the Supreme. The merit earned by humans in great fields like Kashi leads them to Mayura through the process of purification. Thus, everything has been told, especially the form of the day. Reading or hearing this daily grants the fruit of residing in the field.

Chapter 13 : The Description of the Naming of Mayuresha and the Granting of Boons in Dandakaranya

The Devas asked: O Bhrishundi, you who know the ultimate truth, please tell us out of curiosity how the region of Ganesha came to be named Mayuraka.

Bhrishundi said: In a previous kalpa, O Lords of the Devas, you worshipped the Lord of Obstacles (Ganesha) there, and He appeared before you in person to grant boons. He arrived as the Great Lord, with a pleasant countenance, riding a peacock, having ten arms and ten weapons, a large belly, and the face of an elephant. He told them to ask for their desired boons, promising to grant them, as He was pleased by their penance, devotion, and prayers. After they received everything they desired from the Elephant-faced Lord, the gods spoke to the Lord of the Ganas again with folded hands, saying: "O Elephant-faced Lord, although your vehicle is the mouse, you have come here riding a peacock. Because you were seen in this region mounted on a peacock, this place has become known as the Mayura-janma (Peacock-born) region. From this day forward, by your grace, O Elephant-faced Lord, this region shall be famously known as Mayura-namaka. May you be the Lord of this Mayura region, known everywhere as Mayuresha, the granter of grace to your devotees." Ganesha said "So be it" and vanished. The gods then bowed and returned to their respective duties.

I have told you the reason for the naming of the region and its Lord. Now listen to another reason, O Lords of the Devas. The Great Maya, who performs infinite plays in various forms, is called Mayura, and Mayuresha is her Lord. This region is the embodiment of the four Vedas and the form of Maya; because of His presence there, He is called Mayuresha.

The Devas asked: O Yogi, the Lord of the Ganas is four-armed, but He appeared on the peacock with ten arms; how did that happen?

Bhrishundi said: O Devas, this region is full of the bliss of the Self and is accepted by all as the region of Ganesha; there is nothing strange in this. The meditation on the single-syllable mantra (Om) is the primary one, and it is well-known that it resides in this region. The seven crores of great mantras of the great-souled Ganesha all resided in the Mayura region in different kalpas. The Lord of the Ganas assumes infinite forms for the welfare of the world, and all those forms manifest in the Mayura region. Because of His devotees, Ganesha, who resides in the Mayura region, remains there in various forms and aspects. Therefore, all the forms of Ganesha are essentially rooted and established in the Mayura region.

Shakti said: Hearing the words of Bhrishundi, the lords of the gods were filled with joy, and bowing down with devotion, they asked: O Great Sage, tell us how the region of the great-souled Ganesha became the principal one in the Dandakaranya forest.

Bhrishundi said: O Devas, the 'danda' (punishment) is said to be the result of one's own actions, which humans must experience in this world according to the scriptures. The forest that destroys these 'dandas' is called 'Aranya'. In all scriptures, the wise call that forest 'Aranya' which is void of such karma. The state of Brahman is complete and is called 'adanda' (without punishment); hence, it is specifically called Dandakaranya. In Dandakaranya, the supreme Ganesha, who is the embodiment of Brahman, resides for the benefit of those who are 'adandi' (those beyond worldly punishment). The great yogis like Shuka are called 'adandi'. Ganesha, the Lord of Yogis and the Lord of Brahman, shines there.

I will tell you an ancient story. When Brahma created the great forests for the success of works, Dandakaranya, always longing for Ganesha, bowed to Brahma and asked: "O Grandfather, I wish to worship the Lord who grants the state of Brahman. Please give me the king of mantras for that purpose." Brahma said: "Worship Ganesha with devotion; He is the embodiment of Brahman. He is the Lord of the Ganas, and the Ganas are the expressions of Brahman. His city is Svananda, his beloveds are Siddhi and Buddhi, his sons are Laksha and Labha, and his vehicle is the mouse. He has the face of an elephant but a human body; everything is Brahman, hence He is called Brahmanaspati." Having said this, Brahma gave him the supreme single-syllable mantra. Dandakaranya bowed and went to perform penance. After a thousand divine years, having attained the supreme Ganesha-knowledge, the forest worshipped Him with devotion.

The Lord of the Ganas, pleased and fond of His devotees, appeared and asked him to choose a boon. Dandakaranya bowed and praised Him: "Salutations to the Elephant-faced, the Great-bellied, the Lord of Obstacles, the Protector of Brahman. Salutations to Heramba, the four-armed, the holder of the noose and goad. Salutations to the Primordial One, the Lord of Svananda, the giver of Siddhi and Buddhi. Salutations to Mayuresha, who resides on the mouse and plays with various illusions. O Lord, make my name meaningful; dwell forever in my body, O Elephant-faced One. Grant me your devotion, which reveals Brahman, so that I may be fulfilled."

Ganesha said: "This hymn you have composed will be a granter of all attainments, worldly enjoyment, and liberation. Everything you have said will be fruitful. You will worship me with all your heart, and I will dwell within your body in my various incarnations." Having said this, Ganesha vanished. Thus, Dandakaranya became the excellent region of Ganesha, and the gods came there to worship Him. Dandakaranya is called the region of Ganesha, and within it lies the Mayura region, which signifies Svananda.

The Devas said: You are blessed among yogis, the destroyer of all doubts. We are never satisfied hearing the nectar of your words. Now, O Lord, please describe the three-fold pilgrimage of this region according to the scriptures.

Chapter 14 : Pilgrimage of the Gates

Bhṛshuṇḍi said: O highly fortunate ones, listen with devotion as I briefly narrate the supreme story that occurred in a previous aeon. Long ago, a Brahmin's wife was tormented by wicked men. To protect her virtue, she became very determined. Alone in the forest, she said to those villains, "From today, on the fifth day, I shall become a woman (in a state where you cannot harm me)." She spoke the truth, and without doubt, the forest-dwellers left, feeling satisfied.

The woman, filled with sorrow in the forest, contemplated, "My husband has gone to serve a patron for a sacrifice. What should I do? I shall go to the nearby Mayūreśa (Lord of the Peacock). There is no doubt that the foundation of Dharma exists there. By merely traveling there, one attains their own true duty." Having thought this, the lady went to Mayūreśa. After bathing in the Gaṇeśa-tīrtha and worshipping the Lord of the Ganas, she worshipped the Shakti stationed at the Eastern Gate. Then, having worshipped Mayūreśa according to the rites, she returned home immediately to keep her word.

On the fifth day, those wicked men returned to the forest to find her. She remembered the supreme Gaṇeśa, who is endowed with the power of Dharma. By her mere remembrance, fire consumed them all. She was astonished and held Gaṇeśa in high regard. Having died, she meditated on Gaṇeśa, who resides in the power of Dharma, and went to Vaikuṇṭha, where she was greatly honored by Vishnu. In another aeon, she was reunited with her husband and, as a Brahmin woman, served Him with devotion. In the end, she became a leader among the celestials in Svānanda-loka, having attained the state of Brahman through great devotion and union with her husband. Thus, many people of various castes—men and women—attained great accomplishments there.

Now, listen with respect to the glory of the Southern Gate, so that you may be free from all doubts. There was a king of the Madra country, learned in scriptures, strong, and eager to protect his subjects. Once, the king was severely tormented by all his feudatories and was unable to restrain them by force. Filled with great sorrow, he renounced his kingdom and went to the sage Śaunaka to attain success in his actions. Knowing the king's plight, Śaunaka said, "O King, go to Mayūreśa, the giver of success. There, in the southern part, is the supreme gate, which is the embodiment of wealth. By merely performing the pilgrimage there, one attains all desires."

Bhadraseṇa bowed to him, went to Mayūreśa, and performed the pilgrimage to the Southern Gate with devotion. Returning to his city and remembering the Lord of Obstacles, Bhadraseṇa defeated all his enemies and ruled his kingdom. Thus, by the method of pilgrimage, a man becomes capable and certainly attains the wealth befitting his own caste. Later, he always worshipped the Gaṇeśa of the Southern Gate, enjoyed worldly pleasures, and upon death, attained Kailāsa. He was reborn as a Vaishya, worshipped the Lord of Ganas daily with devotion, and in the end, by dying in that sacred field, he became one with Brahman, known as Megha. Thus, many people became wealthy; I cannot describe how many.

Now I shall narrate the story of the Western Gate, which grants supreme meaning; listen, O knowers of all truths. In the city of Bhāraka, a Vaishya named Sāma was tormented by diseases and poverty, devoid of enjoyment. He once heard the greatness of the Svānanda-kṣetra from the Skanda Purāṇa and was astonished. He went to Mayūreśa for a pilgrimage and worshipped the deity of the holy place according to the scriptures. Being severely afflicted by diseases and poverty, he performed the pilgrimage to the Western Gate. Consequently, he was freed from disease, became joyful, returned home, and resumed his trade. He became wealthy and respected by all. He worshipped the Gaṇeśa of the Western Gate, enjoyed various pleasures at home, and in the end, went to the realm of Shakti, which grants supreme happiness. Later, he was reborn in that sacred field as a Brahmin learned in the Vedas, named Śivaśarmā, and worshipped Mayūreśa. By renouncing the world in that sacred field and taking refuge in Mayūreśa, he became one with Brahman in the end.

Now, listen to the pilgrimage of the Northern Gate, O best of gods. In Karṇāṭa, there was a Shudra named Bhīma. Once, after hearing the Purāṇa, he became filled with sadness, thinking, "Everything is vain and illusory; I shall renounce it with respect. By what action can one attain liberation completely? That is what I, a human being, must accomplish." He wandered here and there in great distress. In the forest, the Shudra saw the ascetic Viśvāmitra. He bowed to him and stayed there, honored by the sage. He asked for the path to liberation, and the sage replied happily:

Viśvāmitra said: "A man attains liberation through great effort and virtuous deeds performed over many births. Therefore, O Shudra, go to the great sacred field of Mayūreśa and perform the pilgrimage to the Northern Gate; you will attain liberation. You will attain liberation there without further struggle. Do not be sad, O Shudra; go, go by my command."

Bhīma bowed to the sage and went to Mayūreśa. He performed the pilgrimage to the Northern Gate according to the rites. Due to his intense desire, he opened the door to liberation. Returning home, he performed his worldly duties, remained devoted to his own Dharma, and served the people of the three higher castes with joy. He worshipped the liberating Gaṇeśa daily with respect. In the end, he went to the radiant realm of the Sun. Then, gradually, that Shudra, through the path of light, became the very form of liberation due to the power of the pilgrimage.

Thus, many people attained liberation there; it is impossible for me to describe all their stories. Now, O lords of gods, I shall narrate the complete pilgrimage of the four gates, which grants all accomplishments, for your pleasure. In Mālava, there was an outcaste named Dundubhisvana, a known sinner who wandered the earth. Greedy for wealth, he killed people and lived in hollows; he would not spare even a Brahmin or a cow. Once, a Vaishya carrying wealth went from Mālava to the Daṇḍaka forest for trade. Seeing the wealthy man on the main road, the wicked man followed him. Gradually, the Vaishya arrived at Mayūreśa, and the evil-minded Dundubhisvana followed him. The Vaishya became engaged in the pilgrimage of the Lord of Ganas, and the outcaste also performed the pilgrimage there.

As people of various kinds stood at the four gates, the Chandala also stood there in Mayūreśa. Then, a change of heart occurred in that wicked man, and he thought, "Alas, I, a great fool, have committed various sins. What will be my fate at death? It will be terrible." He bowed to the Vaishya, returned to his place with respect, and lived according to his own Dharma, performing his duties. Through the merit of the Eastern Gate, he became righteous; through the Southern Gate, he became powerful; through the merit of the Western Gate, he was freed from diseases and became wealthy, enjoying various pleasures surrounded by friends; and through the Northern Gate, which is the fruit of the pilgrimage, the outcaste attained great liberation through the path of light.

I cannot describe the character of those who perform the pilgrimage of the gates. People of various castes and stages of life became endowed with the four goals of life. Whether a man, a woman, or even an animal, if one performs the pilgrimage of the gates, one attains the fourfold fruit. Whoever listens to or reads this story of the pilgrimage of the gates will have all their actions become fruitful.

Thus ends the fourteenth chapter of the sixth section of the Mudgala Mahāpurāṇa, titled "The Description of the Pilgrimage of the Gates."

Chapter 15 : Description of the Glory of the Pilgrimage to the Doors of the Divine Temple

Bhushundi said:
The temple of the Lord has four doors. O Gods, I shall now describe the character of those who serve them well. Once, in the land of Gurjara, there lived a Shudra named Shambhu, who was wealthy and loved by his friends, though he was wicked. One evening, he went out of the village for some work and was surrounded by ghosts. Seeing the terrifying ghosts, he became frightened, and those cruel spirits entered his body. The Shudra fell down, and his friends came, picked him up, and took him to his home.

Thereafter, he wandered the earth like a demon. His friends tried their best to help him, but the great ghosts never left him. They traveled to various holy places and regions with him, but even the kings of the ghosts did not leave him due to his past deeds. Finally, his friends took him to the great region of Mayuresha. After worshipping Mayuresha, they took Shambhu to the deity Bhairava, who appears in a naked form. Upon seeing the great Lord Bhairava, the ghosts, filled with fear, left Shambhu without a doubt. Seeing him restored to his natural state, his friends were amazed. They worshipped the Lord of Obstacles (Ganesha) again and returned to their city. By the sight of the naked Bhairava, a man is freed from the sins of demons and ghosts. Through the vision of the naked Bhairava, one is never troubled by planets or evil spirits. In the past, many people in this great region, by merely performing this pilgrimage, became free from all faults. I cannot describe this even in a hundred years, so I have told you his story in brief.

Now, I shall tell you the character of the southern door. There, the Lord of Gods, Nilakantha, resides. After worshipping Ganesha, Lord Shankara drank the highly poisonous venom born of the ocean, which destroys everything. Upon touching it, even Vishnu turned dark. Proud of his influence, he fell down, but by remembering Ganesha, he became free of the poison. Lord Vishnu was instructed by Shiva, the slayer of great warriors. By the grace of Ganesha, the great soul drank the poison, but Shankara then suffered from a burning sensation. By remembering Mayuresha, he became free of the burning. With a cooled body, he arrived at Mayuresha. There, Nilakantha, the great Lord, remains as the guardian of the door to serve the Lord of the Ganas. People who bow to him become free from poison.

Listen, O great Lords, to a story about this. In the Dandaka forest, there was a Kshatriya named Sulochana, who was well-versed in many scriptures. He defeated kings with his strength, but they, having lost their luster, sought his refuge. Knowing him to be a strict punisher, the kings deceitfully gave him poison. Distressed and knowing the pain caused by the poison, the king went to Mayuresha with his ministers. By the grace of Ganesha, the great poison was neutralized, and the king arrived in the region. He was so afflicted by the poison that he lost all bodily movement in the presence of the Lord. His ministers carried him and performed the pilgrimage to the southern door of the temple, which belongs to Nilakantha. By worshipping Nilakantha and applying the holy water to his head, the king became free of the poison. Then, after worshipping Ganesha, the king returned to his place and ruled the earth by punishing the wicked. Thus, by the method of pilgrimage, the king became free of poison and worshipped Ganesha along with Nilakantha. In the end, he went to Kailasa and enjoyed various pleasures. He was reborn as a Brahmin in the Mayura region, where he remained a devotee of the Lord of the Ganas, known for his righteousness. In the end, he attained the Lord of the Ganas in Svananda and became one with Brahman.

Now, I shall tell you the excellent glory of the western door, which grants success. There was a demon named Gajasura, the son of Mahishasura, who troubled all the three worlds. Being invincible and powerful, he oppressed all the gods. Then, Lord Shankara, riding his peacock, worshipped Ganesha and killed the demon. Since then, the Lord of Parvati has resided in that region, and Ganesha made him the guardian of that door. Lord Shambhu, the wearer of the elephant skin, became the guardian of the western door, fulfilling the desires of those who worship him. I shall tell you a brief story about this that destroys all sins and grants devotion to Ganesha.

In the Andhra region, there was a Brahmin who was addicted to sinful deeds and followed demonic ways. His friends tried many ways to help him, but they could not remove the demon residing in his heart. They went to a sage, who told them the whole story. The sage said: "This Brahmin never performed purification rites. Because of his lack of cleanliness, a demon named Pingala entered him. Seeing the Brahmin impure, the demon settled in his heart, and because of that, he performs demonic deeds daily. Therefore, go to the Mayura region where Krittivasa (Shiva) resides at the door. Worship him according to the pilgrimage rites. Without a doubt, the demon will be freed; otherwise, it would not happen even in ten thousand years."

They were delighted and took him to the region, performing the pilgrimage to the western door. By worshipping Krittivasa, the Brahmin was immediately freed from the demon and regained his own dharma. He returned home and worshipped Ganesha along with Krittivasa, and in the end, he went to Kailasa. Reborn as a Brahmin, he sought refuge in Mayuresha and worshipped him daily with devotion. In the end, he became one with Brahman in Ganesha. Thus, I have told you the glory of the western door.

Now, I shall tell you the character of the northern door, which grants all desires. From the demoness, through Kumbhakarna, was born the demon king Bhima, who destroyed the path of the Shaivas everywhere. He captured and killed many Shaivas. Once, a great devotee of Shiva was captured. He remained fasting and meditating on Shiva in the demon's prison, ready to kill him. He worshipped the Shankara residing in his heart. Shankara, extremely agitated, came to kill Bhima. After fighting, Bhima was struck and fell. Shankara came to Mayuresha and prayed. After worshipping Ganesha, he went there and killed the fierce Bhima. That Bhima-natha was established by the Brahmins in the past, and the Shaivas worshipped him with devotion. Since then, Bhima-natha has remained in Mayura and worships Mayuresha daily. Ganesha made him the guardian of the northern door of the temple, known as Bhima-Shankara. By worshipping him, a man becomes powerful.

I shall tell you a brief story about this. In the Dandaka forest, there was a very righteous king named Ugrasena, well-versed in all sciences. He became weak, afflicted by the wind element, and remained like a statue, devoid of movement and filled with sorrow. He tried many remedies with physicians, but the king was not freed from the disease. Then, a great demon came and forcibly took his kingdom. His ministers, filled with fear, took him to Mayuresha and asked for the way to victory. The devotees of Ganesha in the region told them about the glory of the door pilgrimage. Hearing this, they were delighted. The ministers took the king and performed the pilgrimage to the northern door of the temple with great devotion. The king became free of disease and regained his power. After worshipping Ganesha, he went to his city with his army. Remembering Ganesha and Bhimesha, the king fought the demon with various weapons. The demon, enraged, engaged in a wrestling match. The king fought him while remembering Ganesha in his heart. Divine power entered the king's body, and the demon, losing his strength, fell. The king returned to his city, ruled well, and worshipped the Lord of the Ganas along with Bhimesha daily. In the end, he went to Kailasa and enjoyed great pleasures. He was reborn as a Brahmin in the Mayura region, worshipped the Lord of the Ganas, and in the end, became one with Him in Svananda.

Thus, many people have attained success through the pilgrimage to the Bhimesha of the temple. Now, I shall tell you the glory of the complete pilgrimage to the temple. In the Dravida country, there was a Shudra who was fond of worldly pleasures. Once, while on his way for some work, a demon entered him because of his impure nature. He became demonic and was possessed by ghosts, losing his ability to act. His friends were distressed to see him weak and afflicted by various diseases. A wise Brahmin advised his friends to go to Mayuresha and perform the pilgrimage to all four doors of the temple. Even though they were bitten by a snake, they performed the pilgrimage. By worshipping the naked Bhairava, the ghosts left him in fear. By seeing Nilakantha, the poison was removed. By seeing Krittivasa, the demon left. By worshipping Bhimesha, he became powerful. Then, after worshipping Ganesha, he went home. He remembered the Lord of the Ganas with a heart full of wonder and worshipped Him at the four doors with devotion. In the end, he attained the worlds of Shiva and enjoyed his desired pleasures. He was reborn as a Kshatriya in the Mayura region, worshipped the Lord of the Ganas with renunciation, and in the end, became one with Brahman in Svananda.

Thus, many people have attained success. Who can count how many have attained it through the pilgrimage to the temple? Whoever hears or reads the glory of the pilgrimage to the temple, the Lord of Obstacles becomes pleased with him.

॥ Thus ends the fifteenth chapter of the Vikata Charita in the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana, describing the glory of the pilgrimage to the doors of the divine temple. ॥

Chapter 16 : Description of the Glory of the Pilgrimage to the Inner Sanctum (Garbhagara)

Salutations to Lord Ganesha.

Bhushundi said: O lords of the gods, I shall now briefly narrate to you the glory of the pilgrimage to the inner sanctum (Garbhagara). Listen with attention.

In ancient times, there lived a foolish Brahmin in the land of Vanga named Vishnudatta, who was animal-like in his nature. Seeing his state, his parents, Kashyapa and his wife, were filled with sorrow and went to the sage Kashyapa to seek counsel. The sage Kashyapa explained to them the glory of the inner sanctum. After bowing to him, they returned home, took their son, and went to Mayuresha with great devotion. Together with their son, they performed the pilgrimage with utmost reverence.

Upon reaching the eastern gate of the inner sanctum, the son attained wisdom; by worshipping the Great Goddess (Mahavidya) there, he became enlightened. Filled with joy, his parents took him back to their hermitage, amazed at the transformation in their son. Thereafter, he worshipped Lord Ganesha, the embodiment of wisdom, and at the end of his life, he attained the Lord’s abode in Kailasa. Having enjoyed various pleasures there, they were reborn as virtuous Brahmins in the Mayura region. They worshipped Vighneshvara daily with devotion, and eventually, they attained the state of Brahman (liberation).

In this way, many people attained perfection in Mayura by following the prescribed pilgrimage to the eastern gate of the inner sanctum. O great gods, it is impossible to describe everything in detail, so I have briefly stated the pure glory of the eastern gate.

Now, listen with a focused mind as I describe the excellent glory of the pilgrimage to the southern gate of the inner sanctum. In Kashmir, there was a Shudra who was a great sinner. Once, seeing a temple, he worshipped the gods despite his wicked nature. Later, driven by greed upon seeing a wealthy merchant, the wicked man followed him with a sword in hand to kill him. The merchant, however, remained cautious and stayed with a group of travelers, yet the sinner did not leave him.

The merchant arrived at the Mayura region with his companions, and the Shudra followed him there, intent on killing him. The merchant performed the pilgrimage with a devout heart, while the wicked Shudra remained there, devoid of devotion. On the second day, when everyone performed the supreme pilgrimage to the southern gate, the wicked Shudra followed them. After worshipping those at the inner sanctum and the southern gate, the others departed with joy. The Shudra, however, sat there and eventually returned to his own place. By the merit of having worshipped Ganesha there, the sinner became virtuous.

He reflected in his heart, "Alas, the sins I have committed will surely torment me. I have uselessly defiled the temple of the gods, while others worshipped them; what have I done in my sinfulness?" Thinking thus, he left the merchant and returned to Kashmir, where he began to worship all the gods with devotion. At the end, he went to Kailasa with devotion to Ganesha. Later, he was reborn as a merchant’s son in Mayura. He worshipped Lord Ganesha there through the path of renunciation and, at the time of his death, merged into the Lord’s form.

Many such people attained perfection; it is impossible for me to describe it all. Now, I shall describe the glory of the western gate of the inner sanctum, which brings happiness. In Vidarbha, there was a Kshatriya named Sudasa, a knower of all scriptures, who lost his kingdom and suffered greatly. He went to the forest, filled with grief. There, the divine sage Narada, who knew the ultimate truth, arrived. The king worshipped the sage, who, to gladden him, said, "Go to the Mayura region; you will attain perfection there. By worshipping the western gate of the inner sanctum, O King, you will become a great ruler once again."

Having said this, Narada departed, remembering Vighnesha. The king followed his advice with a devout heart and performed the pilgrimage to the western gate of the inner sanctum according to the rites, and stayed there. Meanwhile, in the city of Kaundinya, King Subahu was suffering from a terrible, death-like pain. In a dream at night, he saw a fearsome man who struck him, causing him to faint in terror. Upon regaining consciousness, the man said to the king, "Restore the kingdom of Vidarbha to Sudasa. If you do not, O King, you and your entire lineage will perish. Go now to the one who has taken refuge in Mayuresha."

The king no longer saw that man, and his pain vanished. He went to Sudasa, bowed to him, and returned his kingdom, setting aside all enmity. The king worshipped the Lord of the Ganas daily and, at the end, attained Kailasa. Later, he was reborn as a virtuous Brahmin in Mayura, where he worshipped Ganesha daily with devotion. At the end, he attained the Lord’s abode and became one with Brahman due to the influence of living in that sacred region.

Thus, many people attained perfection through the western gate. How many can I count? Now, O bestowers of honor, I shall describe the glory of the northern gate of the inner sanctum, which brings all happiness upon hearing it. A merchant from the Panchala country, addicted to worldly pleasures and possessing great wealth, did not realize the passage of time. He was always devoted to sensual pleasures. Once, due to the fear of an invading army, he left his country with his family and, in terror, came to the Dandaka forest to reside.

On the way, he reached the Mayura region. On that day, people were performing the pilgrimage to the western gate. On the second day, the merchant felt ashamed and joined the people in the pilgrimage to the northern gate. After worshipping Ganesha, he went to the inner sanctum and worshipped the sixty-four Yoginis. Then, exhausted, he went to Ganapati, worshipped Him, and went on his way, still attached to worldly desires.

Later, the merchant’s intellect turned, and he reflected in his heart, "I have committed terrible deeds while attached to worldly life. What will be my fate at the time of death?" He realized the glory of the region was beyond description, and his wicked mind had become pure. "By the sight of the Yoginis, a man becomes pure-hearted; I have become a lover of yoga, which is the truth of the scriptures." The merchant, now following his own dharma, worshipped the Lord of the inner sanctum along with the Yoginis, constantly denouncing worldly pleasures.

At the end, he went to Kailasa with devotion to Ganesha. After enjoying great pleasures there, he was reborn on earth as a virtuous Kshatriya in the Mayura region. He worshipped Vighnesha through the path of renunciation. At the end, he attained the state of Brahman, having achieved yoga-perfection through his previous merits. In this way, many people attained supreme perfection there; it is impossible to count them.

Now, I shall describe the supreme glory of the complete pilgrimage to the inner sanctum. A Brahmin named Atreya was a fool in his youth. After his parents died, he wandered the earth as an orphan, deeply attached to worldly pleasures. By divine grace, he arrived in Mayura. There, he met a wise Brahmin and, for the sake of service, stayed in the region. Taking him along, the Brahmin performed the pilgrimage to the inner sanctum. Through the association of the wise Brahmin, the wicked-minded man also performed the pilgrimage and became a treasure of knowledge, just like other Brahmins.

He saw the eastern gate, then went to the southern gate. Even though he stumbled on the way, he reached the gate. Seeing the joy of others, he became detached from worldly desires. Seeing the perfection at the western gate, he became fortunate. Seeing the Yoginis, he became virtuous. Having performed the pilgrimage once, he returned home. He bowed to the Brahmin and went to his own country. Seeing him so transformed, his friends were amazed. They arranged his marriage, but he, constantly contemplating Ganesha, worshipped the Lord of the inner sanctum.

At the end, he went to Kailasa and worshipped Ganesha there. After enjoying pleasures, he was reborn as a Brahmin in Mayura. He worshipped the Lord of the Ganas there with a single-minded heart. At the end, he attained the Lord’s abode and became one with Brahman. Those who are devoted to the pilgrimage of the inner sanctum in Mayura, even once, attain the highest perfection; it is impossible to describe. Whoever hears or reads this glory of the gates of the inner sanctum, Lord Vighnesha grants them their desired fruits.

Chapter 17 : Description of the Greatness of Attaining Death in Mayurakshetra

The Sages (Shiva and others) asked: O Lord, how did such highly fortunate beings reach Kailasa? Please explain the reason for this, as we serve the Lord of the Ganas (Ganesha).

Bhushundi replied: O best of the gods, those devotees of Ganesha who are full of worldly desires remain attached to various objects. Their path is not considered to be the state of Ganesha’s own bliss (Svananda). However, for those who are desireless, that state is the destroyer of rebirth. Therefore, all the yogis who went to Kailasa worshipped Ganesha with single-minded devotion. Once they reach the Lord of Kailasa, there is no doubt that these fortunate beings will attain that state of bliss from which there is no return. If those who are fond of worldly enjoyment and liberation happen to fall from Kailasa, they again worship the Lord of Obstacles (Ganesha) with single-mindedness. Those who go to the Lord of the Ganas in Kailasa and become engrossed in worldly pleasures will undoubtedly fall back into the mortal world. Eventually, they become one with Brahman and reside in the state of Ganesha’s bliss; this was all arranged by Ganesha for the sake of divine play.

Now, I shall briefly describe the greatness of the Devabhumi (divine land) which lies outside the main sacred area. There was once a Shudra in the Dandaka forest who was afflicted by poverty and wandered the earth. Extremely hungry and suffering from fever, he died in the Devabhumi situated outside the eastern gate. The Vaishnava Ganas arrived in a celestial chariot and, due to the power of the sacred land, took the Shudra to Vaikuntha. It is said that the area extending for a yojana from the eastern gate is Vaishnava territory, where many have attained perfection that cannot be fully described.

O best of the gods, listen also to the account of the southern region, which is known as the Shiva-bhava, briefly. A Brahmin went there for the sake of livelihood and, having arrived, became extremely exhausted. He died on the second day and immediately attained Kailasa due to the greatness of the Devabhumi, which is sacred to Shiva.

Now, regarding the western gate, which is considered the Shakta territory, I shall describe its wonders for a distance of one yojana. A Chandala came there from Vidarbha for work, but being afflicted by fever, he suffered greatly. By the grace of destiny, he died on the fifth day and went to the realm of Shakti due to the power of that sacred land.

Now, O beloved ones, listen to the wondrous account of the northern region, which grants the solar realm. A Bhilla once came there for work, was bitten by a snake, and died due to his good fortune. He attained the solar realm and rejoiced, O protectors of the gods. Thus, many men and women of various castes, even those who had fallen from their duties, attained special perfection in the north of Mayurakshetra. It is impossible for anyone to recount all their stories; I have only told you a few briefly.

Now I shall briefly describe the greatness of the fruit attained by dying in Mayurakshetra. A certain sinful Chandala was lustful for other women; he lived in the forests of Andhra and killed those who came his way. He was so full of various sins that it is impossible to describe them all, as it would make the text too long and dwell on the faults of others. Once, this wicked man went to Mayura with his friends to attend the wedding of his nephew at his sister’s house. The sins of that wicked man remained outside the sacred area, waiting for him with anger. When a person enters Mayura, their sins, wherever they were committed, leave them and wait outside. If the person comes out, the sins follow him again, and he continues to be in a state of impurity. If he has committed any sin, the sins re-enter and consume that person. Therefore, one who possesses a body should never leave Mayurakshetra; it should always be served because it is free from the entry of sin.

When a person decides to leave their home to go on a pilgrimage to Mayuresha, their sins begin to worry, thinking, "A great and terrible obstacle has come upon us. If the person goes to Mayura, where shall we reside to continue our mischief?" Then, the sins try their best to trouble that person so that they become distressed. They cause the loss of wealth, children, property, and livestock. Distressed by this, the person loses the desire to go on the pilgrimage. Therefore, one should ignore all these and take refuge in Mayuresha. Even if one commits various sins, one should eventually go to Mayura; what can those sins do to him then? By any means, O best of the gods, one should always reside in Mayura for the sake of attaining the state of Brahman. Even if one is endowed with various worldly enjoyments like kingdoms elsewhere, one who lives in Mayura, even in poverty, is superior. A person attains the bliss of Ganesha by dying in Mayurakshetra, whereas elsewhere, even with enjoyments, one remains bound by the cycle of birth and death. If one is attached to worldly objects but still takes refuge in Mayuresha, even if they are of wicked conduct, they will eventually attain the highest state.

Now, O wise ones, listen to the account of the Chandala. The Chandala stayed at his sister’s house in Mayura and died there after being bitten by a snake. The Ganas brought a celestial chariot for him, and due to the merit of dying in that sacred land, he became one with Brahman. That Chandala did not commit any small sin while in Mayura, and because of that, he immediately attained the state of Brahman despite his low birth. There is no doubt that one becomes one with Brahman upon death there. Thus, many people, as well as animals and birds, became one with Brahman in Mayura before their death.

O leaders of the gods, listen with single-minded attention to another wondrous account that happened in Mayura. Some merchants, for the sake of their work, loaded a donkey with grain and other goods. They brought it to Mayuresha, and the donkey, exhausted by the weight, died there. It immediately took the form of Brahman. If this is the case for animals, what more can be said of humans? Thus, by the power of this sacred land, many people attained special perfection, which I cannot fully describe. Whoever hears, reads, or recites this wondrous account of the sacred land will always attain all their goals.

Thus ends the seventeenth chapter of the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana, titled "Description of the Greatness of Attaining Death in Mayurakshetra."

Chapter 18 : Description of the Dimensions of the Sanctum Sanctorum

The Devas said: O Yogi, please tell us the greatness of the pilgrimage to the holy sites. Who are the primary deities that should be worshipped by people in the great holy field at all times?

Bhrishundi said: Lord Ganesha, the presiding deity of the field, resides facing north. On his left side, Siddhi (Success) is stationed to serve him. Adorned with whisks and fans, and endowed with various accomplishments, she serves the Lord of the Ganas with devotion. On his right side, Buddhi (Intellect) resides, accompanied by the arts and Saraswati, standing near him to serve. Endowed with fragrant substances, she, the speaker of the ultimate truth, serves Ganesha daily with great devotion. In front of him, Laksha and Labha, with necks bowed in devotion, serve the Lord of the Ganas with various offerings. Behind him, the great goddesses Bhramari and others, along with various Shaktis, serve the Lord with devotion.

Beneath the seat of Ganesha lies the ocean of sugarcane juice, and in it, a thousand-petaled lotus born from the ocean. There, the Lord of Obstacles (Vighneshwara) always resides, accompanied by the Tīvra and other Shaktis. The gods, filled with divine essence, serve him there for the welfare of the world. Thus, Ganesha should be worshipped by all, especially by those who wish to be blessed with all boons; there is no doubt about this.

In front of him stand the peacock and the mouse with folded hands. Before them, the Siddha-yoginis perform the waving of lights (Nirajana) for the Lord. Behind him, Pramoda and others, armed with weapons, stand with devotion and are worthy of being worshipped by men.

In the eastern direction is the Dharma-mandapa (Hall of Righteousness), where Lord Vishnu himself resides, eager to serve. He explains all the Ganesha-related Dharmas there; because of his love for the Ganesha-path, he is especially worthy of worship. Similarly, in the south is the Artha-mandapa (Hall of Prosperity), where Lord Shiva resides. He explains the various profound meanings of the Ganesha-related scriptures. The Lord always reveals the secret meanings, making humans proficient in the knowledge of Ganesha.

In the west is the Kama-mandapa (Hall of Desire), where the great Shakti and Maheshwara reside. She fulfills the desires of all humans regarding Ganesha and explains the supreme and wonderful Ganesha-related happiness. In the north is the Mukti-mandapa (Hall of Liberation), where the Sun god resides. Devoted to Ganesha, he enlightens various people. The Sun, worshipped by the people there, reveals the primary Ganesha-related liberation, which grants complete salvation.

In the proximity of Ganesha, great souls like Mudgala and other great devotees reside, teaching the path of devotion. On his right side, Mudgala, the leader of devotees, stands with unobstructed movement, known as the keeper of secrets. On the left side of the Lord of the Ganas, Shuka stands with other yogis, teaching the supreme Ganesha-yoga. Both Mudgala and Shuka, being dear to the Lord of Obstacles, should be worshipped with effort.

Beyond these, the halls of the chief deities are described. There are eight Vinayakas, starting with Vakratunda and others. Then the eight Matrikas are mentioned, followed by the eight Bhairavas. In the various directions, these lords should be worshipped with effort. On the left side of Ganesha stands the fourth, Sankata, and on the right side stands Shukla, eager to serve. Behind him is the Shami tree, and in front is the Mandara tree; the Durva grass also stands in front, all serving the Lord of the Ganas.

The Nagnabhairava deity resides in the eastern part, serving the Lord of the Ganas with natural devotion. Similarly, in the south, the powerful Nilakantha comes constantly to serve the Lord of Obstacles. In the west, Krittivasa, and in the north, Bhimesha, both come to serve Ganesha with devotion. Then the Dikpalas (Guardians of the Directions), armed and filled with devotion, also come daily to serve the elephant-faced Lord.

These have been described as the primary residents of the sanctum sanctorum; some reside there permanently, while others come for service. Now I will tell you about the great Vinayakas who always reside in the sanctum sanctorum and grant all accomplishments. From Vidarbha comes Vakratunda, along with Ballala and Yalliga. Heramba and Maheshana reside in Vidyapura. Vighnesha is in Pariner, and Bhalachandra is also there. Gyanesha, accompanied by Dattatreya, resides on the banks of the Ganga. Chintamani is in Sthavara, and Siddhivinayaka is among the immortals. Mahaganapati resides in the Siddhi-field. Vighnahara is in Manipura, and Vinayaka is in Vijaya. The Lord of a million obstacles resides in the abode of Kashyapa and in Ela. The Ganesha of Bengal and the Lord of Obstacles, Maheshwara, are there. Jirnapura, Ashapuraka, and the Amalakshetra are also present. The Ganesha of Pravala and the one in the royal palace—many such Ganas reside there.

All those residing in the sanctum sanctorum, taking refuge in Mayuresha, are forms of the Lord of Obstacles and are his manifestations. The sanctum sanctorum of Ganesha is a supreme form of the deity; it should be known with all one's heart and worshipped with special care. Hundreds of billions of Ganeshas, the best of gods, reside in the sanctum sanctorum, established by the Lord of the Ganas himself. The Ganeshas established by men, sages, and gods in the sanctum sanctorum are considered by the wise to be even greater.

One should worship Ganesha in the sanctum sanctorum with respect, marking him with his own name; by doing so, the Lord of the Devas and the entire universe are worshipped. O best of gods, it is impossible for anyone to describe the merit of this. The establishment of the Lord of the Ganas in the Mayura-field is supreme. He who performs the renovation of the temple receives the complete fruit. A man who sees a broken idol and restores it to its complete form receives the same fruit.

The Devas said: O best of Gurus, your words seem astonishing. Tell us how these Ganeshas reside there. Tell us the dimensions of all of them accurately, O Lord, so that we may be free from doubt.

Bhrishundi said: Some of these Ganeshas reside there in the form of atoms, while others have bodies the size of dust particles. There is no doubt that gods and sages, including Shiva, reside there in bodies the size of a thumb joint. Mayuresha resides with a dimension of four cubits. The gods, along with the pedestal, and Siddhi and Buddhi, reside in the two-cubit space. All those I mentioned earlier reside in the space of one cubit, always eager to serve the Lord of the Ganas.

The Dharma-mandapa is four bows in dimension. The Artha-mandapa is said to be double that size. The Kama-mandapa is double that again, and the Mukti-mandapa is said to be one-fourth less than that. The Dharma-mandapa is ten bows away from Ganesha. All the halls are situated at the gates according to their own dimensions as before.

Vakratunda is known to be situated in the eastern direction from the hall. O immortals, know that it is ten bows away according to the measurements of the wise. Ekadantaka is situated at a distance of fifteen bows. Thus, the Lords of Obstacles are situated in the directions, increasing by five bows each. At a distance of five bows from the eight Lords of the Ganas, the Matrikas are situated, and the field grew accordingly. At a distance of five bows from them, the fourth (Sankata) is situated, according to the measurement of the field's general state. In the eastern part, others are situated according to the increase or decrease in measurement.

At a distance of five bows from there, in the eastern direction, is Nagnabhairava, and others are situated similarly according to the field's measurement. At a distance of five bows from them, the Dikpalas are situated, according to the increase or decrease in measurement as described for the field. Prajapati himself resides between the east and the northeast. Shesha resides in the southwest and west directions. At a distance of five bows from them, Vajra and others are situated, determined by the field's measurement and its variations.

Thus, I have told you everything according to the scriptures and the rules regarding the expansion and greatness of the sanctum sanctorum, O best of gods. Other various Ganeshas reside there for the service of the Lord of the Ganas in the sanctum sanctorum for the welfare of the world. He who listens to or reads this with devotion becomes free from all sins, O best of gods.

Thus ends the eighteenth chapter of the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana, titled "Description of the Dimensions of the Sanctum Sanctorum."

Chapter 19 :Description of the Lives of the Residents of the Sacred Region

Salutations to Lord Ganesha.

The Devas asked: O Lord of Honor, please now describe the greatness of the divine temple. Who are the prominent beings worshipped by the people, who remain devoted to the Lord of Ganas?

Bhrushundi said: Lord Vishnu, along with Dwarka, resides in the divine temple. In the eastern part, the best of the Devas reside near Ganesha. All the various Vaishnava regions, such as Mathura and others, are situated in the eastern part. In the center of that, the hundred Dwarkas are established, extending two hundred bows from the inner sanctum. There, Krishna, Rama, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha, the best of devotees, reside for the sake of devotion to Ganesha. Having installed Ganesha, the Lord of Prosperity, Janardana (Vishnu) serves Him, as do the residents of Dwarka. The Gomati river, in the form of a sacred pond, resides there; by merely bathing in it, the sin of killing a Brahmin is destroyed. In the month of Shravana, during the dark fortnight, one should worship Janardana in this region; this bestows all desires. By merely worshipping them, one is instantly freed from sins and attains the fruit of a hundred sacrifices.

To the left of Mathura, Dwarka is situated, measuring the same, and it grants all purposes. The child-forms of Rama and Krishna reside there, and they should be worshipped by humans to fulfill all desires. Having happily installed Gauri-Vinayaka there, the two Lords (Rama and Krishna) serve Him along with the people. The Yamuna herself resides there in the form of a lake; by bathing in it, all sins are destroyed. The pilgrimage to them is prescribed on the eighth day of the dark fortnight of every month, which burns away great misfortunes.

Ayodhya is situated on the southern side, measuring the same, and the Sharayu pond is located there. By bathing in it, the sins of creatures are destroyed instantly; this pond grants heaven for all deeds done in this life. There, Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Shatrughna reside, having installed Ganesha, and are served by the people. On the ninth day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, the residents of the region perform an annual pilgrimage, which removes all sins.

In front of Dwarka, Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, the knower of all Dharma, resides, measuring ten bows. In front of him is Nrisimha, then Vamana, then Matsya, then Vishnu, and then Buddha. The deities Nara and Narayana are situated in front of them, and Hayagriva is said to be there as well, of equal measure. Similarly, on the left side, at a distance of ten bows, the forms of Vishnu reside, bestowing happiness to Mathura. Hear of them, O Lords, as I describe them briefly: Kurma, Parashurama, Kalki, and the son of Prishni (Vamana) reside there. Kapila, Siddhesha, Shesha, and yogis like Sanaka worship their own named Ganesha deities.

In front of Ayodhya, seven Janardanas reside, measuring the same. Hear of them: Narada, Kartavirya, Atri, Yajna, Rishabha, Prithu Vainya, and Mohini. Having installed their own chosen Ganesha deities, the residents of the region worship them with devotion. On the twelfth day of every month, the twenty-four forms of Vishnu should be worshipped in order by the residents. Along with those in Dwarka, all incarnations of Vishnu reside in Mayura, bestowing welfare. Lord Vishnu himself resides there; that region is known as Vaikuntha, measuring two hundred bows. On the eleventh day, people worship them constantly, and by doing so, they become blessed in Mayura. Other various incarnations and regions reside in this Mayura due to devotion to Ganesha. The Lord residing in Vaikuntha always installs Siddhi-Vinayaka and worships Him with devotion. Others, having installed Ganesha deities named after their own chosen forms, worship Him with single-minded devotion.

I have described the eastern part of the inner sanctum; now I shall briefly describe the southern part. From the inner sanctum, Kashi is situated in the middle, measuring two hundred bows. There, Vishvesha (Shiva) resides, devoted to worship, having installed Dhundhiraja. The Manikarni lake is there, the destroyer of sins; by bathing in it, even a Brahmin-slayer is freed from sin. The Bhagirathi river is also there; by bathing in it, sins are destroyed. The residents worship Him during Pradosha, and on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of Magha, they perform a pilgrimage. Those who perform the annual pilgrimage to Vishvanatha become enjoyers of happiness.

To its left, measuring the same, resides the holy Avanti, where Mahakala Shiva resides. The Kshipra river, in the form of a pond, is there, the destroyer of sins. By bathing in the Mahakala pond, sins are destroyed. They worship Him especially on Mondays and Pradosha, and they live endowed with wealth and grain. To the south of Kashi, measuring the same, is Mayapuri, the Lord who destroyed Daksha's sacrifice. One who worships Maheshvara on the thirteenth day of Pradosha, if it falls on a Saturday, attains everything. The gate of the Ganga is there in the form of a pond; by bathing in it, one attains the desired fruit.

In front of Kashi, the great Tryambaka resides, measuring one hundred bows. The great river Godavari resides there in the form of a pond; by bathing in it, the sin of cow-slaughter is destroyed. Tryambaka, knowing the power of Ganapatya, always worships Kapila-Gananatha with devotion. Vaidyanatha resides there, measuring the same, the granter of all purposes and the destroyer of the devotees' worldly existence. Shiva is known as the only physician to destroy the disease of worldly existence; He gives the medicine of the name of Gananatha to those desiring yoga. Utkatesha resides in front of him, measuring the same, desiring the devotion of the great Ganesha. To the left of Tryambaka, Rameshvara Shiva resides, measuring the same, with the ocean in the form of a pond. In front of him is Somnath, and in front of him is Mallikarjuna, measuring the same, with their own sacred waters. On the southern side of Tryambaka, the Lord Ghusrisha is situated, as well as Omkareshvara and Amaleshvara. The Narmada river resides there in the form of a lake; seeing it destroys the sins of creatures. By merely bathing in it, the great sins of ten lifetimes are destroyed, as declared by the sages of old. Then Kedar-Shambhu and others reside, measuring the same. Having installed Ganesha deities named after themselves, they are served by the devoted. On the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of every month, they should be worshipped with respect by the residents.

In front of that, in the great region, Shiva resides in Kailasa, measuring four hundred bows. The region of Kailasanatha has the Bhagirathi river, which is always there; by merely bathing in it, one is purified. Having installed Maha-Ganapati, Shiva, the foremost of the Ganapatya, worships Him daily with respect. There are other Shiva regions and various forms of Shiva, all residing there due to devotion to Ganesha. It is not possible for the Devas to describe their locations; they worship Ganesha after installing Him.

I have described the southern divine temple; now, O great ones, I shall describe the western part. Five hundred bows from the inner sanctum, Mahalakshmi resides, granting desires to her devotees. The Lakshmi-kunda is there, the destroyer of sins; by bathing in it, poverty is instantly destroyed. To her left, the power Mahakali resides, and the Kali-lake is there, the destroyer of sins. The power Maha-Saraswati resides on the right side, and the great Sarasvata pond is there, which destroys ignorance. Having installed Swananda-Ganesha, Mahalakshmi is worshipped by people on the eighth day. Mahakali, devoted to Ganesha, worships Siddhesha on the new moon day. Maha-Saraswati is worshipped by people on the third day, having installed Buddhesha.

In front of Mahalakshmi is the city of Vishnukanchi; Vishnu resides there, worshipping Ganesha. He should be worshipped by the residents on the eighth day with respect; He becomes the destroyer of their sins and the granter of all. In front of that is the region of the Matrikas, measuring two hundred bows, where Maheshvari resides. In front of that, measuring the same, is the excellent region where Kaumari resides with her sacred water. Then the region of Varahi is described, granting all desires, where the power Varahi resides, the remover of misfortunes. Then the great region of Aindri is described, measuring the same, where Aindri worships Ganesha with single-minded devotion. In front of Mahakali, measuring the same, resides the great power Narasimhi, the giver of fear to demons. Then Shakambhari, Raktadantika, and Bhima reside, along with their sacred waters. In front of Maha-Saraswati, measuring the same, resides Vaishnavi, and then Brahmi. Then Chamunda is mentioned, and in front of her is Tripura, with the powers residing in equal measure. All these powers reside in Mayura, having made their sacred waters into ponds. Having installed Ganesha deities named after themselves, the Devas worship Him with single-minded devotion. Other power-regions and powers are also there; people should perform pilgrimages to them on the ninth day, which bestows happiness. It is not possible for me to describe their names; the wise should know that there are nine crores of them. Five hundred bows from there, the power worships Lambodara; the pilgrimage to her is prescribed on the eighth day.

Now I shall describe the Devas residing in the northern temple. Hear, O Maheshanas, of those who grant the highest purpose. Starting from the inner sanctum, four hundred bows away, the Grandfather (Brahma) resides, along with the Vedas. On his left, measuring the same, resides the great Agni, who serves Ganesha along with the fires. On the right side, Karma resides with his deeds. These three are known as the primary ones born from the rays of the sun. Having taken refuge in Brahma, the Sarasvata pond is situated, where the Saraswati river resides daily. By bathing there, great sins are destroyed, and the ignorance of men is destroyed. The four-faced one (Brahma) serves Ganesha, the Lord of Siddhi and Buddhi, always devoted to Ganesha worship. Similarly, Agni constantly worships the great Vinayaka with respect. The Agneya-kunda is there, the pacifier of all sins; by bathing in it, one attains the world of fire. The Karma-nasha pond is near Karma; by bathing in it, the three types of karma are destroyed.

In front of Brahma, measuring two hundred bows, is the region of Vedanga, and then the region of the Sun. In front of that is the Bhanu-region, measuring the same. In front of that is the region of Indra, which grants everything. In front of Agni is the region of Ravi, measuring the same. Then the region of Gabhasti, then Yama. In front of Karma, measuring the same, is the great region of Suvarnareta, then the Daivakara region. Then the region of Mitra, then Vishnu, and in front of Indra is the region of Varuna, the destroyer of all sins. In front of Yama is the region of the Sun; the twelve Suns reside there in equal measure. Along with their own sacred waters in the form of ponds, they worship Ganesha constantly, having installed Him with their own names.

In front of that is Shiva-Kanchi, where Shiva resides with his power. He should be worshipped by people on Pradosha, along with Soma, to grant happiness. He worships Heramba with respect. His sacred water is there, the destroyer of all sins. The powerful Agni, residing in the region, should be worshipped by people on the first day; He destroys all sins and grants wealth. On the seventh day, the Grandfather (Brahma) should always be worshipped by the Devas; He destroys ignorance, there is no doubt. Those who worship Karma on the seventh day of the Sun become free from all faults. On the equinoxes, the twelve Suns should always be worshipped; the residents of the region become free from all diseases.

In front of them, the one who goes to the solar world resides daily; the region of that great soul is four hundred bows. On Sunday, the Lord should be worshipped constantly; one attains all success and the highest liberation. The primordial God, the Sun, the best of those who hold time, worships the boon-giving Gananatha. In front of him, the Moon resides, measuring one hundred bows; this region of his grants all food. In front of that is Budha, measuring the same. In front of that resides Jiva, devoted to the region. To the left of the Moon resides Bhauma (Mars), devoted to the Devas. In front of him is the best, Bhargava (Venus), and in front of him is Shanaishchara (Saturn). To the south of the Moon, Rahu, the destroyer of all enemies, resides, and in front of him is Ketu, and then the constellations. Having installed Ganesha deities named after themselves, the planets and constellations worship Him, devoted to the region. They should be worshipped by people on their own days; Tamas (Rahu) on the full moon and Ketu on the new moon. There are other incarnations of the Sun residing in their own regions; it is not possible for the Devas to describe their names.

In the eight directions of the divine temple, the eight primary Bhairavas reside, along with various other Bhairavas, devoted to the Devas. Indra and Agni reside in the eastern part. Yama and Nirriti reside in the southern part. In the west, Varuna and Vayu reside, serving the region. In the northern part, Kubera and Ishana reside. On the eighth day, the Bhairavas should be worshipped by people; they are the destroyers of fear for ghosts and others. On the tenth day, the ten guardians of the directions should be worshipped with effort; they will always destroy all fear of thieves and others. Having installed Ganesha deities named after themselves, the guardians of the directions worship Him, as do the Bhairavas.

The Ashvins, situated in the eastern direction, should be worshipped on the second day, at a distance of one hundred bows from the gate. Having installed the great Lord Ganesha in the divine temple, they worship Him; they are considered the givers of beauty and grace to all. Similarly, in the south, Gauri and Skanda reside, worshipping the Lord of Ganas with respect. By merely worshipping them, one becomes endowed with good fortune, and the mind becomes steady with virtuous conduct. One should worship Skanda daily on the sixth day and Parvati on the third; by doing so, along with Mayuresha, one attains happiness.

All the Nagas, headed by Vasuki, reside in the west, near the gate, along with the pure Naga-kunda. On the fifth day, they should be worshipped, as they are the destroyers of poverty and always make humans free from all diseases. In the north, one should worship the Lord of Wealth (Kubera) on the eleventh day, as He resides near the gate. On the thirteenth day, one should worship the King of Dharma (Yama); there is no doubt that He grants Dharma and increases merit. All other groups of Devas residing in the divine temple should be worshipped by the residents on the full moon day with respect. Near Yama, the ancestors of the residents of the region reside; they should be worshipped by people on the new moon day to increase the lineage. The thirty-three crore Devas reside everywhere; it is not possible for the Devas to describe their locations. I have described the greatness of the divine temple along with the pilgrimages, which grants all desired fruits.

Now I shall describe the life of Mayura. Hear, O wise ones, of those residing there, who grant all success. Two hundred bows from the divine temple, Bhrigu resides; the Bhrigu-tirtham is a great region with a pond that burns away sins. By bathing there, the defect of barrenness in creatures is destroyed. Similarly, one should worship the Lord of Creation, Bhrigu, to attain everything. The pilgrimage to him should be performed by the residents on the Rohini day; pleased by that, the great yogi Bhrigu grants all purposes. He also worships Ganesha, having installed Him with his own name, with single-minded devotion.

On his left side, measuring the same, Pulaha resides; by worshipping him, a man becomes endowed with karma. The Pulaha-tirtham is a great pond, the destroyer of faults. He worships Ganesha with single-minded devotion. The pilgrimage to him is prescribed on the Mrigashira day in Mayura, which should be performed by the residents to increase great merit. On the southern side, Kratu resides, having made a pond from his own sacred water; the yogi worships Ganesha with single-minded devotion. He should be worshipped by all people on the Ardra day with effort; by the method of pilgrimage, he becomes the granter of the fruits of sacrifice.

In front of Bhrigu, one hundred bows away, Chyavana, Dhata, and Vidhata reside, the best of the Devas. In order, all the Bhrigu sages reside there. Five hundred bows is that region, where Shaunaka and others reside. The sages should be worshipped on the fifth day with all devotion; for those residing there, they become the givers of merit on the Shravana day. Similarly, in front of Pulaha, the Paulaha sages always reside; they should be worshipped on the Revati day. In front of Kratu, O Maheshanas, the sages born of the lineage of Kratu reside, all knowers of yoga and increasers of merit. They should be worshipped on the Ashvini day, as they are the granters of all purposes; the Brahmins worship them, having installed Ganesha, devoted to Him.

In front of them are the Devas and Gandharvas, headed by Vishvavasu; their region is known to be two hundred bows in Mayura. In front of them are Urvashi, Rambha, and other Apsaras; their region is said to be one hundred bows. The Gandharvas should be worshipped by people with flowers to increase merit; the Apsaras should be worshipped especially on the Punarvasu day. Other various groups of sages reside there; Vishvamitra, Yajnavalkya, Parashara, Shvetaketu, Vamadeva, Raibhya, Nidagha, and many others reside there; it is not possible to describe them all. Having installed Ganesha deities named after themselves, they worship Him, along with their sacred waters; they should be worshipped as they grant happiness.

I have briefly described everything in the eastern part. Now I shall describe the southern Mayura, which grants everything. Four hundred bows from the divine temple is the region of the great soul Vashishtha. He always worships Ganesha, having installed Him with his own name. The Vashishtha-kunda is there; by bathing in it, sins are destroyed. He should be worshipped on the Bharani day to increase the lineage; the pilgrimage to him is described as granting happiness in Mayura. On his left side, Atri resides, the granter of all purposes; he worships Ganesha, having installed Him with his own name. His sacred water is there; by bathing in it, one attains honor. He should be worshipped by people on the Krittika day.

On the southern side of Vashishtha, Pulastya resides; he worships Dhundhi, having installed Him with his own name. His pond, known as Tirtham, is great; by bathing in it, one becomes pure, and it burns away the dirt born of demonic nature. The great sage should be worshipped especially on the Dhanishtha day; he will be the granter of all purposes to those who perform the pilgrimage. In front of Vashishtha, other Vashishtha sages reside; their region is two hundred bows, where the Brahmins reside. In front of Atri, the Atreyas reside, measuring the same. In front of Pulastya, the Paulastyas reside. Attached to their own sacred waters, they worship Ganesha, having installed Him with their own names, with devotion. The Vashishthas should be worshipped on the Magha day, the Atreyas on the Chitra day, and the Paulastyas on the Hasta day by the residents with respect.

Other various groups of sages always reside there; I shall tell you the prominent ones among them. Hear, O best of Devas: Kanva, Jaimini, Dvita, Trita, Raivata, Medhatithi, Bharadvaja, Jamadagni, and Gautama. Many others reside there, having installed Ganesha; they should be worshipped by people to increase all Dharma. In the mentioned constellations, the pilgrimage to them is described as the destroyer of all sins. In front of them, the Pishacha-lords, Bhuta-lords, Siddhas, and Charanas reside; they should be worshipped especially on Tuesdays.

Now I shall describe the western part, the destroyer of sins, the wonderful greatness of Mayura, which arises from the residents of the region. Eight hundred bows from the divine temple is the excellent place of Daksha; the Daksha-tirtham lake is there. By bathing there, evil-mindedness is instantly destroyed, and good-mindedness is instantly born in those who are devoted. The great pilgrimage to him is prescribed on the Abhijit day, which is happiness-granting; it should be performed by the residents to grant the highest wisdom. On the left side of Daksha, the great Marichi resides, measuring the same, with his own sacred water. The great pilgrimage to him should be performed on the Svati day by the residents with joy. Angira, the best of yogis, resides to the south of Daksha; he should be worshipped especially, as he is the giver of knowledge. The sacred water there is known as a pond; by bathing in it with devotion, a man attains knowledge. Daksha and the others worship Ganesha, having installed Him with their own names.

In front of Daksha, his sixty daughters, who illuminate the four varnas, serve Ganesha. Their region is described as four hundred bows; they should be worshipped on Sundays to increase lineage and good fortune. In front of them, all the people born from them reside; they should be worshipped on the Dhanishtha day to grant happiness. Their region is said to be two hundred bows; they all serve Ganesha daily with respect. In front of Marichi, the Marichas, headed by Kashyapa, reside; they should be worshipped on the Shatatara day to grant wealth. That region is said to be four hundred bows; all of them worship Ganesha constantly. In front of them, the Angirasas always reside, measuring the same, with their sacred waters and sages. They worship Ganesha, having installed Him with their own names, with devotion. The great pilgrimage to them should be performed by people on the Ashlesha day for the increase of sons and grandsons.

Other great sages reside there, devoted to Ganesha; I shall tell you the prominent ones among them, the great yogis: Durvasa, Galava, Trishira, the sage Naiva, Agastya, Mrikanda, Markandeya, and Dadhichi. They should be worshipped by the great ones on the mentioned days; they become the givers of all happiness. The sages, devoted to the region, worship Ganesha, having installed Him with their sacred waters. Beyond that, the Kinnaras, Sadhyas, and Vidyadharas serve Ganesha, having installed Him. They should all be worshipped by people with respect. Thus, I have briefly described the greatness of the western part.

Now, O Devas, I shall briefly describe the northern part, the life of those residing in the Mayura region, which grants happiness. Five hundred bows from the divine temple, the eight Vasus reside, having installed Ganesha. Having made a pond from their own sacred water, they worship Him, devoted to Him; they should be worshipped especially on the full moon day. On their left side, the wish-granting cows reside, measuring the same, with their sacred waters. They worship Ganesha, having installed Him with their own names, with devotion. On the twelfth day, they should be worshipped by people, headed by Kamadhenu; they grant desires and happiness to the residents.

On the right side, Sita and Devala reside; they worship Ganesha, the best of yogis. They should always be worshipped by people on the northern day; they become the givers of single-mindedness and the destroyers of sins. In front of the Vasus is a region of two hundred bows, where the Gargyas reside; they should be worshipped by people to grant knowledge. The pilgrimage to them is prescribed on the Uttarashadha constellation. Garga himself, the great yogi, worships Ganesha. In front of the cows, O Maheshanas, the Maudgalas, who are dear to Ganesha, serve the Lord of Obstacles, residing there, measuring the same. The Devas, Brahmins, and Mandukas, in front of Devala and Asita, serve Ganesha, all devoted to Him. The Maudgalas should always be worshipped by people on the Uttarabhadra constellation; they become the givers of yoga. The Mandukas should always be worshipped by people on the Purvaphalguni day; they are the destroyers of disease and faults, there is no doubt. These, headed by Asita, all worship Ganesha, having installed Him with their own sacred waters.

In front of them, the great sages reside; I shall tell you the prominent ones among them, the best of yogis: Dhaumya, Valmiki, Vachaknavi, the sage Mankana, Kahoda, Sumantu, Vaishampayana, Jabali, Parvata, Paila, the powerful Rishyashringa, Lomasha, Vibhanda, and the Ballava sages. Having installed Ganesha with their own sacred waters, they worship Him, having installed Him with their own names. They should always be worshipped by people on the Uttarashadha constellation; they become the destroyers of all sins and the best of yogis. In front of them, the Guhyakas, Hanuman the son of the wind, the Yakshas, and the Rakshasas all worship Ganesha. Having installed Dhundhi with their own sacred waters, they are devoted to meditation; they should be worshipped on the Uttarabhadra constellation, as they grant auspiciousness.

In the Ishana direction of Mukti is the pond known as Pranava; it is in the shape of Pranava, and by bathing there, a sound is heard on the head. There, Omkara-Ganesha resides, along with Saraswati; He should be worshipped on the fourth day, as He grants all success. In front of him, the messengers of the naked Bhairava reside everywhere, powerful and protecting. There are many other great souls there; it is not possible to describe their names due to their multitude.

I have described the life of Mayura in the north, which grants all success. Whoever hears this holy life of the prominent residents of the region, along with the pilgrimages, attains all happiness.

Thus ends the nineteenth chapter, titled "Description of the Lives of the Residents of the Sacred Region," in the sixth section of the Maudgala Purana.

Chapter 20 : The Description of the Torment for Defecation

The Devas asked: O Sage, what is the nature of the Mayura (peacock) temple, what is its essence, and what is the form of Ganesha within the inner sanctum? Please explain this to us.

Bhrishundi replied: The Mayura is a manifestation of Maya, appearing in various forms; it should be understood as the supreme form of the Lord of the Ganas. The term 'divu' refers to the essence of divine play, and Ganesha, who is the embodiment of this play, resides within the temple that is described as his inner sanctum. Just as a fetus is formed by the union of semen and blood, becoming a duality that attains unity, so too is the union of Maya and the Mayin (the wielder of Maya) known as Svananda. This is the inner sanctum that yogis should recognize as supreme. The great Lord Ganesha resides in Svananda, and assuming a physical form, he stands facing the north. This entire mystery has been explained to you clearly; worship Him, O Lords of the Devas, and you shall attain everything.

The Devas asked: O Sage, the entire region of Ganapati is of the nature of Ganesha. If gods and Brahmins reside there, how do they manage their bodily functions like urination and defecation? How do they handle worldly affairs like family life?

Bhrishundi replied: O Immortals, the body of the Lord of the Ganas is composed of pure Yoga; it is never affected by the impurities of the material world. For the benefit of the worlds, the elements like earth and water are present there, and by residing in that region, one attains the fruits of his presence. Ganesha is the master of all Yogas, there is no doubt about this, and therefore, no transformation or decay occurs in his divine form. Those who reside in the region of Ganesha are not truly mortal; they eventually attain his form. Even if others reside there, the performance of bodily functions does not affect the gods or the Brahmins, as they dwell there in a subtle, thumb-sized form. One should perceive this region as being made of the essence of the peacock through divine vision; for ordinary humans, it is perceived as earth, but the faults of the material world do not apply there. Nevertheless, one should never commit the impurity of urination or defecation within the inner sanctum of the temple. By observing this, all humans attain supreme auspiciousness. One should always worship the Mayura with righteousness. If one acts against this and behaves improperly within the Mayura, they shall suffer terrible torment inflicted by Nagna-Bhairava.

The Devas asked: If a man commits the act of defecation in the inner sanctum, what kind of torment does Bhairava inflict upon him? Tell us what happens to a person who performs sinful acts in the Mayura. Also, tell us by what merit one attains the Mayura, and what is the nature of the pilgrimage for those who have renounced the world?

Bhrishundi replied: I will tell you a story from the ancient past so that you may be free of all doubts. There was a wise Brahmin named Devanika, born in the Atri lineage, who lived in the temple of the Lord. He was righteous, always devoted to Ganesha, and diligent in his pilgrimages. As time passed, he grew old, yet he remained devoted to his daily pilgrimage. Once, suffering from fever and indigestion, he went to worship Mayuresha. While performing his daily circumambulation, he was troubled by severe flatulence. Unable to control it, he abandoned his pilgrimage and hurried home in great distress. Because of his indigestion and diarrhea, he accidentally defecated within the inner sanctum. Filled with remorse, he bathed, returned home, and wept, thinking, "Alas, I am a fool; I have committed the sin of defecation in the inner sanctum. What will be my fate?" Shortly after, the noble Devanika died, suffering from his illness.

The messengers of Bhairava arrived to take him; they bound and beat him, dragging him before Bhairava. Bhairava looked at the wretched Brahmin and said, "Why did you enter the inner sanctum while suffering from such a disease? You have committed a grave sin; now suffer the consequences of defecating in the place of the Lord of the Ganas. Your excrement fell upon the very head of the Lord." Bhairava then showed him a terrifying form, and upon seeing it, the Brahmin fainted. Bhairava then had his messengers place him in a wheel of fire. The Brahmin burned in the fire, crying out in agony. This fire of Bhairava is ten million times hotter than the fire of Yama or any other, and no one can endure it. For a hundred years, the Brahmin remained in that wheel of fire, burning but not dying due to the power of Maya. He suffered unbearable torment. After that, he was thrown into a golden cave where he suffered from extreme cold for another hundred years. Then he was thrown into the Raurava hell, where he was bitten by millions of scorpions for a hundred years. After that, he was crushed on a heated stone repeatedly for another hundred years. Following this, he was born as a ghost, wandering the region without food, water, or clothing, entering the bodies of impure people. Eventually, after being purified by the Vedic mantras of noble Brahmins, he was released from that state. After a hundred years of this, Bhairava brought him back and said, "Devanika, because you were devoted but physically unable to control yourself, you have suffered five hundred years of torment. Now, go to Ganapati." Having said this, Bhairava granted him liberation.

I have told you of the great danger of defecating in that holy place. If a person, while in control of their body, knowingly defecates in the inner sanctum, they shall suffer the most extreme torments. Anyone who hears this and becomes fearful, and from that moment on avoids such acts, shall attain the supreme path. Thus, having been chastised by the cruel Bhairavas and shown the great suffering, he was eventually granted liberation.

Chapter 21 : Description of the Fruits of Entering Mayura for Pilgrimage

Bhushundi said: I shall now describe how the Bhairavas inflict great punishment with their own hands upon those who commit sinful deeds within this sacred region.

In Mayura, a certain Kshatriya lived and settled. He would go into the forest, kill people, and steal their wealth. Attached to supporting his family and obsessed with his carnal desires, he committed various sins in the region known as Mayura. He forcibly took other men’s wives and was devoid of shame; he did not respect caste distinctions or social norms. Once, seeing his own sister while intoxicated, he was overcome by lust and forcibly violated her. This wicked man also committed theft, Brahmanicide, and the killing of cows and women—what more can I say? He never worshipped Ganesha or the other gods, nor did he ever undertake a pilgrimage; he died steeped in sin.

The Bhairavas seized him, bound him, and beat the wretch. They took him, naked, to their own realm, the abode of the Lord of Bhairavas. Seeing the fierce Lord of Bhairavas, the Kshatriya cried out in terror and fell unconscious to the ground. Then, the naked Bhairava, through his divine power, revived him and ensured the wicked man remained conscious, neither dying nor falling into a faint. The attendants of the great-souled Bhairava then threw him into pits of fire and burned him instantly. After a thousand years had passed, they threw him into a wheel of fire and spun him around. The wretch wandered in the fire, crying out in agony, yet he did not die nor lose consciousness, due to the power of Bhairava.

After another thousand years, they threw him into a pit of ice, where the Bhairavas tortured him with intense cold. After another thousand years, they placed him upon a stone and crushed him with heavy, spiked clubs. O best of gods, a thousand years passed in this way, after which they subjected him to the most terrible torments of Yama. The wretch was bitten by Ruru worms in the Raurava hell for a thousand years, amidst intense, fire-like heat. Then, the attendants threw him into boiling cauldrons of oil, where he suffered extreme pain. After another thousand years, the Bhairavas covered the base Kshatriya with hot sand and left him there. He suffered intense agony for a thousand years, after which he fell into the womb of a demon, filled with suffering.

Afflicted by hunger, thirst, and the extremes of heat and cold, he wandered here and there within the region. Seeing him there, the divine messengers struck him with their staffs with great force. Hearing the sounds of Vedic chanting and the smoke of sacrificial fires, he suffered even more, fearing the power of mantras and weapons. After suffering for three thousand years, he was brought by the Bhairavas to bow before the naked Bhairava. Purified, he was taken to the temple of Ganesha. Upon seeing the Lord of Ganesha there, he became one with the Supreme Brahman. Thus, the punishment for the propagation of sin and the subsequent attainment of the state of Brahman after dying in this region is beyond description.

O Shiva-like ones, listen as I briefly describe another excellent method for the burning away of sinful deeds. A certain Brahmana named Kashyapa lived in Mayura. He habitually engaged in theft and drinking. He was a lecher, obsessed with his own appetites, and out of greed for wealth, he committed Brahmanicide. The King, having learned of this, seized all his possessions, bound the Brahmana, and had him cast out of the region by righteous men. The Brahmana then lamented and took an oath, returning to Mayura to become devoted to the pilgrimage of the gates. Seeing him engaged in the pilgrimage, people believed him to be a pious Brahmana and gave him food and clothing with reverence. The base Brahmana completed the pilgrimage of the four gates. On the fifth day, he broke his fast, and on the sixth, he was bitten by a serpent. Having died in the Mayura region, tormented by the fierce poison, all the Bhairavas gathered him and took him to the naked Bhairava. The Lord showed him the terrifying house of punishment and then showed him the Lord of Ganesha. Upon seeing Ganapati, he became one with Brahman; the great sin committed in the region was washed away by the pilgrimage of the gates.

O wise ones, listen to another story of Mayura from a past age, which I shall describe briefly. In the Dandaka forest, there lived a Brahmana of the Atri lineage who, from childhood, was wicked and addicted to sinful acts. His name was Supratika, and he was consumed by greed for wealth. He would steal people’s money to indulge in pleasures. Once, people of all four castes went on a pilgrimage to the seven holy cities, and he went along with them. The greedy man stole the wealth of the people and thus became very rich. After completing the pilgrimage to the seven cities, they returned to their own country, and he returned to his home. He adorned his wife and children with ornaments and, at times, engaged in theft while posing as a pilgrim. Seeing a Puranic narrator engaged in reciting the scriptures, the sinful man sat among the people for the purpose of theft. There, O Shiva-like ones, Supratika heard the greatness of the Mayura region from the Skanda Purana. By hearing the greatness of the Mayura region, the wicked Brahmana’s mind was changed by divine grace.

He reflected in his mind, "Alas, what terrible sins have I, a Brahmana, committed? I have killed many people, including Brahmanas, with poison. I have committed theft and murder in holy places. I have committed boundless sins while circumambulating the five-koshi of Kashi; what will be my fate? There is no Brahmana like me, for a Brahmana is one who is devoted to the Supreme." The base Brahmana went to the Puranic narrator in private, bowed to him, and with folded hands, asked: "If a wicked man commits sins in all the holy places and regions, where will that indelible sin be destroyed?"

The Puranic narrator replied: "If a man commits sins in the seven holy cities and other regions, they are dissolved simply by entering the Mayura region. There are four types of regions in the Brahman-sphere that grant Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha to those who serve them. The fifth is known as the Brahman-abode, Mayura; there is no doubt about this. If a sin is committed there, it becomes indelible." Hearing these words, he bowed and returned home. He took his wife and family and went to Mayuresha. He performed the pilgrimage of the region according to the rules, marked the gates, and settled there. He took refuge in the temple of the Lord of Ganas and worshipped him. In the end, free from sin, he became one with Brahman.

Thus, O Shiva-like ones, many fallen people who entered Mayura became free from sin. I shall now tell you an ancient story; hearing it, one will worship Mayuresha without doubt. A Vaishya named Dharmadhvaja was consumed by greed. Out of greed, he poisoned his father. He also poisoned many Brahmanas and other venerable people daily for the sake of wealth. Once, he went with merchants to the Dandaka forest for trade. There, people went on a great pilgrimage in the month of Magha, and he went along with them to Mayuresha, filled with joy. Out of greed for wealth, he arrived in the city of Mayura. By the mere act of entering, his sins abandoned him. They stood outside, watching, waiting for him to leave so they could return to the wretched man. However, by divine circumstance, he committed no sins there. He performed the pilgrimage according to the rules, filled with joy.

He left with the group of people, abandoning Mayuresha, and was on the road. Seeing him, his sins—which had been rendered powerless by the pilgrimage—were unable to touch him, O best of gods. Then, all the sins consulted with respect: "Alas, he who lives in that region always commits sins. If he goes to Mayura, he will commit sins again, and he will not be troubled by great obstacles. Now that he has come out in a purified state, he will perform virtuous deeds daily. Where shall we go? Create obstacles everywhere so that even this sinner may commit small sins. Let us enter the Vaishya, who is slightly tainted, and we will surely make him full of great sins." Having thus decided, the sins entered the hearts of the sinners, brought them together, and tormented the Vaishya. Suddenly, his wealth was stolen by thieves, and Dharmadhvaja became filled with great sorrow.

Then, the wicked man again turned his mind toward sin. In the meantime, he saw a Brahmana. He bowed to him and told him his story in detail. Hearing this, the Brahmana, who knew all the paths, said: "The sins you committed are tormenting you. Therefore, quickly take refuge in Mayuresha. Bring your family, your children, and your wife, O wise one. By living there, righteous and free from sorrow, you will find peace." Hearing this, he bowed to the Brahmana and went to Mayuresha, quickly bringing everyone with him. Living in Mayura with the conduct of a Vaishya, Dharmadhvaja became righteous and always worshipped Ganesha. His sins, devoid of the ability to manifest, died outside. Dharmadhvaja, by the grace of the Lord, became one with Brahman in the end.

The region of Mayura should never be abandoned by a man, even if he is tormented by great faults; it is the best. Whether one is enjoying a kingdom elsewhere or living in heaven, one who lives in Mayura, even if of low caste, is incomparable. By being free from exertion, a man becomes one with Brahman. What can be compared to Mayura in the entire universe? He who hears, recites, or causes others to hear this will become free from sin and endowed with righteousness.

Thus ends the twenty-first chapter of the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Purana, which is the essence of the Puranic Upanishads, titled "Description of the Fruits of Entering Mayura for Pilgrimage."

Chapter 22 : Description of Kshetra-Sannyasa and Other Matters

Bhrishundi said: O Lord of Gods, I shall now describe the great and merit-bestowing Mayura-Kshetra. Listen with a focused mind, for it brings happiness. In a previous Kalpa, there lived a righteous Brahmin named Devapriya, born in the Angirasa lineage, who was always devoted to his duties. Being deeply attached to Ganesha, he was a true devotee of the Lord. Desiring liberation, he performed all his actions according to the prescribed Vedic rites. Inspired by the Lord, he traveled to various sacred pilgrimage sites and holy regions (Kshetras) across the earth, following the rules laid down in the scriptures. After returning home, he lived with his wife and children, worshipping Ganesha daily with a heart full of devotion.

He then reflected in his mind, "Oh, Mayura-Kshetra is a place that should be served constantly." Seeing the Brahmin ready to depart with his family, Maya (illusion) troubled him, causing a disruption in his residence at Mayura. The wealth he had gathered for the pilgrimage was lost through theft due to the influence of Maya. Stunned and filled with sorrow, he thought, "I must be very sinful, which is why I am facing such obstacles." He resolved to go to Mayuresha by living on alms (Shukla-vritti). However, he was soon afflicted by a fever. Despite the illness, he left his home, maintaining his vow of living on alms and controlling his senses.

On the third day, Vighnesha, the remover of obstacles, appeared to the Brahmin. Listen to what happened: by the grace of Ganesha, the Brahmin was cured of his fever. Ganesha appeared in the form of a Brahmin, called the man's son, gave him abundant wealth, and then vanished. The son told his father, and upon realizing it was the Lord, the Brahmin became peaceful. Devapriya reached Mayuresha, performed the pilgrimage, resided in the inner sanctum, worshipped the Lord of the Ganas, and eventually merged into Him. If one serves all the pilgrimage sites in the universe, only then can one attain Mayura-Kshetra, O Great Lords.

The Devas asked: O best of the Brahmarshis, you mentioned thieves and others; what merit did they possess that they attained dissolution in Mayuresha?

Bhrishundi said: If those who have committed sinful acts remember the greatness of the Kshetra at the time of their death, they attain liberation. Even sinners who have lived elsewhere, if they die in this Kshetra, attain dissolution in Ganesha. The mere hearing of the path of Ganesha is beneficial for those with sinful minds. If one remembers Him at the time of death, or if one has served Him unknowingly in a previous life, or even if a wise person performs such service just once, they become one with Brahman.

However, those without proper initiation do not have the right to enter the path of Ganesha. Listen to the story of a King named Sulabha, who ruled the kingdom of Anga righteously. Hearing of the greatness of Mayura-Kshetra, he renounced his kingdom in favor of his son and decided to reside there. He reached Mayuresha according to the scriptures and performed the pilgrimage rites. The King stayed there for a year, performing various pilgrimages to the deities. Then, deciding to take the vow of Kshetra-Sannyasa (renunciation of the region), he commanded his subjects and lived there with his wife.

Influenced by Bhairava, his mind became clouded, and he began to doubt the greatness of the Kshetra. He thought, "Is this truly the best place? It does not equal Kashi. This Mayuresha is said to be the son of Shiva, but Brahman exists everywhere. In the Vedas, Ganesha is not described as the primary form of Brahman. I have surely been misled by the Puranas. I shall go to Kashi." Thinking this, the King left Mayura and went to Kashi, where he died of an illness. Due to his previous merits, he was reborn as a Brahmin in Kashi and lived there righteously. At the time of his death, Vishweshwara (Shiva) himself gave him the Taraka-Mantra (the liberating Ganesha-Ekakshara mantra).

Shaunaka asked: You tell a wonderful and joyful story, Suta. Please resolve my doubt: you speak of the Rama-mantra, the Shiva-Panchakshara, the Omkara, and the Ganesha-Ekakshara as the Taraka-mantra. Which one is it?

Suta said: The great Brahman is the form of the syllable. In the Ganesha-Ekakshara mantra, the letter 'Ga' represents the creator. Vishnu, the sustainer, is the letter 'A'. The 'Anusvara' (the nasal sound) is known as Shankara, the destroyer. Know that this is the result of Ganesha's boon. The sun, which is the mind of these deities, is also established in the mantra through the nasal sound. The four bodies are the power of speech (Vani), present in the mantra. The entire world is created from the Omkara, and thus the mantra is combined with it. Ganesha is the meaning of these, and He is the deity described by the knowers of the Vedas. All deities like Shankara are followers of the Ganesha-mantra. Just as all deities are manifestations of Ganesha, so too are the mantras.

In Kashi, people worship various deities. Those who are devoted to their own Dharma and reside in Kashi according to the rules are given the Taraka-mantra by Shankara. He gives the Shakti-mantra to the Shaktas, the Shiva-mantra to the Shaivas, and the Vishnu-mantra to the Vaishnavas. To those who perform their daily duties, He gives the Omkara. To the devotees of Ganesha, He joyfully gives the Ganesha-Ekakshara mantra. Having attained the Taraka-mantra, they reside in Kailasa like Shiva, absorbed in meditation. They realize the Brahman within the mantra and eventually merge into the body of Maheshwara.

Those who live in Kashi as sinners do not receive the Taraka-mantra from Sadashiva. After suffering in the hells of Bhairava, they are reborn. Shaunaka asked: The sages say that death in various holy places leads to liberation. Why do some attain it and others do not? Suta explained that the Guru is the form of Shabda-Brahman. Disciples are of four types: best, medium, low, and lowest. Those attached to worldly desires and sinful acts are the lowest. Those who perform duties out of fear or shame are the low. Those who perform duties with desire are the medium, and those who perform them without desire are the best.

The fruits of actions vary according to the Yuga and the intent of the performer. One who performs an action once in Krita Yuga gets the fruit immediately. In Treta, it takes time. In Dvapara and Kali, the fruits are often experienced in the next life. If one performs an action according to the rules, it bears fruit; otherwise, it brings negative results.

Regarding the greatness of Kashi and other places, know that without self-realization, no one attains liberation. The gods themselves are subject to death at the end of Brahma's day. However, those who die in Mayura-Kshetra, even if they are great sinners, do not face rebirth. If one remembers the greatness of the Kshetra at the time of death, or has performed the pilgrimage, they attain the same state. Those who are devoted to Ganesha and die in Mayura-Kshetra become one with Him.

Bhrishundi continued: Sulabha, who had lived in Mayura, died in Kashi, but because of his previous devotion, he remembered Mayura at the time of death. Shiva gave him the Ganesha-mantra, and he attained Kailasa. Later, he was reborn in Mayura as a Brahmin, became a Yogi, and attained Brahman. For those who take the vow of Kshetra-Sannyasa, they should perform the pilgrimage to the gates and then reside within the Kshetra, never leaving it.

I shall tell you the story of Somadatta, a descendant of Jamadagni. He was a devotee of Ganesha from childhood. He took the vow of Kshetra-Sannyasa and lived in Mayura. Once, the demons of Khara attacked the residents of the Kshetra. Somadatta was captured and tortured, but he never abandoned his devotion to Ganesha. He performed mental worship even in prison. Ganesha, moved by his devotion, destroyed the demon Khara through Rama. The residents of the Kshetra freed Somadatta. He asked Ganesha for the boon of eternal presence, and he became known as 'Yogapriya'. Thus, many who took the vow of Kshetra-Sannyasa attained perfection. This story, when heard or read, brings all happiness and increases devotion.

Chapter 23 : Describing the Legend of Ganesha-Kunda

Salutations to Lord Ganesha.

The Lords of the Gods asked: O leader of the yogis, please tell us about the most excellent pilgrimage site in Mayuresha. Which is that pilgrimage of pilgrimages that bestows all accomplishments?

Bhrishundi replied: O Great Lords, the region is said to be filled with Brahman, and the Ganesha-Kunda is renowned as the foremost and complete pilgrimage of all. Just as the five elements manifest in various forms, the four-fold world exists, and the fifth is called Brahman. The Ganga, Yamuna, and Saraswati are the great rivers born of the three qualities (Gunas). The fourth, known as the pilgrimage of all pilgrimages, originates from the water pot of Brahma. The union of these is called the fifth Brahman. By the illusion of Ganesha, this manifested as a pilgrimage site, and thus it is called the Ganesha-Kunda.

The land of Svananda was illuminated by Ganesha. Through His illusion, the Lord of Obstacles (Vighnesha) prepared to bathe there. He pierced the earth with His goad, and the pilgrimage site, filled with the essence of Brahman, appeared to serve Him. Ganesha bathed there, and a reservoir (Kunda) filled with inexhaustible water was formed. He respectfully named it Ganesha-Kunda. By merely seeing it, a person attains both worldly enjoyment and liberation. The merit gained from touching its water cannot be described; what can I say of the pilgrimage site that is itself the embodiment of Brahman?

Bathing in the water from Brahma’s pot is said to grant liberation; it is the fourth among all pilgrimages, as accepted by the scriptures. The Bhagirathi (Ganga) is the third, and bathing in it grants heaven; it is especially known as the Golden River. The Saraswati is the second, and bathing in it for three days is said to grant heaven. The Yamuna is the great river of gross form, and bathing in it for seven days is considered to grant heaven to living beings. There are many others, but it is impossible to describe them all; therefore, I have briefly told you the greatness of this five-fold manifestation.

I will now tell you a story; listen with focused minds. Long ago in Gujarat, there was a sinful king named Bhadra. Abandoning his own duties, he was lustful for meat, women, and wine, living as he pleased and indulging in various sins. Once, intoxicated, he saw his own daughter and, with evil intent, violated her in private while she cried out in distress. O best of gods, he committed many such sins; I tremble even to speak of them. When he died, the messengers of Yama took him to the abode of Yama, where he was bound and beaten.

While being taken, he saw a chariot shining like the sun, which had come for someone who had seen the Ganesha-Kunda. The wind touching that chariot brushed against the sinful Bhadra, and he became free of sin, though he still went to the abode of Yama. Yama sent him to be reborn as a Vaishya, where he was named Devadharma and was always devoted to his duties. At the time of his death, he remembered the excellent Kunda. Due to that impression, he was reborn in Mayuresha. Upon seeing the Ganesha-Kunda, he regained the memory of his past life. He then lived in that region, devoted to the worship of the Kunda. He died near the Kunda and attained the state of Brahman. Such is the greatness of the impressions from a past life, O Lords of the Gods.

The Lords of the Gods asked: O wise one, how did that person who saw the Ganesha-Kunda become what he was? What was his caste? Please tell us, for this is a great wonder.

Bhrishundi replied: There was once a sinful Chandala who was always engaged in evil deeds. Seeing someone with wealth, he followed him. He arrived at Mayuresha and killed the man out of greed for his wealth. He came into my presence, but he fled upon hearing that he would be killed. People were busy with their pilgrimage and did not bother to strike him. While fleeing, he saw the great Ganesha-Kunda. He left the region, went far away, and died while still attached to worldly pleasures. The gods of Indra’s city took him away. There is no doubt that by the mere sight of the Ganesha-Kunda, sins are dissolved, and one attains worldly enjoyment and liberation.

Listen to another story about the Kunda, O Lords of the Gods. A greedy Vaishya came to Mayuresha. By entering the region, his sins left him, and he became pure, though he still wandered for the sake of wealth. He heard the pilgrims talking about the greatness of the Ganesha-Kunda. He thought to himself, "If it is true that one attains enjoyment and liberation by seeing this, then I shall stay here and sell my goods. In that way, I will also get to see the Kunda." Thinking this, he took his food and went to the Kunda, praying, "O Lord, let me attain liberation." Later, he left Mayuresha and returned home, where he died after a short time. By the merit of having seen the Ganesha-Kunda, he ascended a chariot and attained liberation.

Listen to another ancient history, O wise ones. Two Shudras named Megha and Mani lived in Malwa. They served a Kshatriya and accompanied him to Kashi for a pilgrimage. The Kshatriya took them along. Megha died on the way, and his son cremated him. A Brahmin from Avanti collected the bones. Mani asked the Brahmin where he would take the bones. The Brahmin replied, "There is a wonderful Kunda in the region of Ganesha. By merely immersing the bones there, one attains the fifth state. I will surely take your father's bones there." Hearing this, he also collected the Shudra's bones. Mani died in Kashi, and his son collected his bones. The Kshatriya scolded the son, saying, "Why would you leave Kashi to immerse bones in Mayuresha?" The son replied, "My father's command must be honored."

Just then, a learned Brahmin arrived. The Kshatriya asked him about the Shudra's stubbornness. The Brahmin, who knew the essence of the Vedas, explained to the Kshatriya: "O Kshatriya, there are four types of pilgrimages and regions, but the region of the Lord of Ganas is called the fifth. Ganesha is known as Brahmanaspati in the Vedas, and all His pastimes are filled with Brahman. Those who know the scriptures take bones to Kashi, but others take them to Mayuresha." The Kshatriya, now free of doubt, worshipped and bowed down, then returned home happily. The Kshatriya completed his pilgrimage and returned home. The Shudras took the bones to Mayuresha, worshipped the Ganesha-Kunda, immersed the bones, and completed their pilgrimage according to the scriptures.

The Shudras returned home. O Lords of the Gods, listen further: by the power of the immersion of the bones, the Ganas came to take Megha. They took him from the realm of Shiva to Svananda. They also took Mani, who had gone to Kailasa, and made him attain the state of Brahman. Thus, many people have attained perfection there. What more can I say? Who can describe it fully? Whoever hears or narrates this greatness of the Ganesha-Kunda will attain their desired fruits.

Thus ends the twenty-third chapter of the Ganesha-Kunda legend in the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 24 : Description of the Manifestation of the Brahma-Kamandalu

Bhrishundi said: Once, Brahma came to have a vision of the Lord of Ganas (Ganesha). After bathing in the great pond, he began to offer prayers.

Brahma said: I bow to the sacred pond of the Lord of Ganas, the Ganesha-Kunda, which transcends all calculations. It is the source of infinite sacred waters, ancient, and grants the knowledge of Brahman to those who serve it. I bow to the One who is beyond distinctions, who is the four-footed and the fifth, the primordial being. I bow to the essence of liberation, the Lord of all, who manifests the scenes created by Ganesha’s Maya.

The fourth state (Turiya), which is your own essence, becomes formless for those who seek the truth. Even I, though pure, became purified by the vision of this pond, which is contained within the Brahma-Kamandalu (Brahma’s water pot). This same water became the three Gunas, manifesting as the Bhagirathi (Ganga), the daughter of the Sun (Yamuna), and the Saraswati. From there, all the rivers of the world were born. By bathing in these rivers, humans are cleansed of their sins; after immersing themselves in these waters, they become pure and return to their own abodes.

If a creature dies at the holy Prayag, they attain their desired goal. By seeing you, O Ganesha-Kunda, one attains that same result instantly, even if only once. What can I say of the merit gained by the touch of a single drop of your water? I bow to the Kunda of the Lord of Ganas, which was born from the strike of Ganesha’s goad. I am blessed by your vision, by the touch of your water, and by bathing in it. O great-souled one, you are Brahman itself; I bow to you again and again. Dying on your banks is supreme, auspicious, and leads to the state of Brahman. Without effort, men attain the status of sages like Shuka—this is truly wondrous. May I always have the touch of your water, the bath, the drink, and the vision. O Ganesha-Kunda, due to my limited intellect, I cannot describe you fully; I bow to you again and again.

Bhrishundi said: Whoever reads this hymn of Ganesha-Kunda with faith will attain worldly enjoyment, liberation, and eventually the state of Brahman. This hymn, composed by Brahma, grants all accomplishments. It can be recited with devotion from anywhere.

Brahma then went to Ganesha, filled with joy. After worshipping and praising the Lord of Lords, he circumambulated Him. Through the touch of his feet, combined with the water from his Kamandalu, the water overflowed and a river was formed there. Brahma then bowed to the Lord of Obstacles and, through his yogic power, drew that river back into his Kamandalu.

The Lord of Ganas then said to him with joy: O Creator, do not take away this river which contains all sacred waters. It has manifested in my field by my will to purify all, and it shall always serve me. Brahma, filled with sorrow, bowed to Him and said: O Gajanana, without this sacred water, I shall be devoid of holiness.

Lord Gajanana said: O Grandfather, do not draw this river away by the power of your yogic Maya. Fill your Kamandalu with the sacred water and remain here. Hearing this, Brahma did as instructed and left, filled with joy. The Brahma-Kamandalu river was thus established there. By this river, the field of the Lord shone brilliantly. Who can describe the greatness of this river?

The Devas asked: O Lord of Sages, how did that supreme, sacred Turiya-Tirtha come to be in the Brahma-Kamandalu? Tell us, for it brings happiness.

Bhrishundi said: Brahma, having created desire (Kama), established it everywhere. Seeing desire, the Creator himself became agitated. Seeing Saraswati, Brahma was struck by the arrows of desire; he became obsessed and sought to unite with her. The Goddess cried out and remembered the Lord of Ganas. Consequently, Brahma became calm and filled with wisdom. Releasing her, he condemned his own desire-stricken self. Filled with anger, he cursed Kama: "You have made me deluded and are now playing with me. O Kama, you shall lose your form in the fire of Shiva."

After cursing Kama, Brahma remembered the Devas and the great sages, who all gathered before him. Hearing the grave news, they were filled with sorrow and sought to perform penance. The Devas and sages created three and a half crore sacred waters, each endowed with their own power. Yet, even after bathing in them, Brahma was not purified. They all remembered the King of Tirthas for Brahma’s sake. It appeared before them by their collective will. Brahma bathed in it, yet he was not purified. Then the Sun created the Yamuna from his own body; Brahma bathed in it but remained impure. The primordial Maya created the Saraswati; Brahma bathed there but was not as he was before. Shiva created the Reva (Narmada); Brahma bathed in it but remained impure. Vishnu created the Ganga from his own body; Brahma bathed in it but was not purified.

Filled with distress, the Devas and sages reflected and praised the seed of the three Gunas, the supreme Tirtha. Pleased, the Turiya-Tirtha manifested there, radiant and full of water. Seeing this luminous Tirtha, the sages and Devas bowed, worshipped it, and with folded hands said: "May this be known as the 'Sarva-Tirtha' (All-Sacred) in the three worlds. O Tirtha of Tirthas, we bow to you; purify the Creator."

The Tirthas of the three worlds, though based on the three Gunas, were not capable of washing away the faults of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. Therefore, we have prayed for this Turiya-Tirtha for the benefit of the three Gunas and for purification. O Tirtha, do good for all. Having said this, the great ones bowed. The Tirtha, pleased, revealed its form, and by it, the Grandfather became sinless.

Brahma then bowed to the Tirtha and praised it. The supreme Tirtha said: "O great one, ask for a boon; I will grant your desire. You are the Creator, do not hesitate." Brahma said: "O Tirtha, if you grant me a boon, then stay in my Kamandalu forever. I will be fulfilled."

Bhrishundi said: Saying "So be it," the Tirtha remained in his Kamandalu by the power of that boon. The Devas knew this. It remained there, constantly meditating on Ganesha for the benefit of all. It said to the Lord of Obstacles, "Having attained a visible form, I have not worshipped your feet. By the power of the boon, I am in Brahma’s abode. O Lord, make me stay near your lotus feet. By purifying the Creator and placing him in the Mayura-Kshetra, I have taken this visible form for that purpose. O Lord of Ganas, what can I do in my dependency? Make me free of obstacles, for you are fond of your devotees. Having taken this form, I have not seen the Peacock (Ganesha’s vehicle). My life is meaningless without it, so I pray to you, O Lord."

Thus, constantly meditating on Ganesha, the Sarva-Tirtha remained near Him.

The Devas asked: O Sage, Prayag is known as the King of Tirthas, yet Brahma was not purified there. How then can this Tirtha be superior? Why is it called the 'King' in the scriptures? Resolve this doubt.

Bhrishundi said: Just as Indra is the King of Devas and no other god is superior to him, similarly, Prayag is the King of the three and a half crore Tirthas. There is no Tirtha superior to Prayag. The Ganga and other rivers are based on the Gunas; they are called Tirthas due to their specific characteristics. Because the King of Tirthas was requested, the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna occurred there. The merit gained by bathing at the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna is their glory; there is no doubt. The Narmada became superior by a boon; it is not described as a mere Guna-form.

Now listen, O wise ones, to the story at hand. Because it resides in the Kamandalu, it is called the Brahma-Kamandalu. Because it came from the Kamandalu, the Ganga is considered to have originated from there. Brahma, the grandfather of the world, resides at its source. By bathing there, one worships the Lord of Ganas with a single-minded heart. If a man bathes there and worships the Grandfather, he instantly becomes learned and attains supreme liberation at the end. In the middle, Shiva resides at the Mayura (Peacock) as Madhyameshvara and worships the Lord of Ganas. Whoever bathes in the Madhyameshvara-Tirtha attains great power and liberation. At the end, Vishnu resides there as Hrishikesha. By bathing there and worshipping Hrishikesha, one attains immense fame and supreme liberation.

On its banks, many gods reside. It is impossible for me to describe both sides. The mere sight of the river born from the Kamandalu destroys the sins of all creatures accumulated in this life. The touch of a single drop of its water destroys the sins of many lifetimes. By drinking its water, one attains the realm of Indra; by bathing, one attains liberation. O Devas, those who bathe in it at the Mayura-Kshetra attain their desires and liberation instantly. Such is the greatness of this river, which the wise say extends for ten yojanas.

Chapter 25 : The Legend of the Brahma-Kamandalu Tirtha

The Devas asked: O learned one, how did the Devas and sages praise this great river? For the sake of Brahma, please recite that hymn which bestows happiness.

Bhushundi said: In the past, when the divine sages were unable to purify Brahma even with the power of various holy places, they deliberated and decided to praise the fourth and supreme Tirtha. Joining their palms, they began to recite a beautiful hymn.

The divine sages said: We bow to that fourth Tirtha, which is the origin of all, resides within the three Gunas, is devoid of all imperfections, is the essence of all Tirthas, and is capable of destroying sins. We bow to that which is the source of the Ganga and other rivers, which resides within all as the form of the Self, and which, having assumed the form of sound, is the mover of all. We bow to that which is sung in the Puranas, which destroys the sins of the Creator, which resides in the Kamandalu, which is beyond measure, and which will assume a physical form among the infinite Tirthas. O Great Soul, if the Creator, who is our Lord, remains tainted by sin, the entire universe will face destruction; therefore, for the sake of mercy, please manifest yourself. Salutations to you, who are the form of the Ganga and the daughter of Brahma. Salutations to you, who are Prayaga, Narmada, and the one residing in the Kalindi. Salutations to you, who are the Krishna, the one residing in Kakudmati, the divine river, the Payoshni, the Veni, the Pushkara, the Tapi, and the Prabhasa—you who are all the Tirthas. Salutations to you, who are the Godavari, the Kshipra, the Sindhu, the Earth, the Kaveri, and the Sarayu. Salutations to you, who reside in the Kamandalu. Salutations to you, the Lord of Tirthas, who resides in the three and a half crore holy places, and who is eternally established in the Mayura region. Salutations to you, who reside in the oceans, lakes, ponds, and wells. Salutations to you, who reside in whatever water exists in the form of the sun and clouds. O Supreme Lord, this entire universe, moving and stationary, shines because it is pervaded by you, who are the water. Protect us with the nectar of your compassionate glance and reveal your true form to us.

Bhushundi said: As they were praising it thus, a brilliant, luminous water appeared before them. Seeing this, the Devas and sages bowed down. The great Tirtha spoke to them with a joyful heart: O Devas and sages, ask for a boon, and I shall grant it. This virtuous hymn composed by you will increase my joy; there is no doubt that it will bestow both worldly enjoyment and liberation. Those who read or hear it daily will receive the same merit as bathing in me, and it will especially destroy all sins. Hearing the words of the Tirtha, the joyful Devas and sages bowed with folded hands and said: O Great Tirtha, if you are pleased, then purify the great Grandfather Brahma and establish his stay firmly in the Kamandalu. Let your name be "Sarvatirtha" (All-Tirthas) and "Brahma-Kamandalu." May this boon, which we have requested, be granted by your grace. The great Tirtha replied, "So be it," and did everything that the Devas and sages had asked, all of which I have narrated to you.

The Devas asked: We have heard everything in detail, which destroys all doubts, yet we are not satisfied; we wish to drink more of this nectar of stories. O learned one, you have spoken of the greatness of this place; tell us the stories of those who attained great miracles there in the past.

Bhushundi said: In a previous Kalpa, there was a Brahmana born in the lineage of Bharadwaja who was a fool, devoid of knowledge and the performance of daily prayers. His parents took him to the Brahma-Kamandalu and went to the source of the river with devotion. After bathing in the river water and worshipping with reverence at the Kamandalu, the son immediately became endowed with great wisdom. He began to recite the Vedas and other scriptures with love. His parents, filled with joy, took their son and returned home, eventually attaining liberation. Thus, many people, whether knowingly or unknowingly, attained perfection through Brahma by bathing or having a vision of the place.

I will tell you another story. There was a Kshatriya king of the solar dynasty named Suratha, a ruler of Malwa and a slayer of enemies. He ruled his kingdom righteously with his ministers. After a long time, the king of Vidarbha came to conquer his territory. Suratha fought with his army but was defeated. He tried again with the help of other kings, but he was defeated once more. The king then consulted the Brahmanas and came to the Mayura region. He bathed in the Madhyameshvara Tirtha and worshipped Shiva. After bowing to Him, he fought again with his army, defeated the king of Vidarbha, and regained his kingdom. At the end of his life, he attained liberation due to the merit of the bath. Thus, people attained perfection there, knowingly or unknowingly.

Listen to another virtuous story, O wise ones. There was a Brahmana in the lineage of Gautama who followed his own duties. Though he was learned, he never attained fame. He was diligent in his rituals, but other Brahmanas, seeing his Vedic rites, considered them flawed due to the weight of his past sins. Filled with sorrow, he went to the Sarvatirtha and, after reflecting, bathed there with devotion. He worshipped Hrishikesha, bowed down, and went home. Thereafter, the Brahmanas saw that the rituals he performed were perfect. Everything he did became filled with glory, and in the end, he attained liberation due to the merit of serving the Tirtha. It is impossible for me to describe how many people attained perfection there, knowingly or unknowingly.

O best of Devas, listen to another story with a focused heart. In the Dandaka forest, there was a Chandala who committed many sins. He would go into the forest and kill Brahmanas daily, and he would forcibly take other men's wives. He was fond of worldly pleasures and committed various sins. Once, he saw a merchant carrying wealth. The wicked man followed him with a weapon, intending to kill him. On the way, he saw the great river born from the Brahma-Kamandalu. The wicked man did not even touch the water. A yojana away, the villain killed the merchant, took his wealth, and returned home. After some time, the low-born man died. The messengers of Yama took him and, after beating him, led him to the city of Samyamani. Yama spoke these words of Dharma: "O attendants, this is a great sinner, yet he must be released. He had a vision of the Sarvatirtha in the past when he intended to kill the merchant, which is a great destroyer of sins. Release him, O wise ones; he will return to the human body, experience the fruits of his deeds, and then return to this city." That man was later born as a fisherman in Bengal. Thus, by the mere vision of the Tirtha, his sins were destroyed.

I will tell you another story about the touch of a single drop of water. Listen, O all-knowing ones, to this story which bestows perfection. There was a hunter in the forest who committed sins like Brahma-hatya (killing a Brahmana) daily. Once, he saw a man carrying wealth and ran after him with a drawn sword to kill him. The man, terrified, fled, and the hunter followed. By divine providence, they reached the Ganga born from the Kamandalu. The man crossed it and fled, and the hunter also crossed it, but the wicked man fell on the bank. He came into contact with a drop of the water. The man went far away, sighed in relief, and returned home. When the wicked hunter died, the messengers of Yama took him to Yama. Seeing him, the Lord of Dharma spoke with love: "O great ones, he is purified and free from all sins. He fell on the bank of the river born from the Kamandalu while running; he had a touch of its water and a vision of it. By that vision, his sins were destroyed, and by the touch of the water, the sins of many births were washed away. Although he committed sins after that which deserve punishment, he is not fit for torture. For one who has had a vision of the Brahma-Kamandalu, there is no fear of the punishments of Yama." He was later born in Kashmir as a Brahmana well-versed in the Vedas. Thus, many people became free from sin there.

Now I will tell you a story from a previous Kalpa. There was a Shudra in the Bengal region named Shyama, a great sinner who was obsessed with his own belly and genitals. He was a thief who wandered in cities and forests, armed with weapons, killing people and addicted to meat and liquor. Once, in the forest, he saw wealthy merchants and followed them to rob them. They went to the Dandaka forest, and he followed them. Due to the heat, they became thirsty and wandered without water. They reached the bank of the Brahma-Kamandalu, drank the water, and returned to the village. At night, they were killed by the thief. Due to the merit of drinking the water of the Brahma-Kamandalu, they all went to the city of Indra. When the thief died, the messengers of Yama took him to Yama. Seeing him, Yama said: "This Shudra is a great sinner, yet he has become meritorious because he saw the Sarvatirtha, even while intending to commit a wicked act. He drank its water and touched it. I will tell you the reason for this threefold merit: the sins of this life were destroyed by the vision, the sins of many births were destroyed by the touch of the water born from the Kamandalu, and the attainment of Indra's realm was the result of drinking it. He is now free from internal and external sins and is considered meritorious. Therefore, take him to Mahendra; he will surely enjoy pleasures in that city. He will later be born on earth again; there is no doubt about this." The messenger did as told and bowed to Yama again.

Thus, many people attained perfection; it is impossible to describe it even in a hundred years. I will tell you another story from the past, in brief, which reveals the power of bathing. There was a craftsman in Bengal known as Dhanapriya. He was a sinner who committed sins with joy. For the sake of wealth, he poisoned his own parents and killed Brahmanas. He appeared saintly on the outside but was wicked within. After a long time, the king learned of his deeds, took his wealth, and banished him from the country. The righteous king continued to rule his subjects with justice. Dhanapriya went to the Dandaka forest with his wife and children and settled there. He continued his wicked ways. Once, he saw a wealthy merchant and followed him with the intent to poison him, appearing saintly to deceive him. On the way, they reached the great river, the Sarvatirtha. He bathed there with the merchant. The next day, the villain poisoned the merchant and killed him. Because of the merit of the bath, the merchant attained the supreme liberation. Dhanapriya died in his home after some time and also attained liberation due to the power of the bath.

Now I will tell you another story of the Kamandalu, which bestows great perfection upon remembrance. In Gujarat, there was a Vaishya named Dharma who was devoted to his duties. He heard of the greatness of the Kamandalu and was amazed. He kept it in his mind, thinking, "This river is blessed; when I attain it, my life will be successful." Dharma remembered the great river daily. Once, a Kshatriya traveler came there and heard the name of the river born from the Brahma-Kamandalu. The Kshatriya left for his own place. After a long time, Dharma died, went to heaven, and enjoyed various pleasures. He was later born as a Brahmana named Shivadatta on the bank of the river. He was devoted to his duties and never left the riverbank, performing all his rituals there. By the power of his previous merit and the service of the holy Tirtha, he became a Yogi and died on the bank. He became one with Brahman. Thus, it grants liberation even to those who are far away if they remember it.

The Kshatriya who had heard the name but was a sinner committed grave sins. When he died, the messengers of Yama took him, beat him, and threw him into hell by Yama's order. He was later born as a dog. The sinful Kshatriya wandered into the Dandaka forest and came to the great river. Being tormented by insects and flies, the dog bathed in the great river due to the impressions of his past life. He died and attained liberation without a doubt. Such is the merit of hearing the name even once. Blessed are the plants, creepers, grasses, and trees on the bank of the Brahma-Kamandalu. A creature that dies on its bank goes to the supreme state, whereas one who dies elsewhere is subject to rebirth. Thus, the river born from the Brahma-Kamandalu is everywhere auspicious and bestows the grace of Mayuresha. It is especially powerful at Chaturmukha, Madhyamesha, and Hrishikesha. It is rare everywhere for the Devas. A crore of Tirthas reside at its root, in its middle, and at its end. I have narrated its story in brief; O Devas, hearing or reading it destroys all sins.

Chapter 26 : Description of the Seven Sacred Fords

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

Bhrishundi said: Now, I shall briefly describe the principal sacred fords (tirthas) that exist on the banks of the Kamandalu river in Mayura.

One primary ford is known as Ganesha-kunda, the history of which has been briefly narrated to you, O lords of the gods. After this, listen briefly to the five sacred fords. In the central part, there is the Ganesha ford, which spans two hundred bows in length. There, the gods, sages, and humans perform their daily ablutions with great effort. The ford situated on both banks of the Kamandalu is declared to be the Supreme Brahman; by bathing there, creatures always become Ganesha-like.

After that is the great Kapila ford, considered to be of the same nature. Ganesha became Kapila to destroy the demon Kamala. Having slain the mighty demon, who was invincible to Shiva and others, Ganesha rested at Mayura, bearing the demon's head. There, Brahma, accompanied by the sages, performed an ablution for Kapila with hymns dedicated to Ganesha, filled with joy. Through their worship, the five nectars (panchamrita) were created there, and by the union of those with the river, that ford is considered supreme. By bathing there, one attains the knowledge of Sankhya; it is said that Vishnu, in the form of Kapila, resides there.

After that is the Vyasa ford, which destroys all ignorance. It should be known by the wise as being of the same measure. There, the Lord of the gods, Vyasa, performed severe penance. After a hundred years had passed, the Lord of the Ganas granted him a boon. With that, he composed the Bharata, which is endowed with righteousness and unrighteousness, and the scripture of the Supreme Brahman; through the unity of both, he became the Lord of all. By bathing there, one is immediately freed from dullness and, knowing the arrangement of righteousness and unrighteousness, becomes filled with wisdom.

To the east of the Ganesha ford is the Bhima-kunda, created by Bhimesha. Bhimesha stayed there and performed penance for Ganesha, and by the power of the boon, he slew the demon Bhima. The Bhimesha ford is supreme and bestows great prosperity; by bathing there, one immediately becomes endowed with greatness. Once, in the summer, it became devoid of water. Then the valiant son of Pandu, Bhima, arrived at that ford. With a blow of his mace, he dug the excellent ford. Having drawn water there, he bathed with great devotion. By that, he attained wonderful power and prosperity, and being endowed with such power, he slew all the sons of Dhritarashtra.

After that is the ford of the sages, which bestows one's own duty. By its measure, it grants the power of penance there. Eighty-eight thousand sages, devoted to Brahman, performed penance there to attain Brahminhood. They became one with Brahman and stayed there specifically; with the nature of those liberated while living, they worshipped the great Lambodara (Ganesha). These five fords are declared to be in the Mayura region. By merely bathing in these five, a man becomes one with Brahman. One should bathe first in the Ganesha ford, then in the Bhima, then the Arsha (of the sages), then the Vyasa, then the Kapila, and finally in the Ganesha ford again, following this order.

Beyond the Ganesha ford, at the end of the region, is an excellent ford, three thousand six hundred bows in length, which destroys all sins. On the southern bank, Shiva, accompanied by Shakti, resides, presiding over the ford and fulfilling all purposes. On the northern bank, Keshava resides with Rama, the bestower of all righteousness and the protector of the region. This ford is known as the destroyer of all sins; by bathing there, O lords of the gods, this sixth one is famous everywhere and becomes the destroyer of all sorrows.

To the west of the Ganesha ford, at the end of the region, is an excellent ford known as the bestower of all merit. On the northern bank of this ford resides the Sun with Samjna, and on the southern bank reside the Supreme Nature and the Supreme Person. By bathing there, a man immediately becomes a mountain of merit. Whatever auspicious thing he desires, he shall obtain without a doubt.

The seventh principal ford is four times as far to the east. Whoever bathes in these seven fords shall obtain all auspiciousness. One should bathe first in the Ganesha, then the Bhima, the Arsha, the Aghaghna (destroyer of sins), the Punyadevi, the Kapila, and again in the Ganesha ford. Thus, these seven principal ones have been briefly described. Hearing or reading them destroys the sins of men.

Thus ends the twenty-sixth chapter entitled "Description of the Seven Sacred Fords" in the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Mahapurana.

Chapter 27 : Description of the Sacred Sites in the Brahmakamandalu

Bhṛshuṇḍi said: Lord Gaṇeśa resides within the Gaṇeśa-tīrtha. To his left is the Siddhi-tīrtha, which grants success upon bathing. To the right is the Buddhi-tīrtha, which bestows wisdom. Near the Siddhi-tīrtha is the Lakṣa-tīrtha, which aids in meditation. Near the Buddhi-tīrtha is the Lābha-tīrtha, which grants supreme gains, and near that is the Mayūra-tīrtha. Bathing there certainly destroys various delusions. Near the Lakṣa-tīrtha is the Mauṣaka-tīrtha, which removes the ego of men. Then follow the Maudgala-tīrtha, the Gārtsamada-tīrtha, the Śuka-tīrtha, and the Dattātreya-tīrtha. There are many other sacred sites of the Gaṇapatyas, and I shall describe their dimensions briefly. The Gaṇeśa-tīrtha is said to be ten bows in length, while the others, including those of Siddhi and Buddhi, are half that size. The sites belonging to their disciples are said to be the size of a barley grain.

In front of the Mayūra and Ākhu (mouse) sites are the sacred spots of Brahmapriya, Pramoda, Moda, and Yogapriya. These are the principal sacred sites of the Gaṇas situated there. I have thus described the sites within the Gaṇeśa-tīrtha. These sites, extending north to south, are two bows in length. O best of gods, there are also sites for the eight forms beginning with Vakratuṇḍa. There are many other incarnations of the great-souled Gaṇeśa, and their sacred sites are also present there, granting the fruits of Gaṇapatya. I shall now describe the order of the Gaṇeśvaras situated in the eastern part; listen, O best of gods. They are Vakratuṇḍa, Ekadanta, Mahodara, Gajānana, Ballāḷa, Heramba, Vighneśa, Bhālacandra, Jñāneśa, Śūrpakarṇa, Cintāmaṇi, and Vināyaka. These twelve are the principal Vighnapas.

I shall now briefly describe those in the western part: Lambodara, Vikaṭa, Vighneśa, Dhūmravarṇaka, Mahāgaṇapati, Siddhivināyaka, Vighnahara, Ḍhuṇḍhīśa, Lakṣya, Āśāpūraka, Varada, and Madotkaṭa. These twelve Vighneśas are the supreme ones situated at the sacred sites. Other incarnations are also present, residing in the size of a thumb-joint. I have described the Gaṇeśa-tīrthas, which are dear to Gaṇapati. It is impossible to describe all of them, yet I do so, bound by your devotion.

From the Ṛṣi-tīrtha and the Caturthī-tīrtha, the Kārṣṇa and Śaukla sites are formed; bathing there on the fourth day grants the fourfold fruits of life. Then follow the Śamyā and Mandāra sites, and the excellent Dūrvā-tīrtha, which is five bows in length. By bathing in these, one attains all desires. On the northern bank is the site dear to Bhairava, where the Lord Nagnabhairava resides. Whoever bathes in the Nagnabhairava-tīrtha with devotion will not suffer the pains of existence. In front of it is the Dvārakā-tīrtha, which grants liberation. Then follow the Ayodhyā and Mathurā sites, which grant liberation and fulfill the desires of men. On the northern bank is the Prabhāsa-tīrtha, which destroys diseases and grants immediate happiness. Then the Puṣkara-tīrtha destroys sins, and the Kāverikā-tīrtha grants liberation.

There are also the twenty-four sites of the manifestations of Viṣṇu, which burn away heaps of sins. On the northern bank, Lord Viṣṇu himself is established; by bathing there, one attains the state of Viṣṇu. Then follow the Bhṛgu, Pulaha, and Kratu sites, which are supreme destroyers of sin. I shall describe the dimensions of the sites of the sages; listen with focused minds. The Vaiṣṇava sites grant the realm of Viṣṇu. The sites of the gods, demi-gods, and sages grant their respective realms to those who bathe there. By the greatness of the Mayūra-kṣetra and bathing in the Kamaṇḍalu, humans attain liberation. I have described the sites in Mayūra, where the principal ones are one bow in length. Other sites of sages are the size of a thumb-joint.

At the beginning of creation, the Creator established these sites, and the sages performed penance there for their own perfection. Having attained perfection through penance in Mayūra, they remained there, united with Mayūreśa. Thus, it is impossible to describe all their locations, dimensions, and sites; they must be understood with subtle vision. The Avantī-tīrtha is on the southern bank, along with the Śukra, Agastya, Someśvara, Piśāca, Yama, Nairṛta, and Haṃsa sites. There are also the great sites of the Bhairavas, Rudras, Rāmeśvara, and Mallikārjuna.

Now I shall tell you the boundaries of the northern sites. From the Viṣṇu-avatāra-tīrthas, the Apsaras-tīrtha is mentioned, followed by the Deva-tīrtha, Gandharva-tīrtha, and the sites of Indra, Agni, and Viṣṇu. On the southern bank is the Atri-tīrtha, which destroys sins, followed by the sites of the Gaṇas. Then the great Śambhu-tīrtha marks the boundary. I have described the sites in the eastern part of Gaṇeśa. Now, I shall briefly describe the sites in the western direction. After the Vyāsa-tīrtha, there are the sites of Kāśī, Māyāpurī, Virajaka, Kṛttivastra, Tryambakeśa, Vaidyanātha, and others. Then the Kailāsanātha-tīrtha, which destroys sins, followed by the sites of the twelve months. The Malamāsa-tīrtha is undoubtedly a Gaṇeśa-tīrtha, for the Lord Gaṇeśvara performed penance there in ancient times. Worshiping Gaṇeśa in the Malamāsa is considered the fulfiller of all desires.

Then follow the Śaiva sites, the Lakṣmī-tīrtha, the Sarasvatī-tīrtha, the Viṣṇukāñcī-tīrtha, and the sites of Kaumārī, Vārāhī, Aindrī, Vaiṣṇavī, Māheśvarī, Brāhmī, and Raktadantā. Then the Vasiṣṭha, Paulastya, Āṅgirasa, Kaṇva, Jaimini, Medhātithi, Kārtavīrya, Māndhātā, Yayāti, Nahuṣa, Dhruva, Bharadvāja, Jamadagni, Gautama, the Pāṇḍavas, Varuṇa, and Marut sites. Then the Pitṛ-tīrtha and Gayā-tīrtha, where the Goddess resides with Gayā-gadādhara. Serving these on both banks grants Brahmā-hood. By offering Piṇḍa there, ancestors attain liberation and one is freed from all debts.

It is impossible for me or anyone else to describe all the various sites of the sages. Then follow the sites of the Bhairavas, Skanda, Nāgeśa, and the Rudras. There are sites for the Vasus, Pārvatī, Dhanapaka, Sādhyas, and Śakti, which mark the boundary on the southern bank. Now, O Lords, I shall describe the sites on the northern bank starting from the Vyāsa-tīrtha. There, Lord Brahmā himself resides with Prayāga; his site is a great destroyer of all sins. Then follow the Karma-tīrtha, the Agni-tīrtha, the sites of the twelve Ādityas, the Śivakāñcī-tīrtha, and the Sūrya-tīrtha. The Pūrṇa-tīrtha destroys all diseases. Then follow the sites of the planets, the guardians of the directions, the gods, Yakṣas, and Rākṣasas. Then the sites of Mahākālī, Nārasiṃhī, Śākambharī, Cāmuṇḍā, Tripurā, and the various sites of the Mahāmāyā-shaktis. The sixty-four Yoginīs also have their sites there.

Then follow the Naidhruva, Devala, Mārkaṇḍeya, and Bhairava sites. The Kāla-bhairava-tīrtha and the sites of the Prajāpatis follow. Then the Raivataka, the Yoga-maya, and the Jaḍabharata-tīrtha, which grants yogic perfection. Then the Oṅkāra-gaṇanātha-tīrtha, the Vidyādhara-tīrtha, and the Paiśācamocana-tīrtha. Then the Dharma, Aśvinī, and the hundreds of Nāga sites, including Śeṣa. Then the great Go-tīrtha, the sites of Sanaka and others, and the fourteen Manus. Then the Mahāśakti, Asita, Dakṣa, and the Mātṛgaṇas. Then the sites of the sixty daughters of Dakṣa, followed by the Gandharvas, Guhyakas, Vibhīṣaṇa, Rāvaṇa, Śvetaketu, Uddālaka, the Rākṣasas, Aṣṭāvakra, and the Vaiśvadeva-tīrtha.

Then the sites of the descendants of Dakṣa, the Brāhmaṇas like Marīci and Maudgala, the Pāṇḍavas, Durvāsā, Datta, Nidāgha, Hanumān, Sugrīva, Jāmbavān, Bali, Vālakhilya, Gālava, Viśvāmitra, Triśirā, Mṛkaṇḍa, Dadhīci, the Kinnaras, the Sādhyas, the Kāmadhenu-cows, Asita, Ikṣvāku, Gārgya, Māṇḍūka, Dhaumya, Vālmīki, Jaimini, Vācakanavī, Maṅkaṇaka, Prahlāda, Upamanyu, Vaiśampāyana, Jājali, Parvata, Paila, Lomaśa, Vibhāṇḍa, Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, and other sages. Then the sites of Aśvatthāmā and Kṛpa. Then the Varāha-tīrtha and the Bhūmi-tīrtha. The Mahāmāyā, who is the one Prakṛti and Puruṣa, also has a site marking the boundary.

I have briefly described these principal sacred sites. They should be served by humans on their respective auspicious days, as they grant success to those living in Mayūra. There are countless sites in Mayūra, and I have told you their dimensions; they are the size of a thumb-joint for those who serve them. Those who serve these sites reside there in the size of a barley grain. All the sacred sites that exist in the three worlds are present in Mayūra in a subtle form. Those who reside in Mayūra do not go anywhere else; they serve the Elephant-faced Lord by residing in their own spots. The gods, along with their sacred sites, come to Mayūra for his vision. This brief account of the sacred sites, if heard or read, grants both worldly enjoyment and liberation to men.

Chapter 28 : Entitled Praise of Nagnabhairava

The Devas said: O Lord, who among those who came to these foremost holy places attained perfection? Please tell us their stories briefly, for they bestow happiness.

Bhushundi said: O Lords of the Devas, go to Mayuresha by my command. There, you will become perfected and come to know everything that grants success. Everything has been told in detail in the Skanda Purana, there is no doubt about it. I have narrated the history of the region to you in brief.

The Devas said: O Lord, tell us about the daily pilgrimage and the circumambulation of the region. Also, tell us about the pilgrimage for other people that grants all successes. How did Nagnabhairava treat a person who, though sinful by nature, resided in Mayura and lived outside the city? How did the Lord treat a person endowed with good impressions but devoted to Ganesha? Please tell us this briefly.

Bhushundi said: There was a Brahmin in Bengal, devoted to Ganesha, born in the lineage of Vishvamitra, named Shambhu, who was very famous. Nagnabhairava, the leader of the Bhairavas, took refuge in his heart and caused a confusion in his intellect, which distressed the Brahmin. He thought, "When will I, while still in this body, see Mayuresha? What can I do, being in this body that is as fragile as a bubble?" Then, accompanied by his wife and children, he left his home. O Lords of the Devas, he became destitute and lived on alms. After two months of travel, he reached the Ganesha pilgrimage site and rejoiced, making his own people happy. Having worshipped Mayuresha first and performed the pilgrimage according to the rules, he worshipped the Elephant-faced Lord with the spirit of renunciation of the region. In the end, becoming established in his own bliss, he worshipped the Lord of the Ganas. Thus, the Lord, having taken refuge in his heart, treated the man in this way.

Now, O Lords of the Devas, I shall tell you the story of those who are addicted to sin and their departure from the region; listen, O dear ones. A Brahmin was born in Mayura in the lineage of Vashistha. From birth, he was a great sinner and remained devoted to sin. He did not study the Vedas and was a thief in his childhood. In his youth, he indulged in liquor, meat, and other women. Nagnabhairava caused a confusion in his intellect, and the wicked man took a woman and went to Vidarbha. In this way, the divine Lord Nagnabhairava, the wielder of the staff, exercised his authority in Mayura.

I shall tell you another story of those who commit sins and, having set their minds on Mayura, did not attain Mayura. In the Dravida country, there were people of the merchant caste who were sinners. They constantly killed people for their wealth using poison and other means. Shambhu, Somaka, Kubja, and Kambala were four who constantly consumed liquor and meat with great enthusiasm. They were all lustful for other women and devoted only to their own bellies. They never performed even a trace of merit or their own duties. In that same city, there was a merchant named Shyamala, a great sinner who was wealthy, who died due to destiny. His brother-in-law, who lived there, was devoted to his own duty, known by the name Shankara, and was devoted to virtuous deeds. He collected the bones of the deceased for the sake of his liberation. After a month, the four great sinner merchants went to the Dandaka forest for the purpose of trade. Shankara, full of humility, gave them the bones of Shyamala. The noble one told them, "Take these bones to Mayura and abandon them in the holy place of the Lord of the Ganas, which grants the bliss of Brahman."

Agreeing, they took the bones and arrived at Mayura. There, Nagnabhairava created an obstacle. Everything they had was stolen by thieves, and the collection of bones was also lost there. The wicked men returned to their own homes with very little wealth. O Lords of the Devas, because of the power of the confusion of their intellect, they did not perform the pilgrimage to Mayuresha, even though they had intended to. Thus, that powerful Bhairava, residing in the heart and being under the command of Ganesha, protects this excellent region. Whoever listens to this story of Bhairavanatha will find everything in Mayura to be auspicious.

The Devas said: O Lord, such is the great Nagnabhairava. Tell us his hymn so that we may praise him constantly. If he is angry with us due to a confusion of intellect, he might prevent us from entering the region; therefore, we shall serve him.

Bhushundi said: Salutations to you, Nagnabhairava, who is devoid of all illusion, the mover of all illusion, and the indweller of all. Salutations to you, Nagnabhairava, who is devoted to Mayuresha, the protector of Mayurapura, and the excellent guardian of the righteous. Salutations to you, Nagnabhairava, who casts out those addicted to unrighteousness and is always established in his own bliss. Salutations to you, Nagnabhairava, who punishes those in Mayura who are devoted to sinful acts despite having good impressions. Salutations to you, Nagnabhairava, who possesses great strength, the mover of Brahma and others, and the Lord of immeasurable power. Salutations to you, Nagnabhairava, the bestower of worldly enjoyment and liberation, the increaser of wealth and grain, and the protector of the devotees of Ganesha. Salutations to you, Nagnabhairava, who at the time of dissolution raises your trident, causing fear to the universe, and pierces the great egg with your trident. Salutations to you, Nagnabhairava, who dances before the Lord of the Ganas, terrifying the Indras and the Asuras with your loud laughter.

O Lord of great majesty, this entire universe is pervaded by you in the beginning, middle, and end. Protect us, O Lord of Devas, and make us dwell in Mayura with undivided devotion. Salutations to you, O Wielder of the Trident; the activity of the world is due to the fear of you. Every soul performs its own work, being engaged in various activities. Therefore, O Supreme Lord, protect us who are based on you, and make us full of devotion. May the region of Ganesha, which is under your control, be established in Ganesha; salutations to you.

Whoever reads or hears this hymn of Nagnabhairava, O Lords of the Devas, will attain all that is auspicious. By worshipping Nagnabhairava, one attains wealth, grain, and everything else, along with worldly enjoyment and liberation. People will never have to abandon the Mayura region. For those who praise him daily with this hymn, nothing is unattainable.

Thus ends the twenty-eighth chapter entitled "Praise of Nagnabhairava" in the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 29 : The Description of the Conclusion of the Dialogue between Bhrishundi and the King of Gods

Salutations to Lord Ganesha.

Bhrishundi said: The pilgrimage of the gates has been described, and the same is the circumambulation of the sacred region. O Lords of Gods, you must know this and perform it with diligence. A man should perform meritorious deeds, for sins deceive a human being especially; therefore, one should be diligent. I shall now describe the daily pilgrimage for those residing in Mayurakshetra. Listen attentively, O you who are composed, to this complete pilgrimage for others as well.

After worshipping Mayuresha along with his retinue, one should worship the eight Ganas, the sacred region, the pond, and the river. Then, one should worship the Shami tree, the Mandara tree, and the Durva grass, and thereafter the fourth. Then one should worship Mudgala and the great Yogi Shuka, and then proceed to the pavilion. A person standing there in order from the east should listen to the discourses on Dharma and others according to the available time. Then, bowing to Ganesha again, one should return to one's own home. One who performs this daily pilgrimage becomes dear to Ganesha. O Lords of Gods, if a person does not perform this daily pilgrimage, the fruit of residing in the sacred region will not be fully attained by him. At the end, he will suffer the complete and supreme torment of Bhairava. Therefore, one residing in the sacred region should perform this pilgrimage according to the rules.

Now, for the pleasure of Ganapa, I shall tell you of another pilgrimage, which bestows complete devotion and is dear to Ganapa. In the inner sanctum, there are supreme Vighneshvaras situated in the four directions. Among them, fifty-six are the principal ones who should be worshipped especially. The great weapons of the guardians of the directions and five bows are placed before them. All these Ganeshas, devoted to Ganapa, are situated everywhere. A person who worships the Ganapas situated in each of the directions in sets of fourteen will become a true follower of Ganesha. Ballala, Kapila, Dhundhi, Vakratunda, Mahodara, Heramba, Gananatha, Vighnesha, Vighnaharaka, Bhalachandra, Shurpakarna, Jyeshtharaja, Gajanana, and Mahotkata—these are the Lords of Gods situated in the eastern direction. One should know that these Ganeshas are situated at a distance of twenty-five bows from each other, as understood by the devotees.

Those situated in the south are at double that distance, and those in the west are at four times that distance. The Ganapas in the north are at a distance less by a quarter. In this order, they should be worshipped, as they bestow all accomplishments. Now I shall tell you of the Ganapatis situated in the south: Jnanesha, Karma, Yogesha, Siddhivighnapa, Chintamani, Buddheesha, Mahaganapati, Purnananda, Lakshyesha, Sahajesha, and Ekadantaka. Lambodara, Dhumravarna, and Kshipraprasadana—these are the great Lords mentioned as being in the inner sanctum in the south. Vinayaka, Vikata, Ashapuraka, Dhumraketu, Pramoda, Moda, Sumukha, and Durmukha, along with Pashapani, Paresha, Labhesha, Dharanidhara, Mangalesha, and Mushakadhvaja—these are the Lords of Gods in the west who should be worshipped according to the rules.

Now I shall speak of the Ganeshas in the north who protect the devotees: Mayuradhvaja, Rajeshvara, Vidrumeshvara, Onkaresha, Gunesha, Varada, Siddhibuddhipa, Ganesha, Chaturbahu, Trinetra, Gajamastaka, Nidhipa, Gajakarna, and Chintamanibhushana. These are the Ganeshavaras mentioned, who should be worshipped as the great Lords. Only those who perform this pilgrimage receive the desired fruits.

Now I shall describe the pilgrimage to the deities situated in the temple, which is the principal one, bestowing all meanings and complete for those who perform it. Ayodhya, Mathura, and Dvaraka are in the eastern temple; there, Mahavishnu should be worshipped with special devotion. Kashi, Maya, Avanti, and Shiva, along with Kailasaga, Gauri, and Skanda, should be worshipped by the people in the south as the principal deities. Mahakali, Mahalakshmi, Mahasarasvati, and the supreme Adishakti, along with Vishnukanchika, should be worshipped by the people in the west. Vidhata, Agni, Karma, Jadabharata, and Divakara, along with Shivakanchi, should be worshipped by the people in the northern temple. The secret of the Lords of the temple has been revealed; a person who performs their pilgrimage will attain all accomplishments.

Now I shall tell you the secret of those situated in Mayura. A person should worship Pulaha, Bhrigu, and Kratu. In the eastern and southern parts, one should worship Vashishtha, Atri, and Pulastya. In the west, one should worship Daksha, Marichi, and Angirasa. In the north, one should worship the eight Vasus, Kamadhenu, Devala, and Asita for the attainment of all goals. This rule of pilgrimage has been described briefly. By performing this pilgrimage, the Lords of Gods bestow all accomplishments upon the people. Go there, O Lords of Gods, to Mayura with devotion. Worship Ganesha, and you shall attain everything.

Adishakti said: Having said this, the great Yogi Bhrishundi became silent. Then, having received the single-syllable great mantra according to the rules, and having bowed to and worshipped the Lord of Yogis, and having performed circumambulation, all the five principal Kings of Gods departed, filled with joy.

Chapter 30 : The Conclusion of the Glory of Mayuresha Kshetra

Adi Shakti said: Then, the gods, bewildered, could not see the peacock-rider (Ganesha). They remembered the Lord of the Ganas, who is Brahman in the form of supreme bliss. Meditating on Bhushundi in their hearts, they worshipped the beloved of the Ganas. Having worshipped the Lord of the Ganas, they prayed to Him with devotion.

The gods said: O Lord of gods, show us the peacock-rider today; we know nothing beyond You. Protect us, who are bound by the veils of ignorance and are seekers of the truth. Suddenly, the Vedas appeared in their complete forms, manifested from the breath of Ganesha, bringing knowledge to the gods. Seeing them radiant with brilliance, the gods bowed and asked, "Who are you, dear ones? We are bound by ignorance and devoted to the remembrance of Ganesha; have you been sent by the Lord of the Ganas?"

The Vedas replied: We are the Vedas, O gods, come here with all our limbs. Why are you filled with sorrow? Tell us, dear ones. Then the gods narrated the entire story of what had happened. Hearing this, the Vedas showed them the peacock-rider. Seeing that supreme, luminous, and Brahman-filled region, they all bowed down and entered with reverence. The gods, along with the Vedas, performed the rituals as prescribed. Then, delighted by the command of the Vedas, they installed the idol. Worshipping Him with deep meditation, they chanted mantras according to the scriptures. Fasting, they pleased the Lord of Obstacles.

At the time when the gods installed the supreme idol, it was the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Bhadrapada, and it was midday. It was a Monday, combined with the auspicious Swati Nakshatra. By divine arrangement, the time had arrived, O Shaktis.

The Shaktis asked: O Devi, how did months and such exist before creation? Tell us this curiosity to remove our doubts.

Adi Shakti said: Time, which is perceived through the senses, perishes in every age. Everything always exists in Brahman, taking the form of Brahman. By the measure of time, the Lord of Obstacles entered Yoga-nidra, and without sleep, He created this supreme universe. He, being Brahman, remained as time itself. If people serve Him even through ignorance, they undoubtedly attain perfection, just as fire burns whether touched knowingly or unknowingly.

On the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Magha, Ganesha became the bestower of boons. When it coincided with a Tuesday, He emerged from the middle of the idol. Seeing the four-armed Dhundhi (Ganesha) seated on a peacock, accompanied by Siddhi and Buddhi, with the moon on His forehead, a large belly, three eyes, a serpent around His waist, holding the Chintamani, with elephant ears, a trunk, and one tusk, holding the noose, goad, and a boon-granting gesture, adorned with ornaments and clothes, the gods rose and bowed to Him. Filled with joy, they worshipped and praised Him.

Brahma and the others said: We bow to the Lord of the Ganas, the beginningless One, seated on a peacock, the Lord of all, who is beyond mind and speech yet resides within them. We bow to the Lord of the Ganas, the unborn, the ancient, the one worshipped by all, the supreme Lord, the giver of bliss who dwells in the heart. We bow to the Lord of the Ganas, who created the world by His own power, who is the essence of all truth. We bow to the Lord of the Ganas, who is beyond duality, absorbed in His own bliss, the master of Yoga. We bow to the Lord of the Ganas, the protector of His devotees, the giver of peace, the elephant-faced, four-armed, one-tusked, three-eyed Lord. We bow to the Lord of the Ganas, the large-bellied, the holder of the noose, the giver of success, the supreme seed of all. Salutations to You, the creator, the sustainer, and the destroyer of the universe. Salutations to You, the refuge of the helpless, the embodiment of power, the dispeller of delusion, the Lord of Karma, the sun-like Heramba. Salutations to Mayuresha, the holder of the peacock banner, the Lord of Obstacles, the remover of great difficulties. How can we praise You, O Ganesha, the Brahman of all Brahmans, in whom the gods find eternal peace? We bow to You, O Lord; be pleased with us and protect Your devotees, O Ganesha, who are fond of great devotion.

Having said this, they bowed to Ganesha with devotion, their eyes filled with tears and their bodies thrilled. Raising them, He spoke.

Shri Ganesha said: This hymn composed by you will grant all desires. I will grant the wishes of those who read or hear it. Ask for a boon; I am pleased by your penance, installation, and this hymn.

The gods said: O Lord of Obstacles, if You are pleased, grant us this boon: may we have constant devotion to Your lotus feet. Also, tell us what else we should do, and we will perform it with zeal.

Shri Ganesha said: O Four-faced one (Brahma), filled with Rajas, perform creation by My command. Become known as Brahma, remembering Me, free from ego. O Four-armed Vishnu, filled with Sattva, perform protection. By taking various incarnations and remembering Me, you will attain success. O Five-faced one (Shiva), filled with Tamas, perform destruction. Remembering Me, you will be free from bondage. O Four-armed one (Devi), filled with action, delude the world through various divisions; remembering Me, you will attain success. Become known as Shakti, the pure one. O Sun with a thousand rays, become known by that name. By the power of Karma, sustain the moving and unmoving; remembering Me, you will be free from bondage.

Having said this, the Lord of the Ganas gave them the power of success in their respective tasks. The Shaktis, cities, weapons, and vehicles disappeared, and He remained in the idol. The gods went to their respective realms and performed their duties. Those who were the main progenitors sent by the gods for the welfare of Mayuresha worshipped Him and became established in their duties. Thus, all beings worshipped Mayuresha and attained power.

Shankara also performed penance at Mayuresha and, by the grace of Ganesha, became Mahadeva. I have told you the glory of Mayuresha Kshetra, which grants all successes. One who hears, recites, or makes others hear this with devotion will enjoy Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha, and eventually become one with Brahman. There is nothing as purifying as this in the three worlds; it is the essence of the Vedas, Shastras, and Puranas. One who hears this will be blessed with children, wealth, and friends. At the end, he will dwell in supreme bliss and become one with Brahman. One who is childless will get virtuous children. By hearing this, nothing remains unattainable. One who performs this with devotion gains more merit than any other vow, pilgrimage, or sacrifice. I speak the truth, the absolute truth. Where the Lord of Brahman Himself resides, and the river is like a water pot, what can compare to it? This is the path to Brahman. One who reads this daily with devotion will undoubtedly see Ganesha, the remover of all sorrows. One should not recite this to the faithless, the wicked, or the hypocrites. If all worship Ganesha with devotion, who would be troubled by obstacles? Therefore, share this with a worthy person. I have told you the essence of all; go there and serve Ganesha with devotion. Only then will your life be meaningful; otherwise, it is as good as fallen.

Chapter 31 : The Manifestation of Vikata

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Shaktis asked: O Mother of the Universe, by the strength of our fortune, we have heard the greatness of Mayurakshetra, which grants all accomplishments. Now, O Goddess, tell us what Shiva and the other gods did after being instructed by Mudgala and being tormented by the fear of Kamasura.

Adi Shakti replied: When the noble sage Mudgala, the guru of yogis, departed, Shiva and the others bowed to him and went to the Mayura region. The gods and sages performed their pilgrimage according to the scriptures. Then, filled with devotion, they worshipped Ganesha. They pleased Vinayaka by chanting the single-syllable mantra. Pleased, He appeared before them in the form of Dhundhi. Seeing the Lord of Obstacles seated upon a peacock, the gods and sages rose, bowed with joy, and worshipped Him with great devotion. The gods, led by Vishnu, folded their hands and praised Him.

The gods and sages said: Salutations to you, O Mayuresha, the giver of all accomplishments. Salutations again and again to the giver of knowledge to your devotees and their protector. You dwell in Svananda, you are the Supreme of the Supreme, the Mother and Father of all, and the Lord Dhundhiraja. Salutations to you, the beginningless, the worshipful, the Supreme Soul, the one with infinite faces and infinite forms. Salutations to you, the giver of success and wisdom, the lord of success and wisdom, the eldest of the elders, and the granter of boons. Salutations to you, the three-eyed, four-armed, lotus-handed, pot-bellied Lord, whose navel is the lord of serpents. Salutations to Ganesha, the refuge of Maya, the mover of Maya, the playful one, and the embodiment of Brahman. Salutations to the single-tusked, the first-worshipped, the embodiment of all, the elephant-eared, the yogi, and the giver of peace. Salutations to you, who are Vishnu in the east, Shankara in the south, Shakti in the west, and the Sun in the north. How can we praise you, O Mayuresha, when even the Vedas and yogis find peace in you? Salutations to you, O Lord of Lords. The mind is fivefold, and within it is the illusory Maya, which is colorful and peacock-like; salutations to the Lord of that Maya. You are the player within the Maya called Mayura, and you are known as Mayuresha; we have seen you directly, there is no doubt. Our lives, age, knowledge, penance, and wisdom have become fruitful; O Lord, by seeing your feet, we have attained our purpose.

Having praised Him thus, they danced with tears of joy in their eyes, their hair standing on end, and cried out, "Victory to Mayuresha!" The Lord of the Ganas, moved by their devotion, said: "O Lords of the gods, I am bound by your devotion; ask for boons, and I shall grant them. This hymn you have composed for me will grant all accomplishments and will always bestow devotion upon those who recite it. I will joyfully grant whatever is desired. Whoever reads or hears this will become dear to me."

The gods said: O Lord of the Ganas, since you are pleased, grant us your devotion. O Lord, kill Kamasura, who causes fear to everyone. O Gajanana, that demon has displaced the gods from their realms and the sages from their duties; therefore, destroy him.

Saying "So be it," the Lord of the Ganas disappeared. The gods, filled with joy, went into a mountain cave. The sages and gods, worshipping Ganesha and awaiting the time, remained in bliss. Meanwhile, Kamasura was sitting in his assembly when he heard a terrifying voice from the sky: "The Brahma known as Mayureshwara, prayed to by the gods, will kill you and make the whole world happy." Hearing this, Kamasura fainted in fear. Hearing the terrible words, the demon lords gathered around him. With great effort, they revived the demon. He told them what he had heard from the sky. Hearing this, the angry demon lords said: "The gods have always been our enemies. O Lord, kill the gods. You have been freed by the sages, and they have done this terrible thing. O Great Lord, you are the creator, sustainer, and destroyer; what can these gods do to you? Command us to kill the gods. When the gods are dead, we shall be without rivals."

Kamasura then ordered them to slaughter the gods. Kumbhakarna and others went to the mountain caves. Seeing the gods and sages in the caves of Mount Meru, the demon leaders threw weapons to kill them. Terrified, Shiva and the others remembered Mayuresha: "Come, O Lord, Ocean of Mercy, protect us who are filled with fear."

By mere remembrance, Heramba, whose banner bears a mouse, arrived. He was seated on a peacock and held weapons. Seeing His radiant form, the gods were astonished and praised Gajanana with various hymns. Then, that radiant form said to the gods and sages: "O noble ones, I am Vikata; worship me for a long time. I have created the various forms of Maya through desire, but I am devoid of desire; worship me by abandoning desire. O Lords of the gods, become 'Vikata' (devoid of desire) through the joy of Maya, and you will be able to see my true form."

Hearing this, the gods and sages, with effort, gathered their minds and became desireless. Then the gods and sages saw the Lord of the Ganas. They bowed to Him and stood there, tormented by the demons' weapons. Then, the very angry Vikata said to them: "By seeing me, you shall become fearless. Now, take up your weapons and fight by my grace. I will kill Kamasura, who has come, O Lords."

Then the gods, filled with anger and armed with weapons, fought the demon leaders with great radiance. Indra came suddenly and struck Kumbhakarna with his thunderbolt, and he fell. Then the other demons fled in fear. After two hours, the powerful demon king regained consciousness, but he remained fearful. The gods, having attained victory, bowed to Vikata and praised the Lord of all with shouts of victory.

Chapter 32 : The Meeting of Gods and Demons

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Shaktis asked: O Gajanana, how is it that the gods and sages, who are free from desires, pray to You with devotion for the sake of slaying Kamasura?

Adi Shakti replied: O Shaktis, I shall now explain the paths of desire and desirelessness. Listen with focused hearts to resolve your doubts. Know that those who worship the Lord for the sake of nourishing their own bodies or for fame are motivated by desire. Those who worship Him with devotion for the fulfillment of their own dharma and for the service of the Divine are considered desireless. O beloved ones, listen as I explain the signs of desireless devotion for your own benefit.

We, the creators and sustainers, were fashioned by the Supreme for the sake of cosmic order, and we serve You, O Gajanana, as You play in this world. By residing in the hearts of all, You enjoy all pleasures without being tainted by them; therefore, O Lord of Ganesha, Your service is what nourishes our very existence. We perform our duties—creation and the rest—out of joy for Your pleasure, and it is for this reason that we pray to You. Now, this service of Yours has been obstructed by the chief of the demons, and we are unable to overcome him. Protect us, for we are eager to serve You.

When the gods prayed to Vikata in this manner, there was no doubt that those who are attached to bodily pleasures and fame, yet perform their own duties for the sake of pleasing Dhundhi, are considered to be acting without desire. Now, O Goddesses, listen to the great events that occurred, through which the devotion of Vikata is especially attained.

Kumbhakarna and the others, filled with fear, went to the mighty Kamasura and reported the news. They said, "Mayuresha has arrived, and it is said that Vikata, having been prayed to by the gods, will slay the great demons. By His mere glance, the gods have been filled with power, while we have become devoid of it. Behold this wonder, O wise one! Take refuge in Vikata, for that will be auspicious for you; otherwise, the destruction of the demon armies is now certain."

Hearing the words of Kumbhakarna, Bali became angry and, rebuking him in the presence of all, said, "Are you deluded? Why do you speak like a coward? Who, possessing a physical form, can withstand the speed of Kamasura?"

Hearing the words of Bali, the powerful demon Kama spoke to the demon chiefs with a heavy heart. Kamasura said, "Even if the prophecy is true, my enemy has arrived. I shall slay him, or I shall die; whatever is to happen will happen."

Hearing the words of Kamasura, Durmada, a great demon full of power and vigor, spoke there. Durmada said, "Kumbhakarna has indeed seen Vikata, but consider this, O wise one: everything that has an origin must have an end. Look at the Vedas, O learned one; how can He, a King, slay you who are endowed with such boons? Do not worry, O King of Kings; we shall slay Him, and there is no doubt that we shall be victorious. Command us, your servants, and see our great might which destroys the gods. This was merely a trick of the gods, a voice from the sky meant to cause fear. Do not believe this celestial voice, O wise one; how can He, who also bears a body, slay you who are so mighty?"

Hearing the words of Durmada, Bali and the other great demons were filled with joy and said to him, "What you have said is the truth." Then, Kamasura, prepared with all the demon leaders and his four-fold army, set out to face Gajanana.

Then, Shukra tried to enlighten the King of Demons with many words, but blinded by the pride of his strength, he did not understand. Knowing the inevitable future, the glorious sage Kavya (Shukra), realizing the momentum of time, followed the Lord. All the demons, filled with anger and excitement, arrived at the place where the gods had previously stayed, intending to crush them.

Thus ends the thirty-second chapter of the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Mahapurana, known as the "Meeting of Gods and Demons."

Chapter 33 : The Killing of the Sons of Kamasura

The Goddess Adi Shakti said: Seeing the vast and boundless army arrive, adorned with various weapons, the lords of the gods approached the Lord of the Ganas (Ganesha).

The lords of the gods said: The mighty Kamasura himself has arrived, before whom the lords of the gods appear like mere mosquitoes. O Lord, his weapon-strength has always been infallible; there is no one equal to him in power, and this very Kama has arrived. Protect us, for we are terrified of Kama; otherwise, the powerful Kama will capture the gods and sages alive, O Lord of the Ganas.

Hearing their words, the Elephant-faced Lord said to them: Do not fear, O wise ones; I shall slay this great demon. Through my grace, all you leaders of the gods will become capable; have no doubt, fight alongside the demons. Hearing the words of Vikata (Ganesha), the gods were filled with joy; they roared, armed with their weapons, and became fearless.

The sound of their roaring filled all the directions, and all the demons who had arrived became filled with fear. Then, the demon lords, led by Bali, filled with anger, roared with lion-like sounds and blew their conches from all sides. Then all the demon hosts, armed with weapons, released a fierce shower of weapons, like clouds over a mountain.

Then the gods, warding them off with their own weapons, fought fiercely. The demons and the gods fought each other intensely. In the dust that covered the sun, there was no distinction between friend and foe. The warriors struck each other with life-piercing weapons. Then, a river of blood was formed, which was difficult to cross; the dust was settled by the heavy flow of blood.

Thus, for one full day and night, the fierce battle continued between the demons and the gods who were seeking victory. Then, the gods, filled with victory, struck the demon leaders with weapon blows, and the demon commanders fell. Seeing this great wonder, the demon kings, led by Bali, became enraged and entered the battlefield with great strength.

By the power of their weapons, the entire army of the gods was struck, and the immortals, terrified, fled in all ten directions. Then Indra arrived and, in his fury, struck Bali, felling the mighty demon king with his thunderbolt. Then the joyful gods roared, but Kumbhakarna struck Indra in the chest with his fist. Indra fell to the ground; then the mighty Vishnu, the wise one, released his discus on the battlefield in anger.

The demons were struck on all sides by the sharp-edged discus. Ravana, filled with anger, approached him, desiring battle. Vishnu struck him there with a mace, and he fainted. Vishnu also rendered Kumbhakarna unconscious. Then Durmadaka, Mahisha, and Shankara approached the great Vishnu from all sides, filled with anger.

Seeing Keshav (Vishnu) in great distress, Shankara himself, taking his trident, approached with speed, as did Bhanu (the Sun). Bhanu was severely struck by Durmada with a mace; he fell unconscious, vomiting much blood. Shankara was struck by the trident of Shankara (the demon) and fell to the ground, unconscious. Vishnu rendered Mahisha unconscious with his discus. Then, the demons and Danavas fell, crying out in agony.

Seeing the strength of the victorious gods, the great sage Shukra made an effort to revive those demon leaders. Meanwhile, Mahakali arrived there; she took Kavya (Shukra) and threw him into a cave. Then Kamasura, the powerful demon, filled with grief, sighed and came to fight, and his two sons said: Stay, Father, we shall go and fight the great enemy; we shall surely kill him. What can this remover of obstacles do?

Having said this, the two mighty demon sons went to the battlefield and spoke to Shankara and Vishnu, filled with anger. Shoshana said: Stay, stay, O Mahadeva; having killed the demon hosts earlier, I shall now kill you; behold my supreme prowess. You are Shiva, equal to Shiva; go to the forest, you will die. What will you do to me with these animals?

Shri Shankara said: Shoshana, you are capable, and I shall kill you now; there is no doubt. O Vikata, show your prowess, endowed with power. Hearing this, the long-armed one released infallible arrows. By them, all the hosts of gods were rendered unconscious and fell in the battle. Shankara fought that mighty one with speed; he too, filled with anger, pierced him again with arrows.

Then, by the strike of the trident, Shoshana fell. Regaining consciousness after a moment, he grabbed Shambhu in anger. Whirling him around, he threw him onto the peak of a great mountain. Then the joyful demons praised him, saying "Victory!"

Dushpura approached Vishnu and spoke to the Lord of the gods, filled with anger, the long-armed one, highly arrogant of his strength. Dushpura said: Why are you, O Vishnu, puffed up with pride? Do you not know me, you fool? My great demon leaders have been killed by you. Take the fruit of your actions, you who follow the gods; you have killed my allies, and you shall surely go to the abode of Yama.

Hearing his words, Keshav, filled with anger, spoke to that mighty and arrogant demon son. Shri Vishnu said: Why do you speak to me, O sinner? I shall kill you, there is no doubt. By the power of Vikata, I shall do it; do not be arrogant, O demon-born. Then, filled with anger, Dushpura struck Vishnu with a mace, and he fell to the ground with great pain.

Then the gods, led by Indra, struck Dushpura with a shower of weapons, and he, in distress, released arrows. He struck Bhanu, the best of the radiant ones, with hundreds of arrows. He felled Indra, Yama, Vayu, and Brahma with hundreds more. Then Vishnu, cautious, struck Dushpura; he rendered the demon lord unconscious on the battlefield with his discus.

Regaining consciousness again, he troubled Vishnu with arrows. Having rendered him unconscious with thousands of arrows, he roared, delighting his own people. Thus, the demon Dushpura and Shoshana performed deeds in battle equal to the victorious ones. Meanwhile, the demon kings, led by Bali, were cautious; praised by them, the two sons of the demon king shone there.

Then, the demon lords, endowed with strength, made up their minds to kill the hosts of gods; then the Elephant-faced one became angry. Gajanana (Ganesha) threw his noose and goad with speed. The noose came and settled around the neck of Shoshana. With his breath blocked by the noose, Shoshana fell in the battle. Moving his hands and feet, he died that very instant.

The goad suddenly arrived and struck Dushpura in the stomach; he died right there as the demons and Rakshasas watched. Then the noose and the goad moved about the battlefield, killing many demons who were filled with cries of agony. The leaders, led by Bali, were agitated by fear; abandoning shame, the forces fell, weaponless, in the ten directions and elsewhere.

Then the noose and the goad returned to the hands of Vighneshwara (Ganesha). Seeing this, the immortals rose again. Free from pain and endowed with strength, they then praised Vikata. The demons, filled with grief, wept in all directions.

Chapter 34 : The Deliberation of Kamasura

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Primordial Shakti said: Some demons, with their limbs severed, went to the mighty Kamasura. Seeing him, they were filled with fear and narrated the entire incident to him.

The demons said: O Great King, why are you sitting idle? Our fellow demons have been killed in the great battle, and your two sons have also perished there. Go and seek refuge with Vikata (Ganesha). If you do not, the entire lineage of the demons will be uprooted. Hearing their words, Kamasura fainted.

When the demons brought him back to consciousness, he wept, filled with terror. With his body scorched by grief, he resolved to slay the gods. Taking up his weapons, he mounted his chariot and, accompanied by the remainder of his army, marched toward the city of Vikata.

Seeing the great warrior Kamasura arrive on the battlefield, the gods were filled with fear and spoke to Vikata: O Lord, the glorious Kamasura has arrived in person. O Lord of the Ganas, do now what you must.

Then, filled with anger, Vikata replied to the gods: O lords of the gods, be fearless and fight by my grace. Hearing his words, the gods, led by Shiva and Vishnu, roared like thunder and charged forward with weapons in their hands.

Seeing Shiva and the others approaching, the demon king, filled with great rage, addressed the gods.

Kamasura said: O Shiva, Vishnu, and other lords of the gods, listen to my words now. What a terrible enmity you have created by killing my sons! Out of affection, I had not killed you gods before. This is the reward I have received from the gods for my mercy. Now, filled with rage, I shall slay the lords of the gods. O Vikata, after killing you, I shall slay these sages and the king of the gods.

Having said this, the demon king readied his bow. Then, holding his ground, Shankara spoke to him.

Shri Shankara said: O great demon, you had previously seized everything belonging to us. You destroyed righteousness and forcibly oppressed the three worlds. O demon king, there is no doubt that you have now received the fruit of those actions. O wicked one, I shall slay you, Vikata, out of compassion.

Hearing Shiva's words, the great demon, filled with anger, struck him with a mace and knocked him to the ground. Seeing Shankara fallen, Keshav (Vishnu) hurled his discus at Kamasura, but it proved ineffective.

Then, filled with rage, Kama took up his bow, readied it, and rained down great arrows like a storm. Struck by those arrows, the chief gods fell to the ground, their limbs severed and their strength drained, and they fainted. Then, Bali and other demons, intoxicated by the battle, struck the gods from all sides.

Vishnu struck Kama with terrible arrows, but the demon also rendered the Garuda-bannered Lord unconscious. Then, recovering from his faint, Shankara fought fiercely, and the demon king struck him with a sword. Yet, Shiva, the destroyer, did not waver. Then Vishnu rose and fought the demons.

Ravana was struck hard by the sun-like arrows, and Durmada and the others fell to the ground. By the strike of Vishnu's discus, Mahisha, Kumbhakarna, Shankara, and Bali were all struck and fell unconscious. Then, Govinda struck the demons with his discus, and all the gods, crying out in despair, fled in all ten directions.

Seeing this great wonder, Kamasura was astonished. Filled with rage, he grabbed Maheshwara and threw him down. He seized Vishnu and tossed him onto the peak of a great mountain, and he grabbed the sun and smashed him onto the earth. Then, all the gods, terrified and crying out in agony, fled, their bodies broken and mangled by Kamasura.

Seeing the strength of the demon king, Vikata himself was pleased. Mounting his mouse, he set out for the battlefield. Seeing him approach, the valiant Kamasura, his eyes red with rage, spoke in fear.

Kamasura said: O Mayuresha (Ganesha), why have you come to fight me? You are mounted on a mouse; I consider you no better than a rat. You have killed my mighty sons, O Gajanana. Scorched by the grief of their loss, I shall kill you along with your mouse. You are requested by the gods, but tell me, what will you do? At the mere knitting of my brows, the entire world, moving and stationary, trembles.

Gajanana replied: O Gajanana, I am the creator, sustainer, and destroyer. Those who are united with me have no fear at any time. O leader of the Ganas, why do you act like a fool while possessing a body? You are filled with ignorance and shall die before me.

Hearing Kamasura's words, Ganapati himself spoke with a smiling face, filled with pride: O Kama, you are a great fool. Consider that I am Vikata. How can you, a great villain, kill one who is beyond birth and death? I am not the creator, sustainer, or destroyer, O best of demons. If you wish to live, seek my refuge. If not, I shall undoubtedly slay you, O sinner. Cast aside your pride, you great fool; I am Brahman, there is no doubt. Shukra told you everything, but you did not understand due to your foolish nature. Even now, seek my refuge, O wicked one.

Hearing Vikata's words, Kamasura became enraged and hurled a terrible mace at him to kill him. That mace proved useless and fell to the ground. Suddenly, the demon king fainted. After a while, the cruel demon regained consciousness. His entire body was weak, and he felt terrible pain.

Then, holding a thought in his mind, the villain pondered: Alas, how did Vikata strike me without a weapon? I am completely devoid of power; how can I fight? What Shukra said is true; he is indeed the form of Brahman. Yet, how can he be the supporter of the gods' side? Therefore, filled with doubt, I will not seek his refuge. I will die; there is no doubt, and that will be the enhancement of my fame. Seeking the refuge of enemies does not seem appropriate in my heart. Therefore, I will go to Vikata and ask a wonderful question. If he is not on the side of the gods, I will seek his refuge.

Thus ends the thirty-fourth chapter, titled "The Deliberation of Kamasura," in the Vikata-charita of the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 35 : The Pacification of Kamasura

Goddess Adi Shakti said: Then, Kamasura went to the elephant-faced Lord. Filled with fear, he spoke words that were beneficial.

Kamasura said: O Vikata, O wise one, O Lord, why do you help the gods? Why is this world, which consists of both gods and demons, dependent on only one quality? How are you Vikata, and what is the nature of the Brahman in the Vedas? If you are devoid of birth and other states, how do you bear a body? Tell me everything in detail so that I may know you truly. Then, O Lord, I will surely come to your refuge.

Vikata said: O demon, the illusion (Maya) of many kinds plays, held by me. By creating divisions and being their support, they call me Mayuresha. Those who see the truth call the word 'Maya' by the name 'Mayura'. See me as Mayuresha, the master of that illusion. Wise men describe the Brahman, which is associated with various divisions, as being of the nature of the unreal, because it shows itself as the witness of creation, sustenance, and destruction. The Brahman, which is nectar-like and always devoid of divisions, is indeed Vikata; know me to be that supreme truth. O demon, where does the Brahman, which is always indivisible, exist? Tell me about its nature as the witness of creation, sustenance, and dissolution. The Brahman is devoid of the four (states) and yet possesses the four, O wise one. Do not perceive it as anything other than the nectar-like Vikata. The Brahman is the life of all, and that is considered to be Vikata. Worship Him according to the scriptures, and you will become immortal.

Siddhi (perfection) is said to be confusing, and Buddhi (intellect) is considered to be the holder of delusion. Ganesha is the master of both; contemplate this while keeping Him in your heart. The mind is of five types, and delusion is also of five types. Abandoning the great mind filled with delusion, worship the Chintamani. I am in the hearts of all. To attain me, O wise one, I myself take a form and grant peace to my devotees. The human form is the manifest, and the head is the essence of manifestation. In the union of these, I became the one who bears the body; contemplate the elephant form. Therefore, I am elephant-faced, and my vision is certainly self-evident to the great yogis, thereby dwelling in self-bliss.

Long ago, I created the diverse world, endowed with its own dharma, out of bliss for the sake of the play of Maya. I always reside in the heart. I am both gods and demons; nothing exists separate from me. Even so, to protect dharma, I destroy all, without doubt. The gods are established in the heavens, and humans on earth, while demons are in the netherworlds; thus, the three are established in the three. When the gods, filled with greed, became eager in their anger to destroy the great demons of the netherworld, then I, filled with anger, resided in the hearts of the demons and made the demons possess the power of penance. I am the creator of obstacles for the gods and the remover of obstacles for the demons; because of this, the demon kings were always victorious. Know, O Kama, that the gods, being killed by the demons, became forest-dwellers by my will, without doubt. When the demons became very wicked and filled with pride, destroying the roots of the gods through the effect of the destruction of their own dharma, then the capable gods struck the demon leaders. I, residing in their hearts, show all the vulnerabilities of the demons. When the demons become unkillable even by Brahma and others, then I take a body and destroy them specifically. When the gods and demons become endowed with their own dharma, then I always reside in their hearts, O demon. You have tormented all the gods and destroyed dharma; therefore, I have come to kill you, as I am the supporter of the gods. I will kill you, O wicked one, if you disregard me. If you wish to live happily, O demon, abandon enmity.

Having said this to the great demon, Vikata became silent. Kamasura became joyful due to the future glory. He contemplated in his heart that this is undoubtedly Vikata, the complete one who is both god and demon; therefore, I shall take refuge in him. Kama folded his hands, cast aside his weapons, and bowed to Vikata with a joyful nature. Having bowed, he worshipped the remover of obstacles with effort. The demon Kama, filled with devotion, praised the elephant-faced Lord.

Kamasura said: Salutations to you, O Vikata, O Ganesha, the Supreme Soul. Salutations to the one worthy of worship by all, the Lord of all, and the one who is both god and demon. Salutations to the one who is endowed with infinite illusion, the one who is the form of Brahman. Salutations again and again to the elephant-faced Heramba, the Lord of gods. Salutations to the one with winnowing-basket ears, the remover of obstacles. You are the remover of obstacles for the devotees and the destroyer of the non-devotees. Salutations to you who dwell in self-bliss, who are of the form of yoga, the giver of peace to yogis, and the Lord of yoga. Salutations to the one who is free from illness, the one worthy of worship by all, the primordial one, the elder, and the King of the elders who grants positions to the elders. Salutations to the giver of Siddhi and Buddhi, the one who dwells in Siddhi and Buddhi, the form of Siddhi and Buddhi, and the Lord of the Ganas. Salutations to you, the three-eyed one, the four-armed one, the pot-bellied one, the Lord of Brahman, and the Lord of the Vedas. Salutations to you, the protector of gods, the bestower of boons to demons, the one who is equal to all, and Dhundhiraja. Salutations to the son of Vishnu and Shiva, the son of Shakti, the son of Kashyapa, the son of the excellent one, the mother and father of all. How can I praise you, O Lord of the Ganas, when the great yogis and the Vedas themselves have attained peace by your nature? O Lord, by worshipping you with Vikata-devotion, one abandons the happiness of Maya, which is specifically deluding to all creatures. The mind, which is always restless and filled with Maya and delusion, attains peace in Vikata; therefore, you are considered Vikata.

As he praised him with devotion, his hair stood on end. Kamasura danced, his throat choked with emotion, and he became highly glorious. Seeing his mind filled with devotion, Vikata said to him: O Kama, ask for a boon; I will grant your heart's desire. I came filled with anger to kill you, there is no doubt. Now, I will not kill you, as you have come to my refuge with respect. This hymn composed by you will grant all desires; whoever listens to it or reads it will attain self-bliss in the end.

Hearing these words of Ganapati, Kamasura bowed to the elephant-faced Lord with joy.

Kamasura said: O Lord, since you are pleased, grant me supreme devotion. Give me a place, O God, so that I may worship you while residing there. O elephant-faced Lord, grant me the love of Ganapatya (devotion to Ganesha) daily. I ask for nothing else, as everything else is perishable. Oh Lord, your position is rare even for the great yogis. I have seen you directly, O remover of obstacles, and thus I have known you now.

Hearing his words, Vikata, who is fond of his devotees, said to the great devotee Kama, who desired Ganesha-devotion:

Vikata said: My devotion will become intense in you, O great demon. Always be devoted to yoga and the love of Ganapatya. Stay in your own place, O demon, and be as you were before. Wherever there is no remembrance or worship of me, there, O demon, enjoy the fruits born of good deeds first. Make those who are endowed with my devotion, and make them filled with my desire.

Saying "So be it," the glorious demon Kama bowed to Ganapati and went to his own place, filled with the desire for devotion to Ganesha. Seeing him pacified, the great demons like Mahishaka and others left Kamasura and went to their own places.

Chapter 36 : Conclusion of the Vikata Incarnation

Adi Shakti said: Seeing the demon Kama (Kamasura) filled with great peace, the divine sages were astonished. They worshipped Vikata and praised Him with folded hands.

The divine sages said: We worship that Supreme Lord Vikata, who is unborn, ancient, immutable, the embodiment of eternal consciousness, and the illuminator of all. He is devoid of non-existence, resides within all diversities, and is the Supreme Lord.

We worship that Supreme Lord Vikata, who is devoid of beginning, middle, and end, who is the essence of life and the sustainer of the dharma of life. He is the eternal nectar, the Brahman, and is free from all modifications.

By You alone was Maya created from Your own reflection, and You Yourself infused it with the power of the life-reflection. Thus, the creation became capable and functional; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

In this way, the Sankhya philosophy, which describes the nature of the unreal, was created, as was the Brahman, which is the form of pure knowledge. He is the refuge of infinite varieties and is immeasurable; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

Then, through Your own knowledge, You created the "I-am" (Aham), which is pure, the sole refuge, and the primordial form. You are the essence of the world and the embodiment of the Bindu; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

The world, consisting of four quarters, was created by You, combined with both the individual and the collective. You are Ganesha, the giver of life to the unborn; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

O Lord, You pervade everything because You are devoid of duality, and You shine in the form of light. You are the performer of infinite pastimes and are immeasurable; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

O Gajanan, You are devoid of birth, yet You shine everywhere through devotion. Therefore, people call You Ganesha and Vikata; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

O Vinayaka, in the form of Hari, You protect this world; through the quality of Rajas, You are the Creator; and through the quality of Tamas, You are the Destroyer; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

In the performance of all actions, You reside within as the regulator in the form of life-force. In the form of action, You reside in the Shakti; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

O Dhundhiraja, O Lord of the Universe, O Universal Form, You exist as the essence of all. You never enter the world, yet You are everywhere; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

We worship that Supreme Lord Vikata, who is the first to be worshipped by all, worthy of praise by everyone, the granter of Ganesha-Siddhi everywhere, the one who shines in the pure heart, and the bearer of elephant ears.

We worship that Supreme Lord Vikata, who resides in the city named Svananda, who has three eyes, rides a mouse, has a large belly, possesses one tusk, and is the Lord of all.

We worship that Supreme Lord Vikata, who is present on the side of His devotees, is free from obstacles, fulfills the desires of the mind, and is the destroyer of the refuge of all non-devotees.

O Lord, the regulator of the various Brahmas in the worlds is held in Your hand. You are the great goad and the sole wielder of the goad; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

The bondage of illusion is the only noose held in the Lord's hand, which destroys the bondage of those who practice devotion to Him; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

Those who have taken refuge in You never have any fear, for fearlessness is always present in Your hand. The wicked, who are full of fear, are cast away; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

O Lord of obstacles, the nectar that is the food of the worlds is held in Your hand. You are the sweet Modaka that brings joy to the people; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

You are the essence of the unreal, all-pervading, and distinct, yet You are the supreme peace residing within it. Therefore, people call You Vikata; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

How can we, with our limited understanding, praise the Lord who cannot be described even by the Vedas and others? Even Suka and others are unable to praise Him fully; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

Nevertheless, O Lord of Brahman, we have praised You through the knowledge born of Your vision. Therefore, O Protector of the humble, be pleased with us; we worship that Supreme Lord Vikata.

Adi Shakti said: Having praised Vikata in this way, all the divine sages bowed down like a staff and then danced before Him. The Lord of all, Vikata, who is bound by devotion, spoke to the divine sages who were filled with devotion and affection for Him.

Vikata said: O noble ones, O gods and sages, ask for boons. I am greatly pleased by your hymns and will grant them to those who are filled with devotion.

This hymn composed by all of you will grant My feet to anyone who reads or hears it. It will be the giver of worldly enjoyment and liberation, will increase sons and grandsons, and will grant wealth, grain, and all desired objects through its recitation.

It will facilitate the six types of rituals, destroy the evil deeds of others, and cure various diseases for those who serve it well. It will grant freedom from bondage to those in prison, and by reciting it a thousand times, it will always increase good fortune.

It burns away a multitude of sins through recitation and will surely grant all accomplishments; there is no doubt about this. Whoever recites it twenty-one times continuously will accomplish everything within twenty-one days.

Hearing these words of Vikata, the best of the divine sages and the Shaktis, filled with devotion, bowed to Him and sang.

The divine sages said: O Gajanan, having seen the powerful Kamasura filled with peace, we are all satisfied; there is no doubt about this. Now, the Brahmins and others will be engaged in their duties, and the gods will be established in their own positions, following their respective dharmas.

The purpose of the boon has been fulfilled; what more shall we ask? Give us steady devotion to You so that there is no fear of desire.

Saying "So be it," Vikata disappeared. The divine sages remained there, filled with longing. Then, the best of the gods, along with the sages, established Vikata, the giver of joy and devotion.

That place is situated at the edge of the Himalayas in the direction of Vayu (North-West). It is the place of Vikata, O great goddesses, and it grants all accomplishments.

Having worshipped the image of the great-souled Vikata, the divine sages returned to their own abodes and then came back to this sacred site. The divine sages were considered to be stationed in their respective authorities by a portion of His power, while the residents of the region worshipped Vikata in His fullness.

It is a large, square sacred site, ten yojanas in extent. In the center, Vikata Himself resided. In the four directions, the four gods, headed by Shambhu, were stationed. Other gods were on the left, and the sages were on the right.

The holy waters associated with the site were situated in the west, and the devotees stood there to serve Him. The mouse was placed near Vikata. On His left side was Siddhi, and on His right side was Buddhi.

The Ganas, led by Brahmapriya, were stationed everywhere, and holding weapons in their hands, they worshipped Vikata, who is dear to the Vikatas.

The Vikata-Tirtha became very famous there. By bathing in it, a creature immediately attains its desired goal. At the end, one attains liberation in Svananda; there is no doubt about this. This sacred site of Vikata is complete, dear to Him, and famous in the three worlds.

Other major holy sites of the divine sages were situated all around the Vikata-Kshetra, and bathing in them grants happiness. If the devotees of other gods die in this region, they certainly go to the world of Vikata.

Having enjoyed pleasures there, they attain dissolution and go to Svananda. By the mere sight of Vikata, they become one with Brahman.

By merely traveling to this sacred site, a person attains all their desires, and the same is true by the sight of Vikata; there is no doubt. Those who are devotees of Vikata, wherever they may die, become one with Brahman; this is confirmed by the scriptures.

That image was established on the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Bhadrapada. Therefore, that day became the most important day for Vikata. The annual festival on the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Bhadrapada is celebrated by the gods and others with devotion.

Worship at midday is said to grant all accomplishments. One should know from the path of the scriptures that it grants even minor accomplishments. Blessed are those men in this world who see the supreme Vikata. O great goddesses, they are considered to have fulfilled their purpose, as stated in the Vedas.

There, the divine sages and others who reside in the region worship Vikata daily with natural joy. They tell the stories of Vikata to one another, their eyes filled with tears and their bodies covered in goosebumps due to their devotion.

Having attained a human body, those who have not seen Vikata have lived a fruitless life, with a nature similar to that of animals.

This is the greatness of the sacred site told in brief. I am not capable of describing it in detail even in ten thousand years. Other gods, goddesses, yogis, and the foremost of the Vedas are not capable of describing it even in crores of years.

Thus, having taken various incarnations, the Lord who upholds dharma, Vikata, protects the moving and non-moving creation by His partial manifestation. Whoever, the best of men, hears or reads this greatness of Vikata will attain everything and, in the end, become one with Brahman.

O goddesses, there will never be any fear of desire for him. Being devoid of desire by nature, he will attain all desires specifically.

Thus, having restrained desire and brought it under His control, Vikata has done this; what more do you wish to hear?

Thus ends the thirty-sixth chapter, named "The Description of the Conclusion of the Vikata Incarnation," in the Sixth Section of the glorious Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 37 : Incarnation of Gunesha

The Shaktis said: Having heard the greatness of Vikata, O Shakti, we are filled with immense joy, as if tasting the nectar of yoga. Yet, O Devi, we are not satisfied; please tell us more of this supreme story of the Lord of Obstacles. O Mother of the World, you have mentioned that Vikata took other incarnations; please narrate the stories of those incarnations briefly.

Adi Shakti said: There was a king named Chakrapani who ruled the city of Gandaki. His wife, Ugra, was endowed with the virtues of devotion to her husband. The king was righteous, generous, and wise, performing the five daily sacrifices and honoring gods, Brahmins, and guests. Having conquered the entire earth, he enjoyed great prosperity. However, every child born to them died instantly; the couple suffered from the sorrow of childlessness. Despite performing various vows and rituals, the king could not obtain offspring from the Supreme Lord.

Filled with sorrow, the king entrusted his kingdom to his ministers and prepared to go to the forest with his wife. At that time, the great sage Shaunaka, a yogi, happened to pass by. The king followed the vow prescribed by the sage, and pleased by this, the Sun God (Ravi) placed a seed in the queen’s womb in a dream. The womb, filled with solar energy, became too intense for the queen to bear, and she cast it into the ocean. There, a son was born who possessed three eyes and held a discus; he dried up the ocean. The ocean then assumed the form of a Brahmin and approached Chakrapani, narrating the story of the child's birth. The ocean returned the son, and the king, along with his people and Brahmins, performed the birth rituals.

The child was named Sindhu by the Brahmins. Due to his immense power, he became very strong. While on his way to the forest for penance, he received a mantra from the sage Kavya (Shukracharya). Standing on one leg, he performed great penance, fasting and pleasing Kashyapa (the Sun). After two thousand years, the Sun God granted him a boon, giving him the wealth of the three worlds and the nectar of immortality. The Sun warned him that he would be destroyed by one who holds the nectar and is free from the three gunas.

After the Sun disappeared, Sindhu returned home. The king, delighted, gave him the kingdom and retired to the forest. Sindhu then conquered the seven continents. Knowing of his boon, demons like Shumbha, Nishumbha, Vritra, Kamala, Shankha, and Kolasura became his followers. With their help, he defeated the gods, including Indra and Shiva. Shiva had to leave Kailasa, and Sindhu imprisoned Vishnu, the Sun, Brahma, and Indra in his dungeons. The demon ruled the three worlds and replaced the gods with demons in all sacred places. After a long time, the demon, filled with arrogance, destroyed all holy sites and rituals. He placed his own statues everywhere and forced people to worship them. Consequently, all Vedic rituals and sacrifices ceased.

Now, O beloved ones, listen to the way he was destroyed. Shiva, accompanied by his ganas, went to the Trisandhya region. There, along with Gautama and others, he lived with his wife and meditated upon Vighnesha with devotion. Once, Parvati, filled with doubt, bowed to Shiva and asked, "You are the Lord of all gods, and there is no one above you, as stated in the Vedas. Yet, whom do you worship with such intense meditation? Please tell me, your servant."

Shiva replied, "O Goddess, I worship Ganesha, the Lord of Brahman, who created even those who are considered the lords of the gods. The syllable 'Ga' signifies the one who is not a lord, and 'Na' signifies the Lord; the master of both is Ganesha, as seen in the Vedas." Hearing this, Parvati asked for the method to attain him. Shiva gave her the supreme mantra of Ganapati and instructed her to perform penance.

The Goddess went to the beautiful Lekhanadri mountain. Through intense meditation and fasting, she pleased Dhundhi (Ganesha), who became ready to grant her a boon. After a hundred years, he appeared and asked what she desired. Parvati requested, "O Lord of Obstacles, be my son. I will serve you, and we shall be mother and son, free from all bonds." Ganesha agreed and disappeared. Parvati then installed the image of Vighnesha with the help of Brahmins. After worshipping him, she told Shiva the news, and he was overjoyed.

Parvati then constantly remembered the Lord. Due to her great merit, she saw the Lord of Ganas everywhere. In the month of Bhadrapada, on the fourth day of the bright fortnight, on a Monday under the Swati constellation, she worshipped his image. The image became alive, granting boons as Vikata. The gods were dazzled by his brilliance, but after they praised him, he assumed a gentle form. Shiva saw him as a six-armed deity, radiant like the moon. They performed all the birth rites with the help of Brahmins. On the eleventh day, they named him Gunesha, and the divine couple worshipped the Brahmins with great joy.

Chapter 38 : Description of Childhood Pastimes

Adi Shakti said: Then, the spies of Sindhu, who were stationed there in disguise, learned of these events and reported the news to Sindhu. Meanwhile, a terrifying, disembodied voice echoed there, which Sindhu heard. It said, "This Lord of the Daityas will soon kill you, and he will establish the order of all moving and non-moving beings according to their respective duties." Hearing this, the Daitya fainted, but upon regaining consciousness, he became extremely anxious and sorrowful. The Daitya king sent his commanders to kill the child. They arrived at the Trisandhya region in disguise. Ganesha, the son of Shiva, killed all those who had come in various forms, such as animals and birds, to slay him.

Seeing this, the goddess Parvati felt great sorrow, thinking, "Alas, my son is constantly killing countless Daityas. Yet, what will these Daitya kings do to my son? I do not know if they will kill this lord of virtues." She wondered if her son, who was the complete Lord of Brahman himself, would be lost due to some misfortune. Then, Ganesha, the Lord of Gunas, cast a veil of illusion. Under its influence, the goddess perceived him merely as her son, Ganesha.

Meanwhile, the yogi Marichi, who was a devotee of Ganesha, prayed to the Lord, "O Lord of Obstacles, please grant me your vision." Hearing his own pure words, Ganesha, who had taken the form of Shiva's son, appeared before him. Seeing him, Parvati was filled with joy; she bowed, worshipped, and fed the sage, then prayed to him, "You are the embodiment of Brahman; do not leave my hermitage. Abandoning pilgrimages, remain here devoted to the worship of Ganesha. Just as he is the remover of obstacles, you are surely the same. Therefore, I pray to you, Master, protect my son. The hordes of Daityas are constantly coming to kill Ganesha, and they all meet their death. There is no doubt that Ganesha is our family deity. O sage, if you do not protect my son, he might perish."

Hearing Parvati, the great sage was astonished, thinking, "This is Adi Shakti herself, yet she is deluded, seeing him only as her son." He gave the Ganesha Kavacha to the son of Shiva, and after bowing to him, the sage returned to his hermitage. Even so, when the Daitya kings came daily in various disguises to kill him, Ganesha slew them as if it were mere child's play.

One morning, Parvati, devoted to Shiva, rose and held a Shiva Linga in her left hand. She invoked Shiva within it and began her worship. Just then, Ganesha woke up and asked Parvati for milk. She replied, "I will give you milk after I have worshipped Maheshwara." Ganesha asked, "Why are you devoted to worship? Why do you give more importance to Shiva than to me, Mother? If you give me milk, the infinite Shiva and others, including Brahma, will be pleased." Parvati, smiling, did not give him the milk. Enraged, Ganesha (Mayuresha) struck her hand with his palm, causing the Shiva Linga to fall and break.

Filled with great anger and sorrow, Parvati struck Ganesha. In retaliation, the enraged Ganesha bit her finger, causing blood to flow profusely. Frightened, he ran away, crying out, while still displaying his divine play. Seeing the broken Linga, which had been consecrated with life, Shiva’s beloved wept in deep agony. She lamented, "I have surely incurred the sin of killing Shiva. I have committed the same sin as killing my husband. This son of mine is a source of hell. If I were barren, it would have been a blessing. Now, filled with sorrow, I shall remember Ganesha in my heart and abandon this body. O Lord of Obstacles, salutations to you."

By merely remembering Ganesha, her confusion vanished, and she saw him standing nearby in the form of her son. The goddess, holding a stick, ran to strike him, but Ganesha, seeing her, ran away in fear. Shiva’s beloved chased and caught her son, but Ganesha cast an illusion and appeared as Shiva himself. Deluded by the vision of Shiva, the goddess felt sorrowful, wondering why she had been chasing Maheshwara with a stick. As she abandoned him in grief, Ganesha returned to his form as a child. When she chased him again, he fled and hid in the forest.

At that moment, a Daitya named Kardama, disguised as a Shaivite brahmin, approached the child and said, "Why do you run, child? I will protect you. Stay here where your mother cannot find you." Ganesha, playing the part of a child, agreed. The Daitya, thinking he had captured his great enemy, was overjoyed, believing the fear of all Daityas had been destroyed. Meanwhile, the Mother of the Universe arrived and, seeing the Shaivite brahmin, bowed and asked, "Master, where is my son? I see no footprints here. Tell me the truth, O wise one." The brahmin replied, "I have not seen your son, O daughter of the mountain. I swear by Shiva, look for him yourself."

Parvati, in great distress, remembered Ganesha, and he emerged from her lotus-like mouth. Ganesha then struck the demon with his fist, killing the wicked creature, who was eighteen yojanas in size. Parvati was overjoyed, her anger vanished, and she took her son home. Once home, Ganesha fell to the ground, rolling about and yawning repeatedly. Seeing him like this, Parvati was distressed, wondering what had happened to her son. Suddenly, she saw the entire universe, containing infinite cosmic eggs, within his mouth. Terrified, she fell to the ground and remembered her guru, Shiva.

The delusion lifted, and Parvati realized, "This Ganesha is my son, yet I was foolishly attached to worshipping the Linga. I worship Shiva as my husband, but I forgot that Ganesha is the Lord himself. I did not give him milk due to my ignorance. He is the Lord of Brahman; when he is pleased, all are pleased. I have seen the form of Shiva in him. From now on, I will worship Ganesha, who has come as my son, with all my devotion. He is my husband, father, mother, son, and friend; he is the Divine Brahman."

Having decided this, the goddess rose, bowed to him, and praised him with devotion. Seeing her praising him, Ganesha cast his spell of illusion again, and the goddess fell into deep forgetfulness. She began to cherish him as her son once more, and returned to her household duties as before.

The Shaktis asked: "Ganesha, the Lord of Brahman, engaged in these childhood pastimes, acting like an ordinary son. Why did he show his Shiva-form, which contains the entire universe, to the goddess? And why did he hide it again? Tell us, O destroyer of doubts, what is the meaning of this curiosity?"

Adi Shakti replied: "He is always eager to accept the devotion of a mother. By the power of his boon, he grants the fruits of penance. After completing the task for the gods and sages, he will disappear, and then the goddess will regain her knowledge. There is no doubt that Ganesha came as my son. Due to ignorance, I truly perceived him as my child. Though he took a human form, he showed me his divine power, yet I did not recognize him. Because of this, I will worship Ganesha with supreme devotion, and for that reason, the Lord of Ganas performed this play. Having killed various Daityas himself, he ensured the worship of Shiva and Parvati through the power of the 'son' sentiment."

Chapter 39 : Killing of Kamalasura

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Primordial Shakti said: There is no doubt that the Lord of the Ganas, while living among the children of Gautama and other sages, played with them daily just like a child. When those sages' sons occasionally insulted Him or behaved disrespectfully, He, being full of joy and demonstrating friendship, bore it all patiently. Those men who performed penance for the sake of friendship and devotion became His servants by the very nature of being sages' sons.

Vishnu, the imperishable one, was born as the son of Kashyapa in the form of a peacock. Being eager to serve, he engaged in battle with the Lord of the Ganas. Upon being enlightened by Vinata’s son (Garuda), he bowed down to Him. The peacock, having praised Ganesha, prayed for a supreme boon. He asked that Ganesha’s name, combined with the name "Mayura" (peacock), should become famous everywhere and be the bestower of all accomplishments. Ganesha agreed, and thus He became known as Mayuresha, and the peacock served the remover of obstacles as His vehicle.

Once, Ganesha was immersed in water by the sons of the Brahmins. The Naga maidens, tormented by desire, carried Him away while He was in the water. Having heard of Ganesha’s greatness in the past, they had performed great penance, wishing for Ganesha to be their husband. Those Naga maidens, devoted to various rituals and mantras of Ganesha, became filled with the power of their penance. They were cherished with great respect by Shesha, Vasuki, and others. When they prayed for husbands, they told the Naga leaders that they would only choose Ganesha as their beloved husband and desired no one else, as others were incapable. Hearing this, Shesha and the others asked why they were so stubborn, noting that the Lord of the Ganas, the son of Brahma and Shiva, resided in His own bliss. They asked how He could be their husband and advised them to abandon their pride and choose an equal.

Hearing these words, the maidens became angry and declared that they had chosen a life of celibacy. Due to their past impressions, they saw Mayuresha in the water and recognized Him as the Lord of the Ganas. Having heard from Narada that the son of Shiva was the Lord of the Ganas, they brought Him to their home, and being overwhelmed with devotion, they worshipped Him as their husband. Ganesha, out of compassion, bestowed upon them a peaceful state of yoga. Being freed from desire, they served Him with special devotion. Through the power of their devotion, He gave them pure happiness, and they enjoyed supreme masculine bliss day and night. After doing this, He subdued the proud and arrogant Shesha and departed to where the Brahmin boys were.

In this way, He performed various pastimes and ate the food of Gautama with great affection. O Great Goddesses, what will the Lord Gajanana not do for the sake of bestowing devotion upon His devotees? He is the servant of His servants. Whatever is offered by devotees, He considers as nectar, but He considers what is offered by non-devotees as poison. Due to His infatuation with devotion, even insults and beatings became a source of happiness for the Lord of the Ganas. Even when insulted or struck by Parvati, Shiva, Aditi, Kashyapa, and others, Gajanana considered it nectar. For the sake of His devotees, He, who carries the heads of demons, even allowed His own limbs to be severed and appeared as if born of filth. In this way, the Lord of the Ganas, the destroyer of delusion, performed various acts like a lowly person, completely enchanted by devotion.

Then, Gautama and the others, influenced by Ganesha’s illusion, went to Lord Shankara and, being greatly deluded, spoke to Him. The sages said: "O Shambhu, go with Mayuresha wherever you please. We are constantly troubled by the presence of the demons. The demon lords constantly come to attack Mayuresha, and they are struck down by His illusion instantly. The demons die and take on their true forms, spanning ten, twelve, or twenty yojanas. Because of their falling bodies, our homes, trees, and hermitages are destroyed daily. What are we to do? Therefore, go wherever you like with Him. Or, O Lord, if we leave You, where shall we go?"

Hearing their words, Shiva, the protector of the gods and the Lord of the great goddesses, became anxious and spoke to the sages. Shri Shiva said: "O Brahmins, I came to your hermitages today, and because of the fault of My association, you sages have been greatly troubled. O Brahmins, remain in your hermitages and enjoy happiness. I shall go elsewhere with everyone, there is no doubt. O lords of Brahmins, the demon lords constantly cause great suffering to Mayuresha, and those powerful demons have been killed by Him. O great sages, tell Me a place for Ganesha to stay without obstacles. I shall reside there with My son, constantly absorbed in meditation."

Gautama and the others said: "In the southern region, there is a field called Vighnesha, which grants all accomplishments. It is called Bhusvananda and bestows union with Brahman. The idol of the Lord of the Ganas there was broken by the messengers of Sindhu, and the demons, filled with joy, installed the image of Sindhu there. O Great Lord, it has been abandoned by people tormented by the fear of demons. Go there with your son, and you will be free from obstacles."

Saying "So be it," Shiva, along with all the Ganas and Vighnesha, departed, and the Brahmins followed. In the meantime, a great demon named Kamalasura, sent by Sindhu, arrived. Seeing him, who was full of great illusion and unconquerable even by Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, the sages trembled. They thought, "Alas, we cannot stay here without Shiva. The sages have been killed by the demon lords; where shall we go?" Thinking thus, they all went back to Shankara, and being terrified, they prayed to Him to protect them from the demon lord. They begged Him to stay with Mayuresha, or else they would not be able to survive.

Hearing their words, Sadashiva, the protector of the Brahmins, who was also fearful, spoke beautiful words to them. Shri Shiva said: "This demon named Kamalasura has come with powerful demon lords, and I am not capable of defeating him. Now, this powerful one will surely capture Me and throw Me into the prison where the gods like Vishnu are kept." Hearing Shiva’s words, Mayuresha said to Him, "Do not fear, Father, I will kill this great demon. You are the direct partial incarnation of the Lord of the Ganas, the leader of devotees. How can there be any obstacle for the Brahmins and the followers of Ganesha? Marichi gave me Ganesha’s armor for protection, so I shall have no fear."

Having said this, the destroyer of obstacles went to the great demon, riding on his peacock, holding a battle-axe and a trident. He fought a fierce battle and, with his trident, cut the great demon into three pieces and cast him down. His head fell in the Mayura region, his stomach in the royal palace, and his loins in Pravala. The demon lord fell in three places and became threefold. The powerful Lord of the Ganas resided in all those places. Shiva, along with the sages, came to the region known as Mayura, and they all settled there.

Thus ends the thirty-ninth chapter named "The Killing of Kamalasura" in the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 40 : The Demonstration of the Subordination of Vishnu and Others to the Lord

Adishakti said: Upon arriving there, Mayuresha saw the Lord residing in the idol. Filled with anger, He crushed the ocean (Sindhu) instantly. Then, the sages led by Shankara became extremely fearful, wondering what would happen after hearing the news about the demons. Even the demon kings, empowered by Maya, arrived to kill the son of Shiva, but the Lord of the Peacock (Mayuresha) destroyed them all. Then, Shankara began an Indra-yajna to destroy the obstacles, but Mayuresha, filled with anger, broke it. Subsequently, Indra fought Mayuresha with the gods, but the Lord of the Ganas defeated him and returned to His own city.

The Shaktis asked: O Devi, the gods were held captive in the prison of Sindhu, and they came to fight. Please tell us quickly to remove our doubts.

Adishakti said: Long ago, the gods led by Maheshwara were captured by the demons. They went to the Lord of the Ganas while residing in supportless cities. No Shaktis are capable of capturing them; I shall explain their path to clear your doubts. Gods are said to be of three types: those who are forms of elements (tattvas), those who are forms of karma (actions), and those who are embodied forms. Because they shine in all states, they are called Devas. Those who follow the Vedas should know that divinity is of three types. O dear ones, Indra, who performs a hundred Ashvamedha sacrifices, is a god born of karma, and such gods reside on the Golden Mountain (Meru). There are cities of gods everywhere, such as in the Mandara mountains, and there is no doubt that demons and others can defeat them. At the end of Brahma’s day, they are devoted to the Manvantaras and undoubtedly perish after enjoying the fruits of their sacrifices. They are all subject to rebirth in human form, receiving fruits according to their actions.

Other gods are forms of karma, pervading and residing as superiors, always performing their duties. The digestive fire, external fire, and the punishments of Yama are described as the jurisdictions of these gods. Demons are not able to defeat them through karma; such gods are called those who are always endowed with authority. Yogis can move these gods through the power of Yoga, but they do not move by any other power. At the end of Brahma’s day, these best of gods, who are supportless and possess the form of karma, do not face death. There is no doubt that they perish during the Great Dissolution (Mahapralaya), and along with their families, they are considered to take on bodies again. All humans in the mortal world are bound by karma; they receive fruits according to the actions they perform.

The gods described in the Vedas as forms of elements (tattvas) are the Great Goddesses. Through these elements, they joyfully manifest the moving and non-moving world. They are the creators, maintainers, and destroyers, assuming all forms, and they reside as the Lords of the world with the nature of Brahma. At the time of the Great Dissolution, having finished their play, they engage in Yoga-nidra, especially in their Yoga forms. After creating the universe again, these leaders of the gods play; no one can defeat them by the power of Yoga alone.

This Yoga is said by the best of the wise to be of two types in the scriptures: one is born of breath control (vayu-sadhana) and is attained through Pranayama. Through that Yoga, the gods who reside in the elements do not become subservient to anyone, O Goddesses, as should be known from the path of the scriptures. Yoga is described as Samprajnata and Asamprajnata; the second, known as Brahma-bhuta, is always attained by yogis. Through that power of Yoga, humans can defeat those gods; all gods become attainable and subservient to them. Whatever the great yogi desires, the gods fulfill; they even alter the Prarabdha (destiny) of those who are devoted to the yogi. When yogis become attached to their play, they fall from Yoga and become subject to birth and death. The gods fear the yogi’s state of Yoga; it should be known from Vedic discourse that they are indeed forms of elements.

Now, O Goddesses, listen with one mind to the current topic: the incarnation story of the great-souled Vikata. Once, Brahma came to the Mayura region to see Him, and upon seeing Him, he became infatuated. He thought in his mind, "He is called the son of Shiva; I, being the elder, should not bow to Him." He thought, "This is undoubtedly the Lord of the Ganas himself. I will bow to Him only after testing the Lord of the Ganas." Thinking this, Brahma, who is all-pervading, hid himself, covering the universe along with Shiva and Shakti. Mayuresha, knowing this, created the moving and non-moving world, and Brahma again took refuge in Him. Then, through His breath, Vighnesha took Brahma into His stomach. Seeing the infinite universes there, he wandered here and there. After a thousand years, the glorious Mayuresha exhaled Brahma out through His breath. Upon coming out, the Creator saw Him for a moment, became extremely astonished, and bowed to Him again. After praising Him, he went to his own place filled with joy. From that day on, Brahma’s water pot remained in the Mayura region.

Having thus destroyed Brahma’s pride, Mayuresha, the creator of the world and the giver of all to His devotees, played with the Brahmin boys. Then, once, the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Bhadrapada arrived. On that day, the sages led by Shankara, with great devotion, made an idol of clay. In their respective homes, they all created the Lord of the Ganas and worshipped Him with reverence. Mayuresha Himself created an idol with a trunk and other marks, and after worshipping and bowing to it, He praised Him with folded hands.

Mayuresha said: Salutations to the Lord of the Ganas, the destroyer of all obstacles, the giver of obstacles to the wicked forms of devotees, salutations again and again. Salutations to You, the Lord of Brahmas, the giver of all siddhis, endowed with immeasurable Maya, salutations to Dhundhi. Salutations to the curved-trunk one, the destroyer of the crooked, the Supreme Soul. Salutations to the one with a large belly, who resides in the stomach of all. Salutations to the form of Chintamani, the holder of the five minds, to Heramba, the seed-form for the poor and the Lords. Salutations to the Lord of Yoga, the giver of eternal peace, the embodiment of peace, the form of peace, salutations to Ganesha again and again. Salutations to the King of the elders, the worshipful Vikata, the giver of status to the elders, salutations to the Mother and Father. Salutations to the beginningless one, the original form of all, the Lord of obstacles, the form of obstacles, the soul of all existence. Salutations to You who dwell in Svananda, the form of union and separation, the worshipful one for all, the giver of devotion to devotees. Salutations to the one with a large belly, the terrible one, the punisher of sinners, the giver of happiness to those devoted to their own duty. Salutations to the one with the peacock mount, O Mayureshvara, salutations to the one with the mouse mount, the Lord of all, the Supreme Being. How can I praise You, O Lord of the Ganas, who are the embodiment of Yoga? Even Shiva and others, the foremost of the Vedas, are not capable of praising You. Protect us, Your servants, and grant us Your devotion, by which Maya does not bind; salutations to You, the Lord of intelligence.

Having praised Mayuresha thus, Mayuresha bowed down. Having completed the worship, He became filled with devotion. Thus, all, including Shiva, worshipped the Lord of the Ganas, and the sages especially worshipped the Supreme Lord in the clay idol. Meanwhile, the glorious Vishvadeva arrived there, wandering through the holy places by chance. Being single-minded and devoted to Narayana, he worshipped the one who sleeps on the serpent (Shesha) with joy and reverence. With unobstructed movement, his sins burned away by penance, he went to the middle of the ocean and worshipped Janardana. Afterward, the Brahmin ate water and other things with devotion; through extreme devotion, he became qualified for Ganesha. Through Maya, Mayuresha, knowing this, covered the knowledge and memory of the one who sleeps on the serpent from Vishvadeva. Through the delusion of his intellect, the Lord of obstacles made the yogi forget through Yoga-Maya. Vishvadeva came and asked for alms from Parvati, the mother of all, and She gave him pudding and other things. After eating, he remembered the one who sleeps on the serpent and remained there in great sorrow. Then, the Lord of the Ganas, seeing him filled with distress, became Narayana and consoled him with affection. Parashara worshipped the four-armed idol with clay offerings, showing his devotion. He gave the knowledge of Ganesha, which grants peace, to Vishvadeva. With the nature of Ganapatya, he bowed to the Lord of qualities. Vishvadeva went to his own place filled with peace, and the Brahmin worshipped Mayuresha with single-mindedness. Thus, by covering knowledge and causing forgetfulness, He destroyed the prowess of Vishnu and played with the Brahmin boys.

Chapter 41 : Description of Mayuresha's Life

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Primordial Energy said: Once, seeing Shiva sitting comfortably surrounded by all his attendants, Mayuresha manifested his divine illusion. The Lord Ganesha, eager for play, approached Maheshana (Shiva), took the moon from his forehead, and went away. Deluded by this illusion, everyone, especially Shiva, did not recognize the Lord of the gods as the thief of the moon. Then Shiva, not seeing the moon on his forehead, became angry and asked his attendants, "Where has the moon gone?" The sages' sons then approached Maheshwara and said, "Mayuresha has taken the moon and is playing with us with great affection." Filled with anger, Shiva told his attendants, "Bind the Lord of the Ganas, beat him, and bring him before me today." The attendants went to him, but were blown away by his breath like dry leaves before Shankara. In this manner, Mayuresha humbled all the attendants, and Shiva became anxious.

Then, taking refuge in his illusion, Mayuresha appeared on Shiva's forehead, placed the moon there, and caused confusion. Seeing the moon on his forehead, Shiva and the attendants thought it had always been there, coming and going. Thus, the Lord of Obstacles made Shiva dependent on him. Later, he went to destroy a powerful demon in the forest. Seeing him in the form of a tiger, the elephant-headed Lord became a tiger himself. The sages' sons did not recognize him in that form. The children wandered here and there, eager to see him, and eventually fell asleep, exhausted. Seeing their feet pointing south, Yama (the god of death) took them, bound them in chains, and threw them into his city. After killing the demon, Mayuresha returned to his city, but not seeing the sages' sons, he became surprised. He went to heaven, defeated Yama, and returned with the sages' children. In this way, the peacock-flagged Lord performed various plays.

After passing fifteen years of age, the Lord of the Ganas shone, playing and especially killing demons. Then the yogi Narada arrived there, remembering the Lord of the Ganas, and spoke to Shankara with a joyful heart. Narada said: "The two goddesses, Siddhi and Buddhi, have been propitiated by Brahma through penance and have become the daughters of the Creator by his boon. Brahma has not found a suitable groom for them, and now the Lord wishes to give them to Mayuresha." Shankara agreed, and accompanied by him, he took Mayuresha and set out. On the way, Mayuresha saw a great city and thought about liberating the gods from Sindhu. He then waged a fierce war against Sindhu, the great demon, along with his attendants. Then, piercing the nectar-filled navel with his axe, he killed Sindhu and the leaders of the demons.

His father, the Vishnu-devotee Chakrapani, thinking of Mayuresha's purpose, took refuge in him. Abandoning everything, he became filled with devotion for Ganesha, brought him to his city, and worshipped him. Chakrapani released the gods, including Indra, from prison and worshipped them with devotion. There, Brahma joyfully remembered his daughters, and Siddhi and Buddhi arrived, endowed with beauty and grace. Seeing them, the gods were filled with desire and each prayed to Brahma with respect: "Give us these two beautiful maidens, O Lord of the gods; we have never seen their equal among women." Brahma replied, "O Lords of the gods, there is no one equal to them; therefore, I will give my daughters to Mayuresha." The gods prayed intensely to the Grandfather, who, feeling sad, spoke reasonably with his daughters. Siddhi and Buddhi were asked to choose their desired groom among the gods, but they replied to the Creator, "We choose the one who is in our hearts." Then, taking a garland and showing the Chintamani, Siddhi and Buddhi left the gods and went to Mayuresha. Brahma placed the garland around Ganesha's neck and formally offered Siddhi and Buddhi to him. Then all the gods, including Indra, bowed to him with respect, and being joyful after the killing of Sindhu, they worshipped and praised him.

The divine sages said: Salutations to you, the rider of the peacock, the bearer of the peacock flag. Salutations again and again to Ganesha, named Mayuresha. Salutations to the Lord of the helpless, the master of those who have lost their ego, the mover of illusion, the Lord of Obstacles. Salutations to you, the giver of all joy, who always dwells in self-bliss, the protector of those devoted to their own duty. Salutations to you, the beginningless Supreme Lord, the destroyer of demons and giants, the remover of those who follow unrighteous paths, O Vikata. Salutations to the son of Shiva, the mother and father of all. Salutations to the delight of Parvati, the elder brother of Skanda. Salutations to you, the Kashyapa, the son of Shesha, who sustains the universe through various incarnations. Salutations to you, the killer of Sindhu, the Heramba, the bearer of the axe, the protector of the gods, the Lord of the Vedas. Salutations to you, the Lord of Yoga, the giver of peace, the compassionate one, the one with infinite faces, arms, and belly. Salutations to you, the possessor of infinite wealth, the mover of the mind's functions, the one who dwells in the hearts of all and is worthy of worship. Salutations to you, the one worthy of first worship, the eldest king, the Lord of the Ganas, and the husband of Siddhi and Buddhi. How can we praise you, O Mayuresha, when you are the Lord of the Vedas and the one whom yogis attain through peace? Therefore, we bow to you. Be pleased with us, O Lord, O ocean of mercy. Protect us, who are born from your limbs, O Lord.

Having praised him thus, they bowed, and the Lord said to them, "Ask for boons, O Lords of the gods, along with the sages. This hymn composed by you will be a bestower of all success and will increase my pleasure. Whoever reads, hears, or makes others hear it will undoubtedly attain the highest enjoyment, liberation, and devotion to me." Hearing the words of Mayuresha, the gods and the sages bowed and replied with joy: "If you are pleased, O Lord of Obstacles, grant us your unshakeable devotion. Sindhu, the mighty, has been killed, and we are all fulfilled. Now, by your command, we shall return to our respective domains." Mayuresha, the valiant, agreed, and after granting them his devotion, he went to the King. Chakrapani worshipped Mayuresha through the path of the five-fold worship and, in the end, attained the state of self-bliss.

Mayuresha arrived on his peacock, and after establishing all the gods, he said to the excellent sages, "I have accomplished the purpose for which the gods came. Now, O sages, I shall go to my own abode." Having said this, Mayuresha disappeared through his own play, and the divine sages remained there, filled with sorrow. Parvati and Shankara fainted there, and Mayuresha appeared in their hearts and spoke to them: "I dwell in your hearts as the mover of the mind's functions. There is no separation between me and you, my parents, there is no doubt. Establish an external image, worship it there with devotion, and serve me especially; by doing so, you will be satisfied." Having said this, Ganesha, the beloved of the attendants, disappeared. Brahma joyfully established his image through the Brahmins. Then, all were filled with joy and returned to their respective places to perform their duties for the success of their tasks. They worshipped Mayuresha there with full devotion, and all the powers, devoted to the Lord, lived in that region. This is the incarnation of Vikata, known as Mayureshwara, told for the devotees, a bestower of all success and an increaser of love. Whoever reads or hears this will attain their desired fruit and, in the end, becoming absorbed in self-bliss, will rejoice, intent on the Supreme Brahman.

Thus ends the forty-first chapter entitled "The Description of Mayuresha's Life" in the Vikata-charita of the sixth section of the great Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 42 : The Incarnation of the Sun

The Primordial Energy said: By the illusion of Vikata, the great goddesses created the supreme, which was endowed with various distinctions, appeared as non-existent, and was engaged in diverse forms. Through that, various types of Brahman and various types of worlds were created, but they considered them to be devoid of life. Then, those goddesses performed severe penance for Vikata for a thousand divine years, following the rule of the single-syllable mantra. Pleased, the Lord, who is the soul of all and the source of all manifestations, came to them in the form of the Sun, riding a chariot, to grant them boons. Seeing Him, they were filled with joy and bowed down with reverence. Through the wisdom born of that vision, the goddesses became enlightened.

They realized that this Vikata, who has assumed the form of the Sun, is one and the same as the soul. There is no difference between Vikata and the Sun anywhere. Having worshipped and bowed to Him, they began to praise Him with various hymns, as the protectors of the universe.

The various goddesses said: Salutations to You, O Vikata, the Supreme Lord, the sustainer of all life, the one who is the soul itself, the Sun, the radiant one. Salutations to You, O Lord of Obstacles, the Supreme Soul, who resides in a chariot of seven horses, O Heramba, Lord of the universe, Lord of Brahma. Salutations to You, O Lord of Samjna, the witness, the one who is the witness itself, the Lord of Chhaya, O Lord of gods, Lord of the lords of gods. Salutations to You, O sinless one, eternal one, holder of a thousand rays, the one devoid of infinite distinctions, the non-dual one. Salutations to You, the beginning of all, the eternal support of all, the embodiment of the universe, the foundation of all actions, the protector of all. Salutations to You, O Aditya, Supreme Lord, the one beyond the supreme, the Lord of the day, the protector of the day. Salutations to You, O Aryaman, son of Kashyapa, Lord of all brilliance, the one without support, the one who causes the rain. How can we praise You, O Sun, when even the Vedas are silenced before You? You are the eternal Yogi, the soul of all, the one beyond the supreme. The knowers of the Vedas declare You to be one and without a second. We are different, and therefore, You are undoubtedly Vikata.

Having praised Him thus, the goddesses bowed down with joy. The Lord, who is fond of His devotees, raised them and spoke.

The Sun said: Ask for boons, O goddesses, and I shall grant them, bound by your devotion. This hymn composed by you shall grant both worldly enjoyment and liberation. I shall grant whatever is desired through the recitation of this hymn. May this hymn, which increases devotion to me, be the grantor of the state of Brahman.

Hearing the words of the Sun, the goddesses, led by the Brahmani, filled with joy, spoke to Him with devotion.

The goddesses said: If You are pleased, O Lord of Brahma, make these worlds and us endowed with life forever, and make us blissful in every way. O Lord, grant us supreme devotion to Your lotus feet. To destroy the delusion of Maya, grant us the supreme Yoga.

Saying "So be it," the Sun imparted the knowledge of the Ganesha-Yoga, which grants peace and destroys the delusion of Maya.

The Sun said: The union of the non-existent and the existent is called Yoga. The letter 'Ga' signifies that which is self-realized. The state of being devoid of one's own true nature is called non-Yoga, and the letter 'Na' is said in the Vedas to represent that. The union of these two is Ganesha, the giver of peace to all peace. By seeing the wish-fulfilling gem in your hearts, you shall become great Yogis. Worship Vikata always, realizing that this world, which is a mixture of union and non-union, is essentially Maya. Perform your natural duties while remaining established in your own Brahman, and always remain in the state of offering everything to Ganesha.

Having said this, the Sun, the Lord of all, disappeared and remained in His own bliss. Then, the goddesses, along with their respective worlds, became endowed with life and began to play with each other. As instructed by the Sun, they practiced the Yoga known as Vikata and became perfectly peaceful. Realizing the wish-fulfilling gem in their hearts and offering all external actions to Vikata, the goddesses enjoyed their existence.

Thus, the greatness of Vikata, known as the incarnation of the Sun, has been described in detail and summarized. This incarnation of the great Vikata, which is in the form of the Sun, is the grantor of all accomplishments. Whoever hears or reads this shall attain supreme success. They shall obtain all their desires and find happiness both here and hereafter.

Chapter 43 : The Story of Bhanu Vinayaka

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Primordial Power (Adi Shakti) said: Kashyapa had a wife named Vinata, who was endowed with great beauty. Two eggs were born from her, both possessing immense radiance. From them, Aruna was born first, and Garuda was born as his younger brother. Aruna worshipped the Sun and received a beneficial boon. He became the charioteer of the Sun, always filled with devotion. Through his singular devotion and service, the Sun, who is the eternal Self, was pleased.

The Sun, in particular, always worshipped Ganesha with great joy. Aruna, having bowed to him, asked with a sense of distress: "O Lord, you are the immortal Self of all beings, one without a second. Whom are you worshipping, O Elephant-faced One? Who is this Ganesha, the perfect one? O son of Kashyapa, you are creating illusion to hide your true nature. Yogis and the foremost of gods attain peace by realizing you. There is nothing beyond you; why do you worship another?"

The Sun replied: "O Aruna, you have spoken the truth, and you know me well. Yet, in my yoga, no one is equal to you. Not knowing the state of perfection, you are established in peace; what can I say about your ignorance, O glorious one? I am born from Ganesha, and others like Shankara are born from him. He is the Lord of the Ganas (Jyeshtharaja), and there is no one superior to him. He is the source of various powers, and I am the expression of his Self. Vishnu is declared to be the joy arising from the union of these two. Beyond this joy is the manifest Shankara, known as the Turiya. In their union, Ganesha is declared to be the one known as Svananda (Self-Bliss). Because he is the creator of all unions, Ganesha is endowed with Maya. O Aruna, he is attained through self-realized yoga. Beyond him is the unmanifest, devoid of self-realization. Know, O wise one, that in the union of these two, Ganesha is the one described in the Vedas. He is the Lord of Speech (Brahmanaspati), and we are indeed made of Brahman. He is the Lord of our Ganas, and therefore we worship him."

Hearing these words, Aruna bowed to him and said with devotion to the Sun, the lord of the radiant: "O Lord, tell me the way to attain Ganesha, which brings great happiness, so that I may become a devotee of Ganesha and a leader among the gods."

The Sun replied: "O son of Kashyapa, worship him through the single-syllable mantra. By seeing the Chintamani in your heart, you will become worthy of being worshipped by yogis." Having said this, the Lord gave him the mantra of Ganapati. Aruna bowed to him and went to an excellent forest. He performed severe penance, intent on the meditation of Ganesha. Through the path of yoga, he worshipped the Lord of Obstacles with devotion. By the service of yoga, he became worthy of being worshipped by the masters of yoga. Abandoning the five-fold mind, he became absorbed in the repetition of the mantra.

After hundreds of years had passed, the Elephant-faced Lord, pleased by his devotion, arrived to grant him a boon. Aruna, however, did not perceive Ganesha, as he was absorbed in meditation within his heart. A wondrous event occurred. He saw Ganesha seated on a chariot, accompanied by Siddhi and Buddhi, and was filled with amazement. Aruna left his meditation, opened his eyes, and saw Ganesha, the granter of boons, outside. Filled with great joy, he rose, bowed, worshipped him according to the rites, and praised him with happiness.

As he began to praise him, he saw the Sun seated on the chariot along with Samjna, and he was filled with supreme wonder. By the grace of Ganesha, the wise Aruna understood that this Ganesha is none other than the Sun, for he is Vikata (the transformed/manifest one). There is no doubt. Maya is multi-faceted, but the Self is devoid of distinctions. Therefore, this Elephant-faced one is the Self in the form of Vikata. "I will worship the Sun in the form of Vikata, who is a part of the Lord of the Ganas, and he is pleased by this."

Ganesha then showed me his supreme form as the Sun, which is his own non-dual nature. Aruna, filled with great devotion and tearful eyes, controlled his mind and began a hymn filled with bliss.

Aruna said: "Salutations to the Lord of the Ganas, salutations to the Lord of radiance. Salutations to you, the sinless one, the Self. Salutations to you, the Lord of Brahman, the Lord of all living beings. Salutations to the one who rides the mouse and the one who rides the seven-horsed chariot. Salutations to you who dwell in Svananda and in the solar realm. Salutations to the four-armed one and the thousand-rayed one. Salutations to the Lord of Siddhi and Buddhi, and the Lord of Samjna. Salutations to the destroyer of obstacles, the destroyer of darkness, the Heramba. Salutations to the one of infinite glory, the one who assumes names and forms. Salutations to you, the mover of Maya, the Lord of all, the one worthy of all worship. Salutations to the King of planets, the giver of light, the glorious one, Ganesha, the supreme Lord, the Lord of obstacles. Salutations to you, the Sun, the radiant one, the Lord of lights, the one with the large belly, the single tusk, and the magnificent form. The Sun and Vikata are one; no difference is ever seen. O Elephant-faced one, grant me your devotion. How can I praise you, O Lord of the Ganas, who are the embodiment of yoga? You play by dividing yourself into four, there is no doubt."

Hearing his own praise, Vikata assumed the form of the Sun, accompanied by Samjna on his left side, marked by the elephant face and other signs. Seeing this, Aruna bowed with joy. The Lord of the Ganas said: "Choose your desired boon. This hymn composed by you will grant all successes; there is no doubt. One who hears or recites it will find nothing difficult to attain, O great bird, and it will be a source of my satisfaction."

Hearing the words of Ganesha, Aruna bowed to him and said with tearful eyes and hair standing on end: "O Lord of the Ganas, grant me devotion to your lotus feet, love for being a devotee of Ganesha, and constant association with the great souls." Saying "So be it," Vikata disappeared. Aruna, filled with longing, remained there. He then established an image of Ganapati through the Brahmins and, filled with joy, named it Bhanu Vinayaka.

After worshipping Ganesha, he went to the Sun, bowed to him, and narrated the entire story. Thus, Aruna established the supreme Ganapati there, worshipped him while seated on the chariot, and became devoted to the peace of yoga. Thus, the greatness of Vikata, pertaining to Bhanu Vinayaka, who is an incarnation of a portion of him, has been told, which grants all success. Whoever hears, reads, or causes others to hear this will attain their desired fruits and, in the end, attain Svananda (Self-Bliss).

Thus ends the forty-third chapter titled "The Story of Bhanu Vinayaka" in the Vikata Charita of the sixth section of the Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 44 : Story of Varada Vikata

Salutations to Shri Ganesha.

The Primordial Energy (Adi Shakti) said: The Supreme Brahman, which is one without a second as described in the Vedas, is called Vikata, through whom Maya is manifested. The Brahman, reflected in the Maya of the great Vikata, appears as the individual soul (Jiva) residing in illusion everywhere. From that, a name was given to the Supreme Soul, Vikata; that name became Sanjna, the wife of the Sun, the supreme player of Maya. From the energy reflected in her, various living beings were born, and the Sun, who is the progenitor of them all, is also known as such.

Joined with Sanjna, the Sun became devoid of knowledge. He performed severe penance for the great Ganesha. Pleased by his devotion after a thousand divine years of chanting the single-syllable mantra, the Lord appeared before him out of affection for his devotee. The Lord said to the Sun, "Ask for the boon you desire in your heart. I am pleased by your penance and will grant even that which is difficult to obtain." Seeing the Lord of Ganesha, the Sun was filled with joy; rising with Sanjna, he bowed to the Elephant-headed Lord. He bowed again and again, worshipped him, and with folded hands, began to praise him.

The Sun said: Salutations to you, O Vikata, who takes the form of Maya and the one who is beyond it. With Sanjna on your left and the Sun on your right, you are known as the Lord of the Ganas, the master of success and wisdom. Salutations to you, who are adorned with the signs of the elephant-headed one. How can I describe the Brahman, who is one without a second? I am blessed in every way to have seen the Elephant-headed Lord. Salutations to you, O Gajanana, who is to be worshipped first of all, the Supreme Soul, Heramba, and the eternal King of the elders. Salutations to you, O Supreme Lord, the destroyer of great obstacles, and the one who brings great obstacles to the wicked. Salutations to you, the Lord of the orphans, the giver of everything, the protector of the unprotected, and the Lord of Lords. Salutations to you, O poet, the Lord of speech, possessor of infinite wealth and infinite Maya. Salutations to you, O Mayuresha, whose vehicle is the mouse, who pervades all, and whose flag bears the mouse. How can I praise you, O Lord of the Ganas, who stirs the five senses? I can only bow to you; may you be pleased with that, O Lord.

As he praised him with such devotion, his hair stood on end. Ganesha spoke to him as he stood with a choked voice, dancing in ecstasy. Shri Ganesha said: This hymn of mine will grant everything. Whoever reads or hears what you have composed will always be blessed. I will grant whatever they desire through the recitation of this hymn, and in the end, I will make them one with Brahman. Ask for your boons now, as I am moved by your devotion. You, along with your wife, are considered my dearest devotees.

The Sun said: Since you are pleased, O Dhundhi, grant me your devotion. Grant me natural knowledge that performs various tasks, O Lord. Grant me incomparable power that sustains all souls. Make me always dear to the Ganas, O Lord of Ganesha. Be my son, O Lord, so that I may be liberated in this world. I will worship you constantly as my son. By keeping you in my heart and in the form of an idol, I will be fulfilled, O Gajanana.

Saying "Om," the Lord of the Ganas disappeared. The Sun, contemplating him, went to his abode with his beloved. The Sun, endowed with power and knowledge, created the world. He realized that all the diverse forms were merely the Brahman. Through Ganesha's boon, he became free from delusion and worshipped him with devotion, as praised by the great yogis.

Once, accompanied by his beloved, he remembered the Lord of the Ganas, as he was severely troubled by the pride of the demon Tamisra. Remembering him, Ganesha appeared in the form of a child. Seeing the child with a trunk, the Sun asked, "Who are you, child, bearing the form of Ganesha? Why have you come here, and are you the Supreme Ganesha?" Hearing the Sun's words, Gajanana said, "I am the son born of your memory, O Sun, your own Vighneshwara. You gave me a boon long ago, and I have come as your son. Protect me, Father, along with Sanjna."

Hearing his words, the Sun and Sanjna bowed, worshipped him, and praised the Lord with the Atharvashirsha. Meanwhile, the great demon Tamisra arrived there. Seeing him, the Sun was afraid. The Lord of the Ganas rose and struck him with his fist, felling the demon to the ground lifeless. Seeing the demon dead, the Sun approached again, bowed, and stood at a distance, enchanted by Ganesha. Enchanted, the Sun and Sanjna took the child and caressed him with joy, filled with parental love. Through Ganesha's Maya, Sanjna fed him milk. After granting the boon, the son departed, having made the Sun known as Varada (the giver of boons).

Then, the son disappeared, and the Sun fell into a swoon. Through Sanjna, Dhundhi resided in their hearts. "Do not grieve, parents, I am never separated from you. Always make an idol and worship it constantly." Then, they both became attentive and did so with reverence, worshipping the Lord of the Ganas daily with devotion.

The Shaktis asked: Who was this demon named Tamisra, and what is his story? Tell us, O Shakti, why the Varada (Ganesha) appeared.

Adi Shakti said: The Sun became filled with ego, thinking, "I am the giver of light to all, and no one gives light to me." As much time passed, he forgot the Lord of the Ganas. From his shadow, this Tamisra was born in human form. Seeing him, the Sun was pleased, thinking him to be a beneficial son, though he was full of darkness. Varada (the Sun) said to him, "My son, you will never have fear from the three gunas. I have given you the fierce kingdom of the three worlds. Whatever you desire will always be fulfilled. Be named Tamisra and be fortunate."

Bowing to him, the great demon went to the netherworld with joy. Incited by Shukra, the demons made him their king. With them, filled with pride, he conquered the universe. He ruled as a powerful demon king. Seeing the radiant Sun, he became filled with enmity and constantly covered him with darkness. He made the Sun, the best of the radiant, useless. The Sun tried various efforts but could not defeat him. Then, devoid of ego, he remembered the Lord of the Ganas. The demon was killed by Ganesha to protect the Sun's nature.

All this has been told regarding the deeds of the Sun's son and the Varada, which grants all success. Whoever hears or reads this story will always attain the state of Brahman in the end.

Thus ends the forty-fourth chapter named the Story of Varada Vikata in the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Purana.

Chapter 45 : Conclusion of the Vikata Charita

Salutations to Sri Ganesha.

The Primordial Shakti said: O great Goddesses, it is impossible to count the various incarnations taken by that great soul, Vikata. Because of his nature of being fond of devotion and his role in destroying the obstacles of his devotees, the Supreme Lord Vikata manifests himself in various forms. Go now to Mayurakshetra; I am also present there in my full form, along with my partial manifestations, with great joy. O supreme Shaktis, worship Lord Vighneshwara there with devotion; there is no doubt that you will become worthy of being worshipped even by the masters of Yoga. O beloved ones, do not fix your minds on worldly objects; instead, take refuge in the path of Ganesha and worship the supreme Vikata. Perform with reverence and devotion those excellent actions that are pleasing to Ganesha, as described in the Vedas and other scriptures. O beloved ones, meditate on the form of Ganesha in your hearts, and perform both internal and external worship to please him. Devotion to Vikata, born from detachment from worldly objects, is the highest; it should be practiced daily with reverence, with the mind attached to Ganesha.

Mudgala said: Having said this, she gave them the supreme single-syllable mantra of the Lord of Ganas, along with the prescribed rituals, and then fell silent. The Shaktis, filled with devotion, bowed to her and, led by Mahakali, went to the region of Mayura. Upon reaching Mayura, they saw the Goddess, and filled with joy, they bowed to her, worshipped Dhundhi (Ganesha), and performed great penance. After a hundred years had passed, Mayureshwara appeared before them, and they bowed to him with great delight. After worshipping the Lord with various charming offerings, they bowed to Vighnesha again and prayed to him with folded hands.

Mahakali, Mahalakshmi, and Mahasaraswati said: Salutations again and again to Ganesha, the Lord of Mayura, the Lord of obstacles, the destroyer of the obstacles of his devotees, and the creator of obstacles for those who are not devoted. Salutations to the Lord with the large belly, the Lord who has a mouse as his emblem; salutations to you, the Lord who provides refuge to the helpless. Salutations to the Supreme Lord, the best among the great, the giver of success, O elephant-faced one; salutations to the Infinite One, who always grants everything to his own. Salutations to the Lord of the Vedas, the embodiment of eternal peace, the supreme soul who is the peace of all peace. Salutations to Heramba, the poet and the embodiment of poetry; salutations to the Lord of poets who grants the gift of speech to poets. Salutations to the Lord of Siddhi and Buddhi, the giver of Siddhi and Buddhi, the mover of Siddhi and Buddhi, and the embodiment of the same. Salutations to the one who plays through the signs of Maya and the illusory, the one whose nature is Yoga and peace, the giver of peace. Salutations to the one who is the power, the sun, Vishnu, and the soul of Shankara; salutations to the player who assumes various forms. How can we praise you, O Lord of Ganas, in whom the Vedas and Shiva himself have found peace? We bow to you, O Lord with the peacock emblem. Grant us devotion, O Lord of all, and a dwelling in your region. The Lord of Ganas, moved by their devotion, said, "So be it."

Whoever reads or listens to this hymn will attain the supreme state; having enjoyed all pleasures here, one attains supreme bliss in the end. O Daksha, I have thus briefly narrated the great and wonderful story of Vikata, which grants all success. There is nothing else anywhere that is equal to this in granting all desires; how can I describe that which directly grants the state of Brahman? The noble person who listens to this greatness of Vikata, or reads it to others, will attain all success. One who recites this daily is considered supreme; he is Vikata himself, and his sight purifies all people. Whatever spiritual practices one performs with great reverence, one obtains a hundred times the merit just by listening to this section. One who performs acts of charity and public welfare with devotion obtains a hundred times more merit by listening to this than by those acts. The merit obtained from listening to this is a hundred times greater than that obtained from listening to the Puranas, Upapuranas, and histories daily. What more is there to say? When the supreme Lord of Brahman, Vikata, is described here, tell me, what can be equal to it?

Suta said: Having said this, the great Yogi Mudgala became silent. Daksha was extremely happy and bowed to Mudgala. I have narrated to you, O best of Brahmins, the complete and desire-fulfilling story of Vikata. It grants Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksha, and the state of Brahman. There is nothing equal to this; what more do you wish to hear?

Thus ends the forty-fifth chapter, titled the "Description of the Conclusion of the Vikata Charita," in the sixth section of the glorious Mudgala Mahapurana. May this be offered to Sri Gajanana. Thus ends the sixth section of the Sri Mudgala Purana.

