Shloka 431: Pakṣaḥ (पक्षः), Māsaḥ (मासः), Ayanaṁ (अयनम्)
ते पञ्चदश पक्षस्तौ मासः षडयनं तु ते ॥ ४३१ ॥
Fifteen Ahar-niśas make one Pakṣa (fortnight). Two Pakṣas (thirty days) make one Māsa (month). Six months make one Ayana. Thus, He is Pakṣaḥ (The Fortnight), Māsaḥ (The Month), and Ayanaṁ (The Solstice/Half-Year).


Shloka 431: Varṣaṁ (वर्षम्)
ताभ्यां तु मानुषं वर्षम् ।
Two Ayanas make one human Varṣa (year). Thus, He is Varṣaṁ (The Year).
Shloka 432: Yugaṁ (युगम्)
तैः षष्ट्या त्रिशतीयुजा । दिव्यं द्वादशसाहस्रैर्दिव्यवषैश्चतुर्युगम् ॥ ४३२ ॥
That (human year) multiplied by 360 (or as described) makes one divine year. Twelve thousand divine years make one Catur-yuga (four ages). Thus, He is Yugaṁ (The Cosmic Age).


Shloka 432: Kalpaḥ (कल्पः)
चतुर्युगसहस्रेण कल्पो दैनन्दिनो लयः ।
One thousand Catur-yugas make one Kalpa, which is one day of Brahmā (followed by a night of equal length). Thus, He is Kalpaḥ (The Eon).


Shloka 433: Mahālayaḥ (महालयः)
द्वा-सप्ततिसहस्त्रैस्तैः स्यान्महाप्रलयो विधेः ॥ ४३३ ॥
Seventy-two such Kalpas constitute a Mahāpralaya (Great Dissolution) of Brahmā. Thus, He is Mahālayaḥ (The Great Dissolution).


राशिस्तारा तिथिर्योगो वारः करणमंशकम् ॥
लभं होरा कालचक्रं मेरुः सप्तर्षयो ध्रुवः ॥१२३॥


Shloka 434: Rāśiḥ (राशिः), Tārā (तारा), Tithiḥ (तिथिः)
राशिर्द्वादश मेषाद्याः कृत्तिकाद्याश्च तारकाः । त्वमेव च तिथिश्चान्द्री कला पञ्चदशात्मिका ॥ ४३४॥
You are the twelve Rāśis (zodiac signs) beginning with Meṣa (Aries). You are the Tārās (stars or lunar mansions) beginning with Kṛttikā. You are the Tithi (lunar day), which is the fifteen divisions (kalās) of the moon. Thus, He is Rāśiḥ (The Zodiac Sign), Tārā (The Star/Lunar Mansion), and Tithiḥ (The Lunar Day).


Shloka 435: Yogaḥ (योगः)
विष्कम्भप्रथमा योगास्त्वद्रूपाः सप्तविंशतिः । योगा अमृतसिद्ध्याद्या आनंदा-द्यास्त्वमेव च ॥ ४३५ ॥
The twenty-seven Yogas (astrological combinations), beginning with Viṣkambha, are of your form. The Yogas such as Amṛtasiddhi and Ānanda are also you alone. Thus, He is Yogaḥ (The Astrological Yoga).










Shloka 436: Vāraḥ (वारः), Karaṇam (करणम्), Aṁśakam (अंशकम्)
रव्यादिसप्तवारात्मा बवादि-करणात्मकः । चत्वारि प्रतिनक्षत्रमंशकानि त्वमेव हि ॥ ४३६ ॥
You are the essence of the seven Vāras (weekdays) beginning with Ravi (Sunday). You are the essence of the Karaṇas (half-tithis) beginning with Bava. You are indeed the four Aṁśakas (quarters) per Nakṣatra (lunar mansion). Thus, He is Vāraḥ (The Weekday), Karaṇam (The Half-Lunar Day), and Aṁśakam (The Division/Quarter).


Shloka 436: Lagnam (लग्नम्)
राशीनामुदयो लग्नम् ।
The rising (Udaya) of the Rāśis is Lagna (the ascendant). Thus, He is Lagnam (The Ascendant).


Shloka 436: Horā (होरा)
होरा लग्नार्थसंमिता ।
Horā is the half of a Rāśi (equal to Lagna). Thus, He is Horā (The Horā).


Shloka 437: Kālacakram (कालचक्रम्)
कालचक्रं शैशुमारं मेरुः सौवर्णपर्वतः ॥ ४३७ ॥
Kālacakra is the cosmic wheel of time, also known as Śaiśumāra (the dolphin-shaped constellation). Meru is the golden mountain. Thus, He is Kālacakram (The Wheel of Time).


Shloka 437: Meruḥ (मेरुः)
Thus, He is Meruḥ (Mount Meru).


Shloka 437: Saptarṣayaḥ (सप्तर्षयः)
सप्तर्षयः कश्यपाद्या औत्तानचरणिर्भुवः ।
The seven sages (Saptarṣi) beginning with Kaśyapa and the son of Uttānapāda (Dhruva) are… Thus, He is Saptarṣayaḥ (The Seven Sages).


Shloka 437: Dhruvaḥ (ध्रुवः)
Thus, He is Dhruvaḥ (The Pole Star).








राहुर्मन्दः कविर्जीवो बुधो भौमः शशी रविः ॥ 
कालः सृष्टिः स्थितिर्विश्वं स्थावरं जङ्गमं च यत् ॥ १२४ ॥


Shloka 438: Rāhuḥ (राहुः), Mandaḥ (मन्दः), Kaviḥ (कविः), Jīvaḥ (जीवः), Budhaḥ (बुधः), Bhoumaḥ (भौमः), Śaśī (शशी), Raviḥ (रविः)
राह्वादयो ग्रहा अष्टौ त्वद्रूपा एव नेतरे ॥ ४३८ ॥
The eight planets beginning with Rāhu (Rāhu, Saturn, Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, Moon, and Sun) are of your form alone, not of another. Thus, He is Rāhuḥ (The Eclipse Planet), Mandaḥ (Saturn), Kaviḥ (Venus), Jīvaḥ (Jupiter), Budhaḥ (Mercury), Bhoumaḥ (Mars), Śaśī (The Moon), and Raviḥ (The Sun).


Shloka 439: Kālaḥ (कालः)
कलनात् काल इत्युक्तो जगत्संहरणक्रिया ।
Because He measures (Kalana) or because He is the act of dissolving the universe, He is called Kālaḥ (Time/Death).


Shloka 439: Sṛṣṭiḥ (सृष्टिः)
सृष्टिः स्थितिश्च जगदुत्पादनप्राणनक्रिये ॥ ४३९ ॥
The act of producing the universe is Sṛṣṭi (Creation). Thus, He is Sṛṣṭiḥ (Creation).


Shloka 439: Sthitiḥ (स्थितिः)
The act of enlivening or maintaining the universe is Sthiti (Preservation). Thus, He is Sthitiḥ (Preservation).


Shloka 439: Viśvam (विश्वम्) & SthāvaraṂ JangamaṂ Ca Yat (स्थावरं जङ्गमं च यत्)
यत्स्थावरादि विश्वं तत्त्वमित्येकाभिधानकम् ।
Whatever universe (Viśvam) there is, consisting of the moving (Jangama) and non-moving (Sthāvara), that is you alone. This is the single designation. Thus, He is Viśvam (The Universe) and SthāvaraṂ JangamaṂ Ca Yat (All That is Moving and Non-Moving).












भूरापोऽग्निर्मरुद्योमाहकृतिः प्रकृतिः पुमान् ॥ 
ब्रह्मा विष्णुः शिवो रुद्र ईशः शक्तिः सदाशिवः ॥ १२५ ॥


Shloka 440: Bhūḥ (भूः), Apo (आपः), Agniḥ (अग्निः), Marut (मरुत्), Yoma (योम / व्योम)
भूरापोऽग्निर्मरुद्व्योमपञ्चभूतात्मको भवान् ॥ ४४०॥
You are the essence of the five great elements: earth (Bhūḥ), water (Apaḥ), fire (Agniḥ), wind (Marut), and ether (Yoma / Vyoma). Thus, He is Bhūḥ (The Earth), Apaḥ (The Waters), Agniḥ (The Fire), Marut (The Wind), and Yomā (The Sky/Ether).


Shloka 441: Ahakṛtiḥ (अहकृतिः / अहङ्कारः), Prakṛtiḥ (प्रकृतिः), Pumān (पुमान्)
अहङ्कतिरहङ्कारः प्रकृतिर्मूलकारणम् । पुमांश्च पञ्चविंशस्त्वं प्रकृत्याद्यैरसंहतः ॥४४१॥
You are Ahaṅkāra (the ego principle). You are Prakṛti (the primordial nature, the root cause). You are the twenty-fifth principle, Puruṣa (the cosmic being). Thus, He is Ahakṛtiḥ (The Ego-Principle), Prakṛtiḥ (Primordial Nature), and Pumān (The Cosmic Being).


Shloka 442: Brahmā (ब्रह्मा), Viṣṇuḥ (विष्णुः), Śivaḥ (शिवः), Rudraḥ (रुद्रः), Īśaḥ (ईशः), Śaktiḥ (शक्तिः), Sadāśivaḥ (सदाशिवः)
मन्त्रस्थब्रह्मविष्ण्वीशरुद्राः पादाः सदाशिवः । फलकस्तत्र कामेशः शिवस्तस्यांकगामिनी ॥ ४४२ ॥ शक्तिः कामेश्वरीत्येते सप्तापि भवदात्मकाः ।
In the mantra (structure), Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Īśa (Rudra), and Rudra are the feet; Sadāśiva is the board (phalaka); Kāmeśa is Śiva; and moving on his limb is the Śakti named Kāmeśvarī. These seven are all of your nature. Thus, He is Brahmā (The Creator), Viṣṇuḥ (The Preserver), Śivaḥ (The Auspicious One), Rudraḥ (The Howler), Īśaḥ (The Lord), Śaktiḥ (The Divine Energy), and Sadāśivaḥ (The Eternal Auspicious One).


त्रिदशाः पितरः सिद्धा यक्षा रक्षांसि किन्नराः ॥ 
साध्या विद्याधरा भूता मनुष्याः पशवः खगाः ॥ १२६ ॥


Shloka 443: Tridaśāḥ (त्रिदशाः), Pitaraḥ (पितरः), Siddhāḥ (सिद्धाः), Yakṣāḥ (यक्षाः), Rākṣāṁsi (रक्षांसि), Kinnarāḥ (किन्नराः), Sādhyāḥ (साध्याः), Vidyādharāḥ (विद्याधराः), Bhūtāḥ (भूताः), Manuṣyāḥ (मनुष्याः), Paśavaḥ (पशवः), Khagāḥ (खगाः)
त्रिदशा दिकशैलान्ता अर्थास्त्वं तिथिभिर्मिताः ॥४४३॥
You are the thirty-three gods (Tridaśāḥ), the ancestors (Pitaraḥ), the perfected beings (Siddhāḥ), the nature spirits (Yakṣāḥ), the demons (Rākṣāṁsi), the celestial musicians (Kinnarāḥ), the divine beings (Sādhyāḥ), the knowledge-holders (Vidyādharāḥ), the ghosts (Bhūtāḥ), the humans (Manuṣyāḥ), the animals (Paśavaḥ), and the birds (Khagāḥ). Thus, He is Tridaśāḥ (The Thirty-three Gods), Pitaraḥ (The Ancestors), Siddhāḥ (The Perfected Ones), Yakṣāḥ (The Nature Spirits), Rākṣāṁsi (The Demons), Kinnarāḥ (The Celestial Musicians), Sādhyāḥ (The Divine Beings), Vidyādharāḥ (The Knowledge-Holders), Bhūtāḥ (The Ghosts/Beings), Manuṣyāḥ (The Humans), Paśavaḥ (The Animals), and Khagāḥ (The Birds).


Shloka 444: Bhūtam (भूतम्)
भवान् भूतमतीतं च भव्यं क्षेमं च भावि च । भवोद्भवः शिवोत्पन्नः संसारप्रभवोऽथवा ॥ ४४४ ॥
You are the past (Bhūtam). Also the future, the present, etc. Thus, He is Bhūtam (The Past / The Elements). (The verse continues describing Him as the origin of existence, born of Śiva, or the source of the world.)


समुद्राः सरितः शैला भूतं भव्यं भवोद्भवः ॥ 
साङ्ख्यं पातञ्जलं योगः पुराणानि श्रुतिः स्मृतिः ॥ १२७ ॥


Shloka 444: Samudrāḥ (समुद्राः), Saritaḥ (सरितः), Śailāḥ (शैलाः), Bhūtam (भूतम्), Bhavyam (भव्यम्), Bhavodbhavaḥ (भवोद्भवः)
(From the conclusion of the previous verse and beginning of this verse) You are the oceans (Samudrāḥ), rivers (Saritaḥ), mountains (Śailāḥ), the past (Bhūtam), the future (Bhavyam), and the origin of existence (Bhavodbhavaḥ). Thus, He is Samudrāḥ (The Oceans), Saritaḥ (The Rivers), Śailāḥ (The Mountains), Bhūtam (The Past/Elements), Bhavyam (The Future), and Bhavodbhavaḥ (The Origin of Existence).


Shloka 445-446: Sāṅkhyaṁ (साङ्ख्यम्), Pātañjalaṁ (पातञ्जलम्), Yogaḥ (योगः), Purāṇāni (पुराणानि), Śrutiḥ (श्रुतिः), Smṛtiḥ (स्मृतिः)
अथ सांख्यादयो विद्यास्त्वद्रूपाः सप्तविंशतिः । साङ्ख्यं कपिलमुन्युक्तं शास्त्रं पातञ्जलं पुनः ॥ ४४५ ॥ सामसूत्र-निदानाख्यं योगः फणिपतीरितः । ब्राह्मादीनि पुराणानि श्रुतयो बहृचादयः ॥ ४४६ ॥ मन्वाद्याः श्रुतयो वेदाङ्गानि कल्पादिकानि षटू ॥
Now, the twenty-seven branches of knowledge beginning with Sāṅkhya are of your form. Sāṅkhya is the system taught by Kapila. Pātañjala is the system taught by Patañjali. Yoga is the system (Sāmasūtra Nidāna) proclaimed by Śeṣa (Phāṇipati). The Purāṇas beginning with Brahmā (or Brahmāṇḍa). The Śrutis (Vedas) beginning with Ṛgveda. The Smṛtis beginning with Manu. 
The six Vedāṅgas beginning with Kalpa. Thus, He is Sāṅkhyaṁ (The Sāṅkhya Philosophy), Pātañjalaṁ (The Yoga Philosophy of Patañjali), Yogaḥ (The Path of Union), Purāṇāni (The Purāṇas), Śrutiḥ (The Vedas), and Smṛtiḥ (The Traditional Laws).


वेदाङ्गानि सदाचारो मीमांसान्यायविस्तरः ॥ 
आयुर्वेदो धनुर्वेदो गान्धर्वं काव्यनाटकम् ॥ १२८ ॥ 
वैखानसं भागवतं सात्वतं पाञ्चरात्रकम् ॥ 
शैवं पाशुपतं कालामुखं भैरवशासनम् ॥ १२९ ॥


Shloka 447: Vedāṅgāni (वेदाङ्गानि), Sadācāraḥ (सदाचारः)
वेदाङ्गानि सदाचारो... वेदाङ्गानि (the six limbs of the Vedas) and Sadācāra (righteous conduct). He is Vedāṅgāni (The Auxiliary Disciplines of the Vedas) and Sadācāraḥ (Righteous Conduct).


Shloka 448: Mīmāṁsā (मीमांसा), Nyāyavistaraḥ (न्यायविस्तरः)
मीमांसान्यायविस्तरः । मीमांसा षोडशाध्यायी संकर्षसहिता सती । त्रिचतुर्लक्षणे भक्ति-ब्रह्ममीमांसके अपि ॥४४८॥ कणाद गौतममुनिप्रणीतो न्याय-विस्तरः ॥
Mīmāṁsā is the sixteen-chapter exegesis (along with the Sānkarṣa Kāṇḍa). The detailed system of Nyāya (logic) was propounded by the sages Kaṇāda and Gautama. Thus, He is Mīmāṁsā (The Philosophical Inquiry) and Nyāyavistaraḥ (The Expanded System of Logic).


Shloka 449: Āyurvedaḥ (आयुर्वेदः), Dhanurvedaḥ (धनुर्वेदः), Gāndharvam (गान्धर्वम्)
ऋग्यजुःसामवेदानामुपवेदा अपि क्रमात् ॥४४९॥ आयुर्वेदधनुर्वेद‌गांधर्वास्तन्मयो भवान् ॥
The Upavedas (subsidiary Vedas) of the Ṛg, Yajus, and Sāma Vedas are respectively Āyurveda (medicine), Dhanurveda (archery), and Gāndharva (music and arts). You are the embodiment of these. Thus, He is Āyurvedaḥ (The Science of Medicine), Dhanurvedaḥ (The Science of Archery), and Gāndharvam (The Art of Music).


Shloka 450: Kāvyanāṭakam (काव्यनाटकम्)
काव्यनाटक-शब्दाभ्यां श्रव्यं दृश्यं च गृह्यते ॥ ४५०॥
By the terms Kāvya (poetry) and Nāṭaka (drama), that which is audible (Śravya) and that which is visible (Dṛśya) are understood. Thus, He is Kāvyanāṭakam (Poetry and Drama).


Shloka 451: Vaikhānasam (वैखानसं), Bhāgavatam (भागवतम्), Sātvatam (सात्वतम्), Pāñcarātrakam (पाञ्चरात्रकम्)
विष्णोर्वैखानसादीनि... पृथकू चत्वारि चत्वारि तन्त्राण्येतत्त्वदात्मकम् ॥ ४५२ ॥
The four distinct Tantras of Viṣṇu are Vaikhānasa, Bhāgavata, Sātvatam, and Pāñcarātram. You are their essence. Thus, He is Vaikhānasam (The Vaikhānasa System), Bhāgavatam (The Bhāgavata System), Sātvatam (The Sātvata System), and Pāñcarātrakam (The Pāñcarātra System).


Shloka 452: Śaivam (शैवम्), Pāśupatam (पाशुपतम्), Kālāmukham (कालामुखम्), Bhairavasāsanam (भैरवशासनम्)
शैवानि तु महेशितुः । पृथकू चत्वारि चत्वारि तन्त्राण्येतत्त्वदात्मकम् ॥ ४५२ ॥
The four distinct Tantras of Maheśvara (Śiva) are Śaiva, Pāśupata, Kālāmukha, and Bhairava. You are their essence. Thus, He is Śaivam (The Śaiva System), Pāśupatam (The Pāśupata System), Kālāmukham (The Kālāmukha System), and Bhairavasāsanam (The Bhairava Doctrine).


शाक्तं वैनायकं सौरं जैनमार्हतसंहिता ॥ 
सदसद्यक्तमव्यक्तं सचेतनमचेतनम् ॥ १३० ॥


Shloka 453: Śāktaṁ (शाक्तम्), Vaināyakaṁ (वैनायकम्), Sauraṁ (सौरम्), Jainam (जैनम्), Ārhata-Saṁhitā (आर्हतसंहिता)
शाक्तादित्रितयं शक्तेर्गणेशस्य विवस्वतः । तन्त्रे द्वे नास्तिकोन्नीते अपि जैनार्हते तथा ॥४५३॥
The trio beginning with Śākta (i.e., Śākta, Vaināyaka, and Saura) belong to Śakti, Gaṇeśa, and the Sun respectively. Similarly, the two tantras upholding atheism are the Jaina and the Ārhata (Buddhist) scriptures. Thus, He is Śāktaṁ (The Śākta System), Vaināyakaṁ (The Vaināyaka/Gāṇapatya System), Sauraṁ (The Saurya System), Jainam (The Jaina Doctrine), and Ārhata-Saṁhitā (The Buddhist Scripture).


Shloka 454: Sad-Asadyaktam (सदसद्यक्तम्)
कार्याणां करण-स्थान्तरवस्थानं सदात्मता । अकारणेनावस्थानं तदभावेऽ-सदात्मता ॥४५४॥
The state of being established in the cause (Karaṇa) of effects is the nature of the Real (Sat). The state of being without a cause, or its absence, is the nature of the Unreal (Asat). Thus, He is the bestower of the knowledge of both – Sad-Asadyaktam (The Bestower of the Real and the Unreal).






Shloka 454: Avyaktam (अव्यक्तम्)
सर्वकार्यात्मना व्यक्तमव्यक्तं कारणा-त्मना ॥ ४५५ ॥
He is the Unmanifest (Avyaktam) as the cause, in the form of the primordial Prakṛti.


Shloka 455: Sacetanam (सचेतनम्) & Acetanam (अचेतनम्)
सचेतनं प्राणिमात्रं व्योमादिकमचेतनम् ॥
All living beings (Prāṇimātra) constitute the sentient (Sacetanam). The sky, etc., constitute the insentient (Acetanam). Thus, He is Sacetanam (The Sentient / Conscious) and Acetanam (The Insentient / Unconscious).


बन्धो मोक्षः सुखं भोगोऽयोगः सत्यमणुर्महान्। 
स्वस्ति हुं फट् स्वधा स्वाहा श्रौषड्वौषड्वषण्णमः ॥ १३१ ॥


Shloka 456: Bandhaḥ (बन्धः)
बन्ध आत्मन्यनात्मत्वभ्रमो नात्मनि चात्मता । एतत्सर्व भवानेव भगवन् परिकीर्तितः ॥ ४५६ ॥
The illusion of non-Self in the Self, and the notion of Self in the non-Self – this is bondage (Bandhaḥ). 
O Lord, all of this is proclaimed as you alone. Thus, He is Bandhaḥ (Bondage).