Shloka 258: Uḍubhṛn-mauliḥ (उडुभृन्मौलिः)
बिभ्रत्युडूनि या द्यौः सा यस्य विश्वात्मनः शिरः । सत्त्व-मेवोडुभृन्मौलिर्धा मूर्धानमिति श्रुतेः ॥ २५८ ॥ यद्वा चंद्रा-वतंसत्वादुड्डुभृन्मौलिरुच्यसे ।
The firmament (Dyauḥ) which bears the stars (Uḍu) is His head, since He is the Soul of the Universe. According to the Śruti, "The essence itself is the head-bearer of stars." 
Or, because He wears the moon as His crest-jewel, You are proclaimed as Uḍubhṛn-mauliḥ (The One who has the Moon, the Bearer of Stars, as His Crest-Jewel).


Shloka 259: Uṇḍeraka-bali-priyaḥ (उण्डेरकबलिप्रियः)
उंडेरकाः पूषभेदा वर्तुला-कृतयोऽल्पकाः ॥ २५९ ॥ उपहारास्तवेष्टा इत्युंडेरकबलि-प्रियः ।
Uṇḍerakās are a type of small, round-shaped cake (Puṣpa-bheda, a kind of offering). They are offerings dear to You. Hence, He is Uṇḍeraka-bali-priyaḥ (The One Fond of Uṇḍeraka Offerings). Previous commentators, accepting a variant reading with the letter 'ra', have explained it as "He who is the mover and lord of insentient cosmic eggs (Brahmāṇḍa)" and "He who is dear to the collective life-force." However, since that interpretation is incongruent with the series of names beginning with 'U', it is to be disregarded.


उन्नतानन उत्तुंग उदारत्रिदशाग्रणीः ॥ 
ऊर्जस्वानूष्मलमद ऊहापोहदुरासदः ॥ ७६ ॥


Shloka 260: Unnatānana (उन्नतानन)
उत्कृष्टानामजादीनां प्राणनादुन्नताननः ॥ २६० ॥
He is Unnatānana (The Lofty-Faced One) because he is the vital breath (Prāṇa) and the source of the call (Nāda) of the foremost beings like Brahmā (Aja).


Shloka 261: Uttuṅga (उत्तुंग)
तुंगा नाम नदी काचित् वराहवपुषस्तव । दंष्ट्राया उद्गता तस्मा-द्भवानुत्तुंग ईरितः ॥ २६१॥
There is a certain river named Tuṅgā which originated from the tusk of your Varāha (boar) form. From that (Tuṅgā), you are called Uttuṅga (The Elevated One / One who Lifted [the Earth]).


Shloka 262: Udāra-tridaśāgraṇī (उदारत्रिदशाग्रणी)
उदारो दातृमहतोस्त्रिदशो देव उच्यते । महादेवादपि श्रेष्ठ उदारत्रिदशाग्रणीः ॥२६२॥
"Udāra" means great giver or magnificent. "Tridaśa" means god (deva). Being superior even to Maheśvara (Śiva), He is Udāra-tridaśāgraṇī (The Magnificent Leader of the Gods).


Shloka 263: Ūrjasvān (ऊर्जस्वान्) & Uṣmalamada (ऊष्मलमद)
ऊर्जस्वानपि तेजोवानत एव मदोदकं । ऊष्मं स्रवति गंडाभ्यां तेनोष्मलमदो भवान् ॥ २६३ ॥
He is Ūrjasvān (The Energetic / Vigorous One), full of splendor. From that very (vigor), the intoxicating fluid (Mada) flows with warmth from his temples; therefore, you are Uṣmalamada (The One with Warm Intoxicating Fluid).


Shloka 264: Ūhāpoha-durāsada (ऊहापोहदुरासद)
ऊहो वितर्कस्तत्त्वस्यापोह-स्तात्त्विकबाधनम् । ताभ्यां दुरासदोऽप्राप्य ऊहापोहदुरासदः ॥ २६४ ॥
Ūha (hypothetical reasoning) is conjecture about the Truth; Apoha (exclusion) is the refutation of such speculative truth. Unattainable by both (reasoning and refutation), He is Ūhāpoha-durāsada (The Unapproachable One, Beyond Conjecture and Refutation).


ऋग्यजुः सामसं भूतिऋद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः ॥ 
ऋजुचित्तैकसुलभ ऋणत्रयविमोचकः ॥ ७७ ॥


Shloka 265: Ṛgyajuḥsāmasaṁbhūti (ऋग्यजुःसामसंभूति) & Ṛddhisiddhipravartakaḥ (ऋद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः)
ऋग्यजुःसामसंभूतिर्यस्य निःश्वसितं त्रयी । राज्याणि-मादिदातृत्वादृद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः ॥ २६५॥
He whose exhalation (Nissvasita) is the three Vedas (Ṛg, Yajus, Sāma) is Ṛgyajuḥsāmasaṁbhūti (The Source of the Ṛg, Yajus, and Sāma Vedas). Because he is the bestower of sovereignty (Rājya) and other powers from the very beginning, He is Ṛddhisiddhipravartakaḥ (The Initiator of Prosperity and Accomplishment).


Shloka 266: Ṛjucittaikasulabha (ऋजुचित्तैकसुलभ)
दृश्यते त्वग्र्यया बुद्ध्येत्युक्तेर्यद्विमलं मनः । तद्ब्राह्यऋजुचित्तैकसुल भस्तेन गीयसे ॥२६६॥
That pure mind is attained through the highest intellect, as stated. Since that (mind) is to be attained, you are praised as Ṛjucittaikasulabha (The One Easily Attained by a Straightforward Mind Alone).


Shloka 267: Ṛṇatrayavimocakaḥ (ऋणत्रयविमोचकः)
पुत्रीयंति यियक्षंति वेदानिच्छंति ये द्विजाः । तत्कामना पूरकत्वादृणत्रयविमोचकः ॥ २६७ ॥
Because he fulfills the desires of those brahmins who wish for progeny (Putrīyanti), who wish to perform sacrifices (Yiyakṣanti), and who wish to study the Vedas (Vedānicchanti), He is Ṛṇatrayavimocakaḥ (The Liberator from the Three Debts).






लुप्तविघ्नः स्वभक्तानां लुप्तशक्तिः सुरद्विषाम् । 
लुप्तश्रीर्विमुखार्चानां लूताविस्फोटनाशनः ॥ ७८ ॥


Shloka 268: Svabhaktānāṁ Luptavighnaḥ (स्वभक्तानां लुप्तविघ्नः), Suradviṣāṁ Luptaśaktiḥ (सुरद्विषां लुप्तशक्तिः), Vimukhārcānāṁ Luptaśrīḥ (विमुखार्चानां लुप्तश्रीः) & Lūtā-Visphoṭanāśanaḥ (लूता-विस्फोटनाशनः)
लुप्तशब्दादिकं नामत्रितयं प्रकटार्थकं । दंतलूतादयो रोगा आंतरा बहिरामयाः ॥ २६८ ॥ स्फोटाद्यास्तान्निहंतीति लूताविस्फोटनाशनः ।
The first three names, beginning with the word 'Lupta' (destroyed), have a clear meaning. He for whom obstacles are destroyed for his own devotees is Svabhaktānāṁ Luptavighnaḥ (The One who Destroys Obstacles for His Devotees). He who destroys the power of the enemies of the gods is Suradviṣāṁ Luptaśaktiḥ (The One who Destroys the Power of the Enemies of the Gods). He who destroys the prosperity of those who worship him insincerely is Vimukhārcānāṁ Luptaśrīḥ (The One who Destroys the Prosperity of Insincere Worshippers). Internal and external diseases, such as tooth-ache (Dantalūtā) and eruptions (Sphoṭa), are destroyed by him; therefore, He is Lūtā-Visphoṭanāśanaḥ (The Destroyer of Diseases like Lūtā and Eruptions).


एकारपीठमध्यस्थ एकपादकृतासनः ॥  
एजिताखिलदैत्यश्रीरेधिताखिलसंश्रयः ॥७९॥ 
ऐश्वर्यनिधिरैश्वर्यमैहिकामुष्मिकप्रदः ॥ 
ऐरंमदसमोन्मेष ऐरावतनिभाननः ॥ ८० ॥


Shloka 269: Ēkārapīṭhamadhyasthaḥ (एकारपीठमध्यस्थ)
एकारपीठमध्यस्थस्त्रिकोणांतःस्थबिंदुगः ॥ २६९ ॥
He who is situated in the middle of the single seat (of the monosyllable oṁ), within the triangle, and is the possessor of the Bindu (dot) is Ēkārapīṭhamadhyasthaḥ (The One Seated in the Middle of the Syllabic Seat 'E').




Shloka 270: Ēkapādakṛtāsanaḥ (एकपादकृतासनः) & Ējitākhiladaityaśrīḥ (एजिताखिलदैत्यश्रीः)
काश्यामेकपदा तिष्ठन्नेकपादकृतासनः । एजिताखिल-दैत्यश्रीः कंपितासुरसंषदः ॥ २७० ॥
He who stands on a single foot in Kāśī, having made a single foot his seat, is Ēkapādakṛtāsanaḥ (The One who has Made a Single Foot His Seat). He whose entire assembly of demons is made to tremble and whose glory of demons is agitated is Ējitākhiladaityaśrīḥ (The One who Agitates the Entire Glory of Demons).


Shloka 271: Ēdhitākhilasaṁśrayaḥ (एधिताखिलसंश्रयः)
स्वाश्रिता वर्धिता ये-नैधिता चाखिलसंश्रयः । ऐश्वर्यनिधिरैश्वर्य भक्तेषु निदधाति यः ॥ २७१ ॥
He by whom all his dependents are increased and nourished is Ēdhitākhilasaṁśrayaḥ (The One who Nourishes All who Seek Refuge). He who places lordship (Aiśvarya) in his devotees (is the treasure of sovereignty).


Shloka 271-272: Aiśvaryanidhiḥ (ऐश्वर्यनिधिः) & Aiśvaryam (ऐश्वर्यम्)
ऐश्वर्यनिधिरैश्वर्य भक्तेषु निदधाति यः ॥ २७१ ॥ ईश्वरेषु यदैश्वर्य संपत्तिः सा त्वमेव हि । एषाऽस्य परमा संपदिति बोधयति श्रुतिः ॥ २७२ ॥
He who places the treasure of sovereignty and lordship in his devotees is Aiśvaryanidhiḥ (The Treasure of Sovereignty). That supreme prosperity and sovereignty which is in all lords (Īśvaras) is indeed you. As the Śruti indicates, "This is his supreme wealth."


Shloka 273: Aihikāmuṣmikapradaḥ (ऐहिकामुष्मिकप्रदः)
दत्से सुतादीन्स्वर्गे चेत्यैहिकामुष्मिकप्रदः । विद्युत्तुल्यस्त-वोन्मेषः क्षणाद्भासितभासि च ॥ २७३ ॥
You grant sons, etc., in this world and heaven in the next; thus you are Aihikāmuṣmikapradaḥ (The Bestower of this-Worldly and Other-Worldly Rewards). Your manifestation is like lightning—in an instant you illuminate the illuminator.


Shloka 273: Airamadasamonmeṣaḥ (ऐरंमदसमोन्मेषः)
विद्युत्तुल्यस्त-वोन्मेषः क्षणाद्भासितभासि च ॥ २७३ ॥ ऐरंमदसमोन्मेषः स्वार्थे ज्ञेयोऽणिरंमदात् ।
Your manifestation is like lightning. Therefore, you are to be understood in its own meaning (as the syllable ai) from 'Aṇiramada'. Thus, He is Airamadasamonmeṣaḥ (The One whose Flashing Forth is Equal to the Splendor of 'Airamada' / Lightning).


Shloka 274: Airāvatanibhānanaḥ (ऐरावतनिभाननः)
ऐरावतसमास्यत्वादैरावतनिभा-ननः ॥ २७४ ॥
Because his face is equal to Airāvata (the divine elephant), He is Airāvatanibhānanaḥ (The One whose Face is Like Airāvata).


ॐकारवाच्य ॐकार ओजस्वानोषधीपतिः ॥ 
औदार्यनिधिरौद्धत्यधुर्य औन्नत्यनिस्वनः॥ ८१ ॥


Shloka 275: Oṁkāravācyaḥ (ॐकारवाच्य)
क्लेशादिरहितमीश्वरमुक्तत्वाग्रे तस्य वाचकः प्रणवः । इति योगशास्त्रसूत्रे कथनादोंकारवाच्यस्त्वम् ॥ २७५ ॥ इति शब्दोऽपि त्वंभेदाभावेन वाच्यवाच्यवाचकयोः ।
According to the statement in the Yoga Śāstra Sūtra that "the sacred syllable Praṇava (Oṁ) denotes the Lord who is free from afflictions, etc.," you are denoted by Oṁ. Therefore, you are Oṁkāravācyaḥ (The One Signified by the Syllable Oṁ).


Shloka 276: Oṁkāraḥ (ॐकार)
अत एव त्वयि वाक्यैराकारोऽपि प्रत्ययो युक्तः ॥ २७६ ॥
For this very reason, through scriptural statements, the word itself (Oṁ) is also a valid cognition for you. Thus, He is Oṁkāraḥ (The Sacred Syllable Oṁ).


Shloka 277: Ojasvān (ओजस्वान्)
ओजोऽष्टम-धातुरिति प्रोक्तं यद्वेदभाष्यकृता । शौर्योत्कर्षनिदानं तेज-स्तद्वांस्त्वमोजस्वान् ॥ २७७ ॥
It is stated by the commentator of the Vedas that "Ojas is the eighth dhātu (constituent element)." That which is the source of the excellence of valor and is splendor—you possess that. Therefore, you are Ojasvān (The Vigorous / Powerful One).


Shloka 277: Oṣadhīpatiḥ (ओषधीपतिः)
ओषधीपतिरौदार्यनिधि-रित्याह्वयौ स्फुटौ ॥
The names Oṣadhīpati (Lord of Herbs) and Audāryanidhi (Treasure of Magnanimity) are clearly two appellations.


Shloka 277: Oṣadhīpatiḥ (ओषधीपतिः)
Thus, He is Oṣadhīpatiḥ (The Lord of Herbs).


Shloka 278: Audāryanidhiḥ (औदार्यनिधिः) & Auddhatyadhuryakaḥ (औद्धत्यधुर्यकः)
औद्धत्यमुद्धतत्वं यत् स्वभक्तानुजिघृ-क्षया ॥ २७८ ॥ स्वोत्कर्षद्योतनं तत्र श्रेष्ठ औद्धत्यधुर्यकः ।
Thus, He is Audāryanidhiḥ (The Treasure of Magnanimity). That which is haughtiness (Uddhatatva) for the sake of wishing to protect his own devotees, and which manifests his own superiority, is supreme in that. Therefore, He is Auddhatyadhuryakaḥ (The Supreme in Divine Haughtiness).
Shloka 279: Aunnatyanisvanaḥ (औन्नत्यनिस्वनः)
बृंहितं यस्य सर्वोच्चं सस्यादौन्नत्यनिस्वनः ॥ २७९ ॥
He whose roar (Bṛṁhita) is the highest of all, is Aunnatyanisvanaḥ (The One whose Sound is Supreme Elevation).


अङ्कुशः सुरनागानामङ्कुशः सुरविद्विषाम्। 
समस्तविसर्गान्तपदेषु परिकीर्तितः ॥ ८२ ॥


Shloka 280: Aṅkuśaḥ Suranāgānām (अंकुशः सुरनागानाम्)
अंकुशः सुरनागानां त्रैलोक्यस्य नियामकः । ऊर्ध्व सुरा अधो नागा मर्त्यलोकोपलक्षणं ॥ २८० ॥
He is the controller (Aṅkuśa) of the gods (Sura) and serpents (Nāga) and the regulator of the three worlds. The gods are above, the serpents below, with the mortal world in between. Thus, He is Aṅkuśaḥ Suranāgānām (The Goad for the Gods and Serpents).


Shloka 281: Aṅkuśaḥ Suravidviṣām (अंकुशः सुरविद्विषाम्)
द्विषः सुराणां च विदां सुष्ठु सम्यग्रविद्विषां । निग्राहकत्वान्निर्दिष्टोऽस्यं-कुशः सुरविद्विषाम् ॥ २८१ ॥
Because he restrains the enemies (Vidviṣ) of the gods, who know how to oppose properly, He is designated as Aṅkuśaḥ Suravidviṣām (The Goad for the Enemies of the Gods).


Shloka 282: Samastavisargāntapadeṣu Parikīrtitaḥ (समस्तविसर्गातपदेषु परिकीर्तितः)
अकाराद्येकपंचाशद्विसर्गा-तार्णबोधितः । अःसमस्तविसर्गातपदेषु परिकीर्तितः ॥ २८२ ॥ प्राचा-त्वसमस्तेति विसर्गनिर्मुक्तमाद्यक्षरं पठित्वा केवलविसर्गातप्रथमैकवचनपदैः कीर्तित इति व्याख्यातं, -तन्मातृकाक्रमाननुगणत्वादचिंत्यम् ।
He is known through all words ending in Visarga (the sound 'ḥ'), from the letter 'A' to the fifty-first (the Visarga). Therefore, He is Samastavisargāntapadeṣu Parikīrtitaḥ (The One Proclaimed in All Words Ending in Visarga). Some earlier commentators have interpreted this by reading the first letter without the Visarga, explaining it as "He is proclaimed by words in the singular form ending in Visarga alone." However, as this does not follow the sequence of the alphabet (Mātṛkā), it is not to be considered.


कमंडलुधरः कल्पः कपर्दी कलभाननः ॥ 
कर्मसाक्षी कर्मकर्ता कर्माकर्मफलप्रदः ॥ ८३ ॥




Shloka 283: Kamaṇḍaludharaḥ (कमंडलुधरः) & Kalpaḥ (कल्पः)
कमंडलुधरः शृंगेनामृतकुंभधृकू । कल्पः प्रलयकाला-त्मा समर्थः कल्पनेऽपि वा ॥ २८३ ॥
He who holds the water pot (Kamaṇḍalu) with his tusk is Kamaṇḍaludharaḥ (The Bearer of the Water Pot). He who is the very essence of the time of dissolution (Kalpa), or who is capable in creation (Kalpanā), is Kalpaḥ (The Aeon / The Creator).


Shloka 284: Kapardī (कपर्दी)
वराटधारी मल्लारिस्त्वं कपर्यथवा जटी ।
You wear the sacred skull-ornament (Varāṭa) or have matted locks. Thus, He is Kapardī (The One with Matted Hair / Skull-Ornament).


Shloka 284: Kalabhānanaḥ (कलभाननः)
कलो नादो भा तु दीप्तिरननं प्राणनं मतं ॥२८४॥ नादकांत्युज्जीवकत्वात्कथ्यते कलभाननः ।
'Kala' is sound (Nāda); 'Bhā' is light or splendor (Dīpti); 'Anana' is considered to be breathing (Prāṇana). Because he is the animator (Ujjīvakatva) of sound and splendor, He is called Kalabhānanaḥ (The One whose Face is Sound and Splendor).


Shloka 285: Karmasākṣī (कर्मसाक्षी)
कर्म-साक्षी त्वदृष्टानामपि द्रष्टासि कर्मणां ॥ २८५॥
You are the witness of the actions of even the unseen beings. Therefore, He is Karmasākṣī (The Witness of Actions).


Shloka 286: Karmakartā (कर्मकर्ता) & Karmākarmaphalapradaḥ (कर्माकर्मफलप्रदः)
कर्मठप्रेरणा-दन्तः कर्मकर्ता भवानपि । स्वर्गापवर्गदातृत्वात् कर्माकर्म-फलप्रदः ॥ २८६ ॥
You are also the inner instigator of activity, thus you are Karmakartā (The Doer of Actions). Because you bestow the fruits (heaven and liberation) for both action (Karma) and inaction (Akarma), you are Karmākarmaphalapradaḥ (The Bestower of the Fruits of Action and Inaction).


कदंबगोलकाकारः कूष्मांडगणनायकः ॥ 
कारुण्यदेहः कपिलः कथकः कटिसूत्रभृत् ॥  ८४ ॥


Shloka 287: Kadambagolakākāraḥ (कदंबगोलकाकारः)
सर्वनाड्युद्गमस्थानं कदंबकुसुमाकृतिः । परितः संवृतात्मा-भिर्हदि काप्यस्ति देवता ॥ २८७ ॥ 
कदंबगोलकाकार इति तद्रूप उच्यसे ।
There is a deity in the heart from which all the subtle channels (Nāḍīs) originate, having the shape of a Kadamba flower-bud. Since you are that form, you are called Kadambagolakākāraḥ (The One with the Form of a Kadamba Bud).


Shloka 288: Kūṣmāṇḍagaṇanāyakaḥ (कूष्मांडगणनायकः)
दुष्टग्रहाणां नेता त्वं कूष्मांडगण-नायकः ॥ २८८ ॥
You are the leader of the host of malignant planets (Kūṣmāṇḍa Gaṇa). Thus, He is Kūṣmāṇḍagaṇanāyakaḥ (The Leader of the Kūṣmāṇḍa Host).


Shloka 289: Kāruṇyadehaḥ (कारुण्यदेहः), Kapilaḥ (कपिलः), Kathakaḥ (कथकः) & Kaṭisūtrabhṛt (कटिसूत्रभृत्)
कारुण्यदेहः करुणामूर्तित्वात्कपिलो मुनिः । कर्णतो वाऽसि कथकः 
संप्रदायान्प्रवर्तयन् ॥२८९॥ रत्नप्रोतस्वर्णकांची धारणात्कटिसूत्रभृत् ।
Because your body is compassion itself, and because you are the sage Kapila (the embodiment of compassion), you are Kāruṇyadehaḥ (The One whose Body is Compassion). Thus, He is Kapilaḥ (The Sage Kapila / The Tawny-Colored One). Or, you are Kathakaḥ (The Narrator / Preacher) as you propagate traditions from ear to ear. Because you wear a golden girdle (Kañcī) strung with gems, you are Kaṭisūtrabhṛt (The Wearer of the Sacred Girdle).


खर्वः खङ्गप्रियः खङ्गखांतान्तस्थः खनिर्मलः ॥ 
खल्वाटशृंगनिलयः खड्यांगी खदुरासदः ॥८५॥


Shloka 290: Kharvaḥ (खर्वः) & Khaṅgapriyaḥ (खङ्गप्रियः)
खर्वो वामनरूपत्वात्खङ्गो गंडकसंज्ञकः ॥ २९०॥ मृगोऽ-सिर्वा प्रियो यस्य स तु खङ्गप्रियो मतः ॥
Because you are of the form of the dwarf (Vāmana), you are Kharvaḥ (The Dwarf / Short One). 'Khaṅga' is the name of a musk-deer or a sword (Asi). He to whom that is dear is considered Khaṅgapriyaḥ (The Lover of the Sword / Musk-Deer).


Shloka 291: Khaṅgakhāntāntasthaḥ (खङ्गखांतान्तस्थः)
खङ्गशब्दे खात्परो डस्तदंते गाक्षरे तव ॥ २९१ ॥ बीजे तिष्ठस्यतः खङ्गखांतां-तस्थ इतीर्यसे ।
In the word 'Khaṅga', the letter 'Ga' comes after 'Kha'. You abide in that Bīja (seed-syllable). Therefore, you are proclaimed as Khaṅgakhāntāntasthaḥ (The One Abiding at the End of the Letter 'Kha' in 'Khaṅga').


Shloka 292: Khanirmalaḥ (खनिर्मलः)
आकाशवत्सर्वगोऽपिनिर्लेपोऽतः खनिर्मलः ॥ २९२ ॥
Like space (Ākāśa), you are all-pervading and unsullied. Therefore, you are Khanirmalaḥ (The One Pure as Space).


Shloka 293: Khalvāṭaśṛṅganilayaḥ (खल्वाटशृंगनिलयः)
वृक्षा एव गिरेः केशाः खल्वाटस्तैर्विवर्जितः । खल्वाटशृंग निलयस्तच्छृंगेऽपि वसन् मतः ॥२९३॥
Trees are the hair of the mountain. Khalvāṭa (bald) is one devoid of them. He who resides on the bald peak (of the mountain) and dwells even on that peak is Khalvāṭaśṛṅganilayaḥ (The Abode on the Bald Peak).


Shloka 294: Khaḍyāṅgī (खड्यांगी) & Khadurāsadaḥ (खदुरासदः)
खङ्घां-गीति भवान् ख्यातः खङ्गांगाख्यायुधं दधत् । अमूर्तो व्योम-वद्धर्तुं अशक्यः खदुरासदः ॥ २९४ ॥
You are famed as Khaḍyāṅgī (The One with Limbs of Space / Wielding the Sword-Khaḍga) as you bear the weapon called Khaḍgāṅga. Being formless like the sky (Vyoma), you are impossible to grasp. Therefore, you are Khadurāsadaḥ (The Unassailable One).


गुणाढ्यो गहनो गस्थो गद्यपद्यसुधार्णवः ॥ 
गद्यगानप्रियो गर्जो गीतगीर्वाणपूर्वजः ॥८६॥


Shloka 295: Guṇāḍhyaḥ (गुणाढ्यः), Gahanaḥ (गहनः), Gasthaḥ (गस्थः) & Gadyapadyasudhārṇavaḥ (गद्यपद्यसुधार्णवः)
अनंतकल्याणगुणो गुणाढ्यो गंतुं न शक्यो गहनोऽसि गस्थः । बीजे निजे तिष्ठसि गद्यपद्यसुधार्णवः काव्यरसा-करत्वात् ॥ २९५॥
Endowed with infinite auspicious qualities, He is Guṇāḍhyaḥ (The Abundant in Virtues). He cannot be reached; He is impenetrable, thus He is Gahanaḥ (The Impenetrable / Profound). He abides in his own seed (syllable 'Ga'), thus He is Gasthaḥ (The Abider in 'Ga'). He is the ocean of the nectar of prose and poetry because He is the source of poetic sentiment; thus He is Gadyapadyasudhārṇavaḥ (The Ocean of the Nectar of Prose and Verse).


Shloka 296: Gadyagānapriyaḥ (गद्यगानप्रियः) & Garjaḥ (गर्जः)
गदितुं योग्यं गद्यं न निषिद्धं साम ते प्रियं गानं । तेनासि गद्यगानप्रियोऽथ गर्जोऽसि मेघनादात्मा ॥ २९६ ॥
Prose (Gadya) is that which is fit to be spoken; the Sāman (chant) is not forbidden. Song (Gāna) is dear to you. Therefore, you are Gadyagānapriyaḥ (The Lover of Prose and Song). 
Moreover, you are of the nature of the thunder of clouds, thus you are Garjaḥ (The Thundering One).


Shloka 297: Gītagīrvāṇapūrvajaḥ (गीतगीर्वाणपूर्वजः)
नादात् गीतादयः शब्दा नादार्थादमरादयः । जातास्तद्व्यरूपत्वाङ्गीतगीर्वाणपूर्वजः ॥ २९७ ॥
From sound (Nāda), words like 'Gīta' (song) arise; from the meaning of sound, the gods (Amara) and others arise. Since He is the very form of that, He is Gītagīrvāṇapūrvajaḥ (The Forefather of Song and Speech).


गुह्याचाररतो गुह्यो गुह्यागमनिरूपितः ॥ 
गुहाशयो गुहाब्धिस्थो गुरुगम्यो गुरोर्गुरुः ॥ ८७ ॥


Shloka 298: Guhyācārarataḥ (गुह्याचाररत)
गुहाप्रविष्टावात्मानौ गुह्यौ तौ मनसा चरन् । अंतर्मुखस्तत्र तुष्टो गुह्याचाररतो मतः ॥ २९८ ॥
The two selves (individual and supreme) entered into the cave (of the heart) are secret (Guhya). Dwelling on them with the mind, turned inward, and content therein, He is considered Guhyācārarataḥ (The One Delighting in Secret Practice).


Shloka 299: Guhyaḥ (गुह्यः) & Guhyāgamanirūpitaḥ (गुह्यागमनिरूपितः)
गुह्य एकांतवेद्यत्वा-द्धितकारी गुहाय वा । रहस्यतंत्रवेद्यत्वाद्गुह्यागमनिरूपितः ॥ २९९ ॥
He is secret (Guhya) because He is to be known in solitude or because He is beneficial to the cave (heart). He is Guhyāgamanirūpitaḥ (The One Defined by the Secret Scriptures) because He is to be known through the esoteric Tantras (Rahasyatantra).


Shloka 300: Guhāśayaḥ (गुहाशयः) & Guhābdhisthaḥ (गुहाब्धिस्थः)
गुहायां हृदयाकाशे शेते यः स गुहाशयः । अव्याकृतं नभोगूढमगाधं च गुहाब्धिवत् ॥ ३०० ॥
He who lies in the cave, the sky of the heart, is Guhāśayaḥ (The One who Dwells in the Cave). It is unmanifest, concealed by space, unfathomable like the cave-ocean.
अधि-तिष्ठसि तत्तेन गुहाब्धिस्थ इतीर्यसे ॥ ३०० ॥
You preside over that. Therefore, you are proclaimed as Guhābdhisthaḥ (The One Abiding in the Ocean-Cave).


Shloka 301: Gurugamyaḥ (गुरुगम्यः)
गुरुगम्यो गुरुप्रोक्त-योगोपायेन लभ्यसे ॥ ३०१ ॥
He is to be approached (Gamya) through the Guru; He is attainable only by the means of Yoga taught by the Guru. Thus, He is Gurugamyaḥ (The One Attainable through the Guru).


Shloka 302: Gurorguruḥ (गुरोर्गुरुः)
वेदा अध्यापिता येन ब्रह्मणे स गुरोर्गुरुः । शिवसूत्रे गुरुरूपाय इत्येवं हि वर्णितं ॥३०२॥
He who taught the Vedas to Brahmā is the Guru of the Guru (Brahmā). Thus, He is Gurorguruḥ (The Guru of the Guru). As described in the Śivasūtra, "To Him in the form of the Guru..."


घंटाघर्घरिकामाली घटकुंभो घटोदरः ॥ 
चंडचंडेश्वरसुहृच्चंडीशचंडविक्रमः ॥ ८८ ॥


Shloka 303: Ghaṇṭāghargharikāmālī (घंटाघर्घरिकामाली)
घंटेव मंजुनादा घर्घरिकाः किंकिणीभेदाः । तद्धारी घंटा-घर्घरिकामालीति बाललीला ते ॥ ३०३ ॥
Bells (Ghaṇṭā) are those with a sweet sound; Ghargharikās are a type of small tinkling bells (Kiṅkiṇī). He who wears a garland (Mālī) of such bells and ghargharikās, such is your childhood play. Thus, He is Ghaṇṭāghargharikāmālī (The One Wearing a Garland of Bells and Tinkling Ornaments).


Shloka 304: Ghaṭakumbhaḥ (घटकुंभः), Caṇḍaḥ (चंडः) & Ghaṭodaraḥ (घटोदरः)
कुंभौ न्युजाम्बु-घटाकारौ घटकुंभस्ततो मतः । घटोदरो बृहत्कुक्षिश्चंडो भूरिपराक्रमः ॥ ३०४ ॥
His two breasts are shaped like water-pots (Ghaṭā). Therefore, He is Ghaṭakumbhaḥ (The One whose Breasts are like Pots). He is large-bellied, thus He is Ghaṭodaraḥ (The Pot-Bellied One). He is fierce (Caṇḍa) with immense valor. Thus, He is Caṇḍaḥ (The Fierce One).


Shloka 305: Caṇḍeśvarasuhṛt (चंडेश्वरसुहृत्), Caṇḍīśaḥ (चंडीशः) & Caṇḍavikramaḥ (चंडविक्रमः)
चंडेश्वरः सुहृद्यस्य शैवश्चंडेश्वरः सखा । चंडीराश्चंडिकानाथश्चंडा 
अत्यंतकोपनाः ॥ ३०५ ॥ तानाक्रम्य वशे कुर्वन्नाख्यातश्चंडविक्रमः ।
He whose friend is Caṇḍeśvara (the fierce lord, a form of Śiva), the Śaiva deity Caṇḍeśvara is his companion. Thus, He is Caṇḍeśvarasuhṛt (The Friend of Caṇḍeśvara). He who is the lord (Īśa) of Caṇḍikā, thus He is Caṇḍīśaḥ (The Lord of Caṇḍikā). The Caṇḍās are those of extreme wrath. He who overpowers them and brings them under control is proclaimed as Caṇḍavikramaḥ (The One with Fierce Prowess).






चराचरपतिचिंतामणिचर्वणलालसः ॥ 
छंदरछंदोवपुश्छंदोदुर्लक्ष्यश्छंदविग्रहः ॥ ८९ ॥


Shloka 306: Carācarapatiḥ (चराचरपतिः)
चराचरपतिः स्थास्तुश्चरिष्णुर्जगदीश्वरः ॥ ३०६ ॥
He is the lord of all that moves and does not move, of the stationary and the mobile, the Lord of the universe. Thus, He is Carācarapatiḥ (The Lord of the Moving and the Non-Moving).


Shloka 307: Cintāmaṇicarvaṇalālasaḥ (चिंतामणिचर्वणलालसः)
चिंतामणिकामदुघाकल्पद्रुमगर्वचर्वणतः । चिंतामणिचर्वण-लालस इति कथितोऽस्यचिन्त्यदानेन ॥ ३०७ ॥
He who is eager to chew (i.e., enjoy) the Cintāmaṇi (wish-fulfilling gem) and the Kalpadruma (wish-fulfilling tree) which yield all desires and thus crush their pride. Therefore, he is called Cintāmaṇicarvaṇalālasaḥ (The One Eager to Savour the Cintāmaṇi), due to his granting of inconceivable boons.


Shloka 308: Chandaraḥ (छंदरः), Chandovapuḥ (छंदोवपुः) & Chandodurlakṣyaḥ (छंदोदुर्लक्ष्यः)
गायत्र्या-द्यात्मना छन्दो भवान् वेदमयात्मना । छन्दो वपुस्तथा छन्दो दुर्लक्ष्यो वेददुर्ग्रहः ॥ ३०८ ॥
In the form of Gāyatrī and other metres (Chanda), you are of the nature of the Veda. Your body is Vedic metre (Chanda) and thus you are Chandovapuḥ (The One whose Body is Vedic Metre). You are difficult to perceive as the Veda is difficult to grasp; thus you are Chandodurlakṣyaḥ (The Inscrutable One of the Veda). (Chandaraḥ is implied as the enjoyer of the metres/forms).


Shloka 309: Chandavigrahaḥ (छंदविग्रहः)
स्वाभिप्रायानुसारीणि भक्तेः परवशानि वा । अवतारशरीराणि यस्य स च्छंद-विग्रहः ॥ ३०९ ॥
He whose incarnated bodies are either in accordance with his own will or subject to the will of his devotees is Chandavigrahaḥ (The One of Willful Incarnations).


जगद्योनिर्जगत्साक्षी जगदीशो जगन्मयः ॥ 
जपो जपपरो जप्यो जिह्वासिंहासनप्रभुः ॥ ९० ॥








Shloka 310: Jagadyoniḥ (जगद्योनिः), Jagatsākṣī (जगत्साक्षी), Jagadīśaḥ (जगदीशः) & Jaganmayaḥ (जगन्मयः)
जगद्योनिर्जगत्साक्षी जगदीशो जगन्मयः । विश्वस्य कारणं द्रष्टा नाथोऽधिष्ठानमेव च ॥ ३१० ॥
He is the womb (source) of the universe, the witness of the universe, the lord of the universe, and pervaded by the universe. He is the cause of the universe, its seer, its master, and its very substratum. Thus, He is Jagadyoniḥ (The Source of the Universe), Jagatsākṣī (The Witness of the Universe), Jagadīśaḥ (The Lord of the Universe), and Jaganmayaḥ (The One who Pervades the Universe).


Shloka 311: Japaḥ (जपः), Japaparaḥ (जपपरः), Japyaḥ (जप्यः) & Jihvāsiṃhāsanaprabhuḥ (जिह्वासिंहासनप्रभुः)
जपो जपपरो जप्यः कर्मकर्तृक्रियात्मकः । कीर्त्यमानं यस्य नाम जिह्वा-सिंहासनस्थितं ॥ ३११ ॥ ददाति पुरुषार्थान् स जिह्वा-सिंहासनप्रभुः ।
He is the act of muttering (Japa), devoted to muttering, and the object of muttering, being of the nature of action, the doer, and the act itself. He whose name, when recited, resides on the throne of the tongue and bestows the supreme goals of life is Jihvāsiṃhāsanaprabhuḥ (The Lord Seated on the Throne of the Tongue). Thus, He is also Japaḥ (The Japa), Japaparaḥ (The One Devoted to Japa), and Japyaḥ (The Object of Japa).


झलज्झल्लोल्लसद्दानझंकारिभ्रमराकुलः ॥ 
टंकारस्फारसंरावष्टंकारिमणिनूपुरः ॥ ९१ ॥


Shloka 312: Jhalajjhallollasadāna-jhaṅkāri-bhramarākulaḥ (झलज्झलोल्लसद्दानझङ्कारिभ्रमराकुलः)
झलज्झल्लोल्लस हान झंकारिभ्रमराकुलः ॥३१२॥ नदंति गंडयो भृंगात्स्फुरन्मदपिपांसवः ।
The intoxicated bees buzz with a jhalajjhal sound around the streaming ichor (Dāna). Thus, He whose temples resound with the buzzing of bees drunk on the flowing ichor is Jhalajjhallollasadāna-jhaṅkāri-bhramarākulaḥ (The One whose Streaming Ichor is Loud with the Buzzing of Drunken Bees).


Shloka 313: Ṭaṅkāra-sphāra-saṁrāvaḥ (टंकारस्फारसंरावः)
कांस्यटंकारवत्स्फारो यस्य मंजुतरो रखः ॥ ३१३ ॥ टंकारस्फारसंराव इति लोके स गीयते ।
He whose beautiful sound (Rava) is more pervasive and resonant than the clang of bronze is celebrated in the world as Ṭaṅkāra-sphāra-saṁrāvaḥ (The One with a Sound Pervasive as the Clang of Bronze).


Shloka 314: Ṭaṅkāri-maṇi-nūpuraḥ (टंकारिमणिनूपुरः)
नदद्रलांघिकटकष्टकारिमणिनूपुरः ॥ ३१४ ॥
He whose anklets (Nūpura), studded with tinkling gems, make a ṭaṅkāra sound is Ṭaṅkāri-maṇi-nūpuraḥ (The One with Gem-Anklets that Tinkle).


ठद्वयीपल्लवान्तः स्थसर्वमंत्रैकसिद्धिदः ॥ 
डिंडिगुंडो डाकिनीशो डामरो डिण्डिमप्रियः ॥ ९२ ॥


Shloka 315: Ṭhadvayī-pallavāntaḥstha-sarvamantraika-siddhidaḥ (ठद्वयीपल्लवान्तः स्थसर्वमंत्रैकसिद्धिदः)
ठद्वयीपल्लवांतःस्थसर्वमंत्रैकसिद्धिदः । स्वाहान्ता-खिलमंत्रोत्थमुख्यसिद्धिप्रदो यतः ॥ ३१५॥
He who abides within the tip of the two-leafed sprout (of the heart) is the bestower of all perfections (Siddhi) through all mantras. Since He grants the principal perfections arising from all mantras ending in svāhā, He is Ṭhadvayī-pallavāntaḥstha-sarvamantraika-siddhidaḥ (The One Residing in the Two-Leafed Sprout, Bestower of All Siddhis through Every Mantra).


Shloka 316: Ḍiṇḍimuṇḍaḥ (डिंडिमुंडः)
डिंडीनामैकदेशेन डिंडिमौ न्युब्जदुंदुभी । तावेव कुंभौ यन्मुण्डे डिंडिमुंडः स उच्यते ॥ ३१६ ॥
By a part of the word ḍiṇḍī, ḍiṇḍima refers to the two kettle-drums (Dundubhi). Those very two (drums) are the breasts on his head; therefore, he is called Ḍiṇḍimuṇḍaḥ (The One with the Drums [Breasts] on His Head).


Shloka 317: Ḍākinīśaḥ (डाकिनीशः)
डाकिन्यो नाम योगिन्यः काश्चित्सत्य-गणादिमाः । षोढा न्यासादिषु स्पष्टा डाकिनीशस्तदीश्वरः ॥ ३१७॥
The Ḍākinīs are certain yoginīs, like Satyā, Gaṇādi, etc., clearly known in the sixfold placement (Nyāsa) and other practices. He is their lord; thus He is Ḍākinīśaḥ (The Lord of the Ḍākinīs).


Shloka 318: Ḍāmaraḥ (डामरः) & Ḍiṇḍimapriyaḥ (डिण्डिमप्रियः)
डामरस्तु महांस्तन्त्रविशेषो वा तदात्मकः । दुंदुभौ पेटहध्वानेनानंदी डिण्डिमप्रियः ॥ ३१८ ॥
Ḍāmara is a great, special Tantra, or He is of that nature. He delights in the sound of the kettle-drum (Dundubhi) and the war-drum (Peṭaha); therefore, He is Ḍiṇḍimapriyaḥ (The Lover of the Drum-Sound).


ढक्कानिनादमुदितो ढौको ढुंढिविनायकः ॥ 
तत्त्वानां परमं तत्त्वं तत्त्वंपदनिरूपितः ॥ ९३ ॥




Shloka 319: Ḍhakkāninādamuditaḥ (ढक्कानिनादमुदितः)
ढक्कानिनादमुदित इति नामद्वयाशयः । गत्यर्थात् ढौकतेढौंकः सर्वगोवासिसर्ववित् ॥ ३१९ ॥
The intent is expressed by two names: delighted by the sound of the Ḍhakkā drum. He goes everywhere (from the root √ḍhauk, to move), thus He is Ḍhakkāninādamuditaḥ (The One Delighted by the Sound of the Ḍhakkā Drum).


Shloka 319: Ḍhaukaḥ (ढौकः)
Thus, He is Ḍhaukaḥ (The Pervader / Mover).