Shloka 320: Ḍhuṇḍhivināyakaḥ (ढुंढिविनायकः)
काशीखंडे ढुंढिधातुः प्रथितोऽन्वेषणार्थकः । विशिष्टो नायकोऽन्वेष्य इति ढुंढिविनायकः ॥ ३२०॥
In the Kāśīkhaṇḍa, the root ḍhuṇḍh is famous in the sense of 'seeking'. He is the distinguished leader who is to be sought; therefore, He is Ḍhuṇḍhivināyakaḥ (The Leader who is Sought / The Sought-After Lord).


Shloka 321: Tattvānāṁ Paramam Tattvam (तत्त्वानां परमं तत्त्वं)
तत्त्वानां तत्त्वं पंचविंशतितः परम् । त्रयं सृष्ट्यादि स्वप्नादि वाच्यं धर्मत्वमा-सदा ॥३२१॥
He is the supreme reality beyond the twenty-five principles. The triad of creation, etc., and dream, etc., are to be spoken of as having the nature of Dharma, and so on.


Shloka 321: Tattvampadanirūpitaḥ (तत्त्वंपदनिरूपितः)
त्यत्क्त्वा धमीणि भक्त्यैव तत्त्वंपदनिरूपितः ।
Having abandoned all that, He is defined by the word 'Tat Tvam' (That Thou Art) through devotion alone. Thus, He is Tattvampadanirūpitaḥ (The One Defined by the Phrase 'That Thou Art').










तारकान्तरसंस्थानस्तारकस्तारकान्तकः स्थाणुः ॥ 
स्थाणुप्रियः स्थाता स्थावरं जङ्गमं जगत् ॥ ९४ ॥


Shloka 322: Tārakāntarasaṁsthānaḥ (तारकान्तरसंस्थानः)
तारकान्तर संस्थानस्तारकाक्ष्णः कनीनिका ॥ ३२२ ॥ तस्यां चिन्त्यो य एषोऽन्तरक्षिणीत्यादिकश्रुतेः ।
He resides within the pupil of the eye of the one looking at the stars. As the Śruti says, "He is to be meditated upon within the eye." Thus, He is Tārakāntarasaṁsthānaḥ (The One Dwelling Within the Star of the Eye).


Shloka 323: Tārakaḥ (तारकः)
तारको भव-पाथोधेस्त्वमेव प्रणवो यथा ॥ ३२३ ॥
You are the one who ferries across the ocean of existence, like the sacred syllable Praṇava. Thus, He is Tārakaḥ (The Ferryman / Deliverer).


Shloka 323: Tārakāntakaḥ (तारकान्तकः)
तारकासुरहंत्रात्मा कथितस्तारकान्तकः ।
He is the one whose soul is the slayer of the demon Tārakāsura. Therefore, He is proclaimed as Tārakāntakaḥ (The Destroyer of Tārakāsura).


Shloka 324: Sthāṇuḥ (स्थाणुः)
स्थाणुः कल्पान्तवाताग्निसलिलैरप्य-कंपितः ॥ ३२४ ॥
He is the immovable one (Sthāṇuḥ), unshaken even by the wind, fire, and water at the end of the cosmic age.


Shloka 324: Sthāṇupriyaḥ (स्थाणुप्रियः)
स्थाणोः शिवस्य पुत्रत्वात्स्थाणुप्रिय इतीर्यसे ।
Because you are the son of the immovable one (Sthāṇu, Śiva), you are proclaimed as Sthāṇupriyaḥ (The Beloved of the Immovable One).


Shloka 325: Sthātā (स्थाता)
स्थाता युद्धेऽपि कल्पेऽपि निष्कम्पो गगनादिवत् ॥ ३२५ ॥
He remains steady, even in battle and even during cosmic dissolution, unshakable like the sky. Thus, He is Sthātā (The Abiding / Steady One).


Shloka 325: SthāvaraṂ JaṅgamaṂ Jagat (स्थावरं जङ्गमं जगत्)
चराचरात्मकत्वेन स्थावरं जङ्गमं जगत् ।
Since He is the soul of all that moves and does not move, He is SthāvaraṂ JaṅgamaṂ Jagat (The Universe of Moveable and Immoveable Beings).


दन्तप्रभिन्नाभ्रमालो दैत्यवारणदारणः ॥
दंष्ट्रालग्नद्विपघटो देवार्थनृगजाकृतिः ॥ ९५॥


Shloka 326: Dakṣayajñapramathanaḥ (दक्षयज्ञप्रमथनः)
दक्षयज्ञप्रमथनो भवानेव शिवात्मना ॥ ३२६ ॥
You yourself, in the form of Śiva, are the destroyer (Pramathana) of Dakṣa's sacrifice. Thus, He is Dakṣayajñapramathanaḥ (The One who Destroyed Dakṣa's Sacrifice).


Shloka 327: Dātā (दाता), Deyaḥ (देयः) & Dānavamohanaḥ (दानवमोहनः)
दाता देयः शोधनार्थाद्भवान् पतितपावनः । दानवांस्तत्त्वविमुखान् कुर्वन् दानवमोहनः ॥ ३२७ ॥
He is the giver (Dātā) and the worthy oblation (Deyaḥ). He is the purifier of the fallen. He deludes the demons (Dānava) who are averse to the truth; thus He is Dānavamohanaḥ (The Deluder of Demons).


Shloka 328: Divyavibhavaḥ (दिव्यविभवः)
दद्यावान् परदुःखानि प्रहारयितुमिच्छसि । प्राप्त्यर्थाद्दीव्यतेर्दिव्यविभवः प्रापकः श्रियाम् ॥३२८॥
You desire to strike down the sorrows of others. From the root 'div' (to shine, to obtain), you are the divine splendor (Divyavibhavaḥ) and the bestower of prosperity.


Shloka 329: Daṇḍabhṛt (दण्डभृत्) & Daṇḍanāyakaḥ (दण्डनायकः)
दण्डभृत् कथितो दण्डनीतेर परिलोपतः । यमेन्द्रादिषु ये दण्डास्तन्नेता दण्डनायकः ॥ ३२९ ॥
He is called Daṇḍabhṛt (The Bearer of the Rod) because he never fails in the administration of justice. He is the leader (Netā) of the rods of punishment held by Yama, Indra, and others; thus He is Daṇḍanāyakaḥ (The Leader of Divine Punishment).










दंतप्रभिन्नाभ्रमालो दैत्यवारणदारणः ॥
दंष्ट्रालमद्विपघटो देवार्थनृगजाकृतिः ॥ ९६ ॥


Shloka 330: Dantaprabhinnābhramālaḥ (दंतप्रभिन्नाभ्रमालः)
यच्छिरःकंपमात्रेण मेघपंक्तिः प्रभिद्यते । दंतप्रभिन्ना-भ्रमाल इति स त्वं निगद्यसे ॥ ३३० ॥
By the mere shaking of your head, the row of clouds is split. Therefore, you are proclaimed as Dantaprabhinnābhramālaḥ (The One whose Tusk Splits the Row of Clouds).


Shloka 331: Daityavāraṇadāraṇaḥ (दैत्यवारणदारणः)
वारयन् दारयन् दैत्यान् दैत्यवारणदारणः । यस्य दंष्ट्रैकदेशेऽपि लग्ना रिपुगजच्छटाः ॥ ३३१ ॥
He who restrains (Vārayan) and tears apart (Dārayan) the demons is Daityavāraṇadāraṇaḥ (The Restrainer and Destroyer of Demons). Even on one part of his tusk, the multitudes of enemy elephants are impaled.


Shloka 331: Daṃṣṭrālagnadvipaghaṭaḥ (दंष्ट्रालग्नद्विपघटः)
दंष्ट्रालग्नद्विपघट इति नाम्ना स गीयते ॥ ३३१ ॥
He is sung by the name Daṃṣṭrālagnadvipaghaṭaḥ (The One on whose Tusk is Attached a Group of Elephants).


Shloka 332: Devārthanṛgajākṛtiḥ (देवार्थनृगजाकृतिः)
देवानां कार्यसिद्धय॑र्थ येन मर्त्यद्विपाकृतिः ॥ ३३२॥ स्वीकृता स स्मृतो नाम्ना देवार्थनृगजाकृतिः ।
He who assumed the form of a human-elephant (Nṛgaja, i.e., the elephant-headed form) for the sake of accomplishing the work of the gods is remembered by the name Devārthanṛgajākṛtiḥ (The One who Took the Human-Elephant Form for the Gods' Purpose).


धनधान्यपतिर्धन्यो धनदो धरणीधरः ॥ 
ध्यानैकप्रकटो ध्येयो ध्यानं ध्यानपरायणः ॥९७॥


Shloka 333: Dhanadhānyapatiḥ (धनधान्यपतिः)
धनधान्यप्रदत्वेन धनधान्यपतिर्भवान् ॥३३३॥
Because you are the bestower of wealth and grain, you are Dhanadhānyapatiḥ (The Lord of Wealth and Grain).


Shloka 334: Dhanyaḥ (धन्यः)
धन्य-स्त्वं धनर्लब्धृत्वात् पुण्यवान्वापि गीयसे ॥ ३३४ ॥
You are Dhanyaḥ (The Fortunate / Auspicious One) because you are the obtainer of wealth, or you are praised as the virtuous one.


Shloka 334: Dhanadaḥ (धनदः)
धनदो धनदानेन कुबेरात्मतयापि वा ॥
You are the bestower of wealth (Dhanadaḥ), either by giving riches or because you are of the nature of Kubera himself.


Shloka 334: Dharaṇīdharaḥ (धरणीधरः)
शेषेणादिद्वराहेणाप्यभिन्नो धरणीधरः ।
Being non-different from Śeṣa and from the Primeval Boar (Varāha), you are Dharaṇīdharaḥ (The Supporter of the Earth).


Shloka 335: Dhyānaikaprakaṭaḥ (ध्यानैकप्रकटः)
मनसैवानुद्रष्टव्यो ध्यानैकप्रकटो भवान् ॥ ३३५ ॥
You are to be perceived only by the mind; you are Dhyānaikaprakaṭaḥ (The One who is Revealed Only through Meditation).


Shloka 335: Dhyeyaḥ (ध्येयः), Dhyānam (ध्यानम्) & Dhyānaparāyaṇaḥ (ध्यानपरायणः)
त्वमेव त्रिपुटी ध्येयो ध्यानं ध्यानपरायणः ॥
You yourself are the triad: the object of meditation (Dhyeyaḥ), the act of meditation (Dhyānam), and the one devoted to meditation (Dhyānaparāyaṇaḥ).


नन्दो नन्दिप्रियो नादो नादमध्यप्रतिष्ठितः ॥ 
निष्कलो निर्मलो नित्यो नित्यानित्यो निरामयः ॥ ९८ ॥


Shloka 336: Nandaḥ (नन्दः) & Nandipriyaḥ (नन्दिप्रियः)
नंद आनंदनीयोऽसि नंदिकेश्वरवल्लभः ॥ ३३६ ॥ नंदि-प्रियोऽसि
You are adorable and blissful (Nandaḥ). You are the beloved of Nandikeśvara. Thus, you are Nandaḥ (The Blissful One) and Nandipriyaḥ (The Beloved of Nandi).




Shloka 336: Nādaḥ (नादः)
नादोऽसि योऽन्तर्दशविधध्वनिः
You are the primordial sound (Nāda) which is the tenfold inner vibration. Thus, He is Nādaḥ (The Primordial Sound).


Shloka 337: Nādamadhyapratiṣṭhitaḥ (नादमध्यप्रतिष्ठितः)
गम्यो नादानु-संधानान्नादमध्यप्रतिष्ठितः ॥ ३३७॥
He is attained through the contemplation of sound, and is established in the midst of that sound. Thus, He is Nādamadhyapratiṣṭhitaḥ (The One Established in the Center of Sound).


Shloka 338: Niṣkalaḥ (निष्कलः)
निष्कलोऽवयवैहींनो
He is without parts, devoid of any components. Thus, He is Niṣkalaḥ (The Partless One).


Shloka 338: Nirmalaḥ (निर्मलः)
निर्मलो दूषणोज्झितः
He is pure, free from all impurities. Thus, He is Nirmalaḥ (The Stainless One).


Shloka 338: Nityaḥ (नित्यः)
नित्यो नाशोज्झितो
He is eternal, free from destruction. Thus, He is Nityaḥ (The Eternal One).


Shloka 338: Nityānityaḥ (नित्यानित्यः)
नित्यानित्यो खोर्यादिरूपधृकू ॥ ३३८ ॥
He is both eternal and non-eternal (Nityānityaḥ), assuming forms such as the sky, etc.


Shloka 338: Nirāmayaḥ (निरामयः)
अविद्येव महारोगस्तदस्पृष्टो निरामयः ।
He is untouched by the great disease of ignorance. Thus, He is Nirāmayaḥ (The Diseaseless One).












परंव्योम परन्धाम परमात्मा परं पदम् ॥
परात्परः पशुपतिः पशुपाशविमोचकः ॥ ९९ ॥


Shloka 339: Paraṁ Vyoma (परं व्योम)
अव्याकृतं यदाकाशं परंव्योम तदात्मकः ॥ ३३९ ॥
He is the unmanifest ether (Ākāśa), whose nature is the supreme void. Thus, He is Paraṁ Vyoma (The Supreme Ether).


Shloka 339: Paraṁ Dhāma (परं धाम)
ज्योतिषामपि यज्ज्योतिस्तत्परन्धाम कथ्यते ।
He is the light of even all other lights; that is called the supreme abode. Thus, He is Paraṁ Dhāma (The Supreme Abode).


Shloka 340: Paramātmā (परमात्मा)
परमः सर्व-जीवेभ्यः परमात्मेति गद्यते ॥ ३४०॥
He is the highest of all living beings; therefore, He is declared as Paramātmā (The Supreme Self).


Shloka 340: Paraṁ Padam (परं पदम्)
कैलासादिपदेभ्योऽपि पैरमत्वात्परं पदम् ।
Because He is higher than even the state of Kailāsa and other realms, He is Paraṁ Padam (The Supreme State/Vishnu's Abode).


Shloka 341: Parātparaḥ (परात्परः)
ब्रह्मविष्णुमहेशादप्युत्तमत्वात् परात्परः ॥ ३४१ ॥
Because He is superior even to Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa (Śiva), He is Parātparaḥ (The One Greater than the Greatest).


Shloka 341: Paśupatiḥ (पशुपतिः)
ब्रह्मादिकीटकान्तानां पाता पशुपतिर्मतः ।
He is the protector (Pātā) of all beings from Brahmā down to the smallest insect; therefore, He is considered Paśupatiḥ (The Lord of Beings).


Shloka 342: Paśupāśavimocakaḥ (पशुपाशविमोचकः)
द्विपंचाशद्विधाः पाशाः सांख्यतंत्रादिषु स्फुटाः ॥ ३४२ ॥ ब्रह्मादीन्मोचयंस्तेभ्यः पशुपाशविमोचकः ।
The fifty-two types of bonds (Paśa) are clearly described in the Sāṅkhya, Tantra, and other scriptures. He who liberates even Brahmā and others from these bonds is Paśupāśavimocakaḥ (The Liberator from the Bonds of Fetters).


पूर्णानन्दः परानन्दः पुराणपुरुषोत्तमः ॥ 
पद्मप्रसन्ननयनः प्रणताज्ञानमोचनः ॥ १०० ॥


Shloka 343: Pūrṇānandaḥ (पूर्णानन्दः)
पूर्णानन्दः क्रियाकर्तृकर्मभेदोज्झितं सुखं ॥ ३४३ ॥
He is the bliss that is devoid of the distinctions of action, doer, and instrument. Thus, He is Pūrṇānandaḥ (The Complete / Perfect Bliss).


Shloka 344: Parānandaḥ (परानन्दः)
भूम्यादिब्रह्मपर्यन्तानन्दान् शतगुणोत्तरान् । सर्वानप्यधरी-कुर्वन् परानंदो महासुखम् ॥ ३४४ ॥
He surpasses all pleasures, from those of the earth up to those of Brahmā, each a hundred times greater than the previous. Therefore, He is Parānandaḥ (The Supreme Bliss).


Shloka 345: Purāṇapuruṣottamaḥ (पुराणपुरुषोत्तमः)
क्षरेभ्यः सर्वभूतेभ्यः कूटस्थादक्षरादपि । उत्तमत्वादनादित्वात् पुराणपुरुषोत्तमः ॥ ३४५ ॥
Because He is superior to all perishable beings, and also superior to the imperishable, changeless Self (Kūṭastha), and because He is without beginning, He is Purāṇapuruṣottamaḥ (The Ancient Supreme Person).


Shloka 346: Padmaprasannanayanaḥ (पद्मप्रसन्ननयनः)
पद्मप्रसन्ननयनो विकसत्कमलेक्षणः ।
He has eyes as gracious (Prasanna) and beautiful as the lotus; He is Padmaprasannanayanaḥ (The One whose Eyes are Gracious as Lotuses).


Shloka 346: Praṇatājñānamocanaḥ (प्रणताज्ञानमोचनः)
नमतां तत्त्वबोधेन प्रणताज्ञानमोचनः ॥ ३४६ ॥
He who liberates the ignorance (Ajñāna) of those who bow down (Praṇata) to Him, through the knowledge of the Truth, is Praṇatājñānamocanaḥ (The Liberator of the Ignorance of the Devout).




प्रमाणप्रत्ययातीतः प्रणतार्तिनिवारणः ॥ 
फलहस्तः फणिपतिः फेत्कारः फाणितप्रियः ॥ १०१ ॥


Shloka 347: Pramāṇapratyayātītaḥ (प्रमाणप्रत्ययातीतः)
प्रमाणप्रत्ययातीतो नित्यज्ञानैकविग्रहः । प्रमाकरण-जानां हि प्रमितीनामनित्यता ॥ ३४७॥
He transcends all proofs (Pramāṇa) and cognitions (Pratyaya), for He is the sole embodiment of eternal knowledge. Indeed, the cognitions (Pramiti) arising from instruments of knowledge are impermanent. Thus, He is Pramāṇapratyayātītaḥ (The One Beyond All Proofs and Cognitions).


Shloka 347: Praṇatārtinivāraṇaḥ (प्रणतार्तिनिवारणः)
नमतां नाशयन् पीडां प्रणतार्तिनिवारणः ।
He who destroys the afflictions of those who bow to Him is Praṇatārtinivāraṇaḥ (The Remover of the Afflictions of the Devout).


Shloka 348: Phalahastaḥ (फलहस्तः)
फलहस्तः स्वभक्तानामविलंबात्फलं ददत् ॥ ३४८ ॥
He who holds the fruit in His hand and bestows the results (of actions) upon His devotees without delay is Phalahastaḥ (The One with a Fruit in His Hand).


Shloka 348: Phaṇipatiḥ (फणिपतिः)
वासुकेरपि शेषस्य स्वामी फणिपतिर्मतः ।
He is the lord of Vāsuki and Śeṣa; thus He is considered Phaṇipatiḥ (The Lord of Serpents).


Shloka 349: Phetkāraḥ (फेत्कारः)
फेत्कार इति तन्नाम्ना तन्त्रं तत्र निरूप्यसे ॥ ३४९ ॥
You are described in the Tantra by the name Phetkāraḥ (The Exclamation Pheṭ).


Shloka 349: Phāṇitapriyaḥ (फाणितप्रियः)
खण्डाह्वयेक्षुविकृतौ प्रीतिमान् फाणितप्रियः ॥
He who delights in Phāṇita (sugarcane juice concentrate) – which is a preparation made from earth-colored sugar lumps – is Phāṇitapriyaḥ (The One Fond of Sugarcane Juice).






बाणार्चिताङ्ङ्गियुगलो बालकेलिकुतूहली ॥ 
ब्रह्म ब्रह्मार्चितपदो ब्रह्मचारी बृहस्पतिः ॥ १०२ ॥


Shloka 350: Bāṇārcitāṅghriyugalaḥ (बाणार्चिताङ्घ्रियुगलः) & Bālakelikutūhalī (बालकेलिकुतूहली)
बाणासुरेण पूज्यत्वाद्बाललीलासु कौतुकात् ॥ ३५० ॥ बाणार्चितांत्रियुगलो बालकेलिकुतूहली ।
Because He is worshipped by the demon Bāṇa, He is Bāṇārcitāṅghriyugalaḥ (The One whose Pair of Feet is Worshipped by Bāṇa). Due to His curiosity in child-like playful sports, He is Bālakelikutūhalī (The One Eager in Child-like Play).


Shloka 351: Brahma (ब्रह्म)
ब्रह्म त्वमेव वेदान्तवेद्यतत्त्वात्मकत्वतः ॥ ३५१ ॥
You are indeed Brahman (the Supreme Reality), being the essence of the Truth known through the Vedānta. Thus, He is Brahma (The Absolute).


Shloka 351: Brahmārcitapadaḥ (ब्रह्मार्चितपदः)
ब्रह्मार्चितपदो वेदैः श्लाघनीयं हि ते पदम् । प्राचा तु विष्णुविधिभ्यामर्चिते पदे यस्येत्य॑र्थकमेकमेवेदं 'ब्रह्मब्रह्मार्चितपदम्' इति नामेत्युक्तं, -तत्पक्षे सरूपैकशेषो दुर्वारः ।
He whose feet (or state) are worshipped by Brahmā (or the Vedas) is Brahmārcitapadaḥ (The One whose Feet are Worshipped by Brahmā). (The commentary notes an alternative interpretation from previous commentators, considering 'Brahma Brahmārcitapadam' as a single name, but then argues it leads to grammatical difficulty.)


Shloka 352: Brahmacārī (ब्रह्मचारी)
ब्रह्मचारी भवान् येनाकृतदार-परिग्रहः ॥ ३५२ ॥
He is Brahmacārī (The Celibate Student) because He has not accepted a wife.


Shloka 352: Bṛhaspatiḥ (बृहस्पतिः)
वाचस्पतिस्वरूपेण देवार्च्यत्वाद्वृहस्पतिः ।
Because He is worshipped by the gods in the form of Vācaspati (Bṛhaspati, the Lord of Speech), He is Bṛhaspatiḥ (The Lord of Prayer/Strength).








बृहत्तमो ब्रह्मपरो ब्रह्मण्यो ब्रह्मवित्प्रियः ॥ 
बृहन्नादाग्यचीत्कारो ब्रह्माण्डावलिमेखलः ॥ १०३ ॥


Shloka 353: Bṛhattamaḥ (बृहत्तमः)
बृहतो ब्रह्मविष्ण्वादीनतिशेषो बृहत्तमः ॥ ३५३ ॥
He who is greater than the great ones like Brahmā and Viṣṇu is Bṛhattamaḥ (The Greatest of the Great).


Shloka 353: Brahmaparaḥ (ब्रह्मपरः)
वेदैकतत्परो धातुः श्रेष्ठो ब्रह्मपरो मतः ।
He who is solely devoted to the Vedas, the creator (Dhātuḥ), the supreme, is considered Brahmaparaḥ (The One Whose Supreme Goal is Brahman / Devoted to Brahman).


Shloka 354: Brahmaṇyaḥ (ब्रह्मण्यः)
ब्रह्मण्य इति विख्यातो ब्राह्मणान् मानयन् स्वयम् ॥ ३५४ ॥
He who honors Brahmins is renowned as Brahmaṇyaḥ (The Favorable to Brahmins).


Shloka 354: Brahmavidpriyaḥ (ब्रह्मवित्प्रियः)
प्रिया ब्रह्म-विदो यस्य स मतो ब्रह्मवित्प्रियः ।
He to whom the knowers of Brahman (Brahmavit) are dear is considered Brahmavidpriyaḥ (The Beloved of the Knowers of Brahman).


Shloka 355: Bṛhannādāgyacītkāraḥ (बृहन्नादाग्यचीत्कारः)
चीत्कारो गजशब्दः स मेघाशन्यादितो महान् ॥ ३५५॥ तवास्तीति बृहन्नादाग्य-चीत्कार इति स्मृतः ।
The 'Cītkāra' is the great sound of the elephant, which is mightier than the sound of thunder and lightning. Because you possess that, you are remembered as Bṛhannādāgyacītkāraḥ (The One with the Great Sound and the Elephant's Trumpet).


Shloka 356: Brahmāṇḍāvalimekhalaḥ (ब्रह्माण्डावलिमेखलः)
कटिसूत्रे किंकिणीव ब्रह्माण्डान्येव गुंफ-यन् ॥ ३५६ ॥ तादृग्दधद्विश्वरूपं ब्रह्माण्डावलिमेखलः ।
He who strings together the multitude of cosmic eggs (Brahmāṇḍas) like tinkling bells (Kiṅkiṇī) on his girdle, thus bearing the universal form, is Brahmāṇḍāvalimekhalaḥ (The One Whose Girdle is a String of Cosmic Eggs).




भ्रूक्षेपदत्तलक्ष्मीको भर्गो भद्रो भयापहः ॥ 
भगवान् भक्तिसुलभो भूतिदो भूतिभूषणः ॥ १०४ ॥


Shloka 357: Bhrūkṣepadattalakṣmīkaḥ (भ्रूक्षेपदत्तलक्ष्मीकः)
भ्रूक्षेपद‌त्तलक्ष्मीको भक्तेभ्यः संपदो ददत् ॥ ३५७ ॥
He who bestows prosperity (Lakṣmī) upon His devotees merely by the movement (Kṣepa) of His eyebrow is Bhrūkṣepadattalakṣmīkaḥ (The One who Bestows Prosperity by a Glance of His Brow).


Shloka 357: Bhargaḥ (भर्गः)
भर्गो गायत्र्युदीरितः ।
He is the one praised as Bharga (the Radiant) in the Gāyatrī mantra. Thus, He is Bhargaḥ (The Effulgent Destroyer of Sins).


Shloka 358: Bhadraḥ (भद्रः)
भद्रा मन्द्रा मृगाश्चेति सन्ति द्विरदजातयः ॥ ३५८ ॥ तेषूत्तमा भद्रजाति-र्भद्रस्त्वं तादृशाननः ।
Among the three classes of elephants – Bhadra, Mandra, and Mṛga – the Bhadra class is the best. You, whose face is like that, are Bhadraḥ (The Auspicious/Excellent One).


Shloka 359: Bhayāpahaḥ (भयापहः)
द्वितीयाद्वै भयं यत्तदपन्नंस्त्वं भयापहः ॥ ३५९ ॥
The fear that arises from duality (Dvaita) – You remove that. Thus, You are Bhayāpahaḥ (The Remover of Fear).


Shloka 360: Bhagavān (भगवान्)
उत्पत्तिं च विनाशं च भूतानामगतिं गतिम् । वेत्सि विद्यामविद्यां चेत्युच्यसे भगवानिति ॥ ३६० ॥
You know the origin, destruction, the path and the wrong path of beings, as well as knowledge and ignorance. Therefore, You are called Bhagavān (The Lord possessing Supreme Opulences).


Shloka 361: Bhaktisulabhaḥ (भक्तिसुलभः)
भक्त्यैव लब्धुं यः शक्यः स भक्तिसुलभो महान् ।
He who is attainable only through devotion (Bhakti) is the great Bhaktisulabhaḥ (The Easily Attainable through Devotion).




Shloka 361: Bhūtidaḥ (भूतिदः) & Bhūtibhūṣaṇaḥ (भूतिभूषणः)
सिद्धीर्दत्से भस्म धत्से भूतिदो भूतिभूषणः ॥ ३६१ ॥
You bestow all powers (Siddhis) and you wear sacred ashes (Bhasma). Thus, You are Bhūtidaḥ (The Bestower of Prosperity/Powers) and Bhūtibhūṣaṇaḥ (The One Adorned with Sacred Ashes).


भव्यो भूतालयो भोगदाता भ्रूमध्यगोचरः ॥ 
मन्त्रो मन्त्रपतिर्मन्त्री मदमत्तमनोरमः ॥ १०५ ॥


Shloka 362: Bhavyaḥ (भव्यः)
भव्यो भावुकरूपत्वाद्भाविविश्वात्मकत्वतः ॥ ३६२ ॥
He is Bhavyaḥ (The Auspicious/Gracious One) because He is of the nature of benevolence and because He is the soul of the future universe.


Shloka 362: Bhūtālayaḥ (भूतालयः)
भूतानां भूजलादीनां पिशाचानां च देहिनाम् ॥ अतीतानाम-धिष्ठानमतो भूतालयो भवान् ॥
You are the substratum for beings such as the earth, water, etc., as well as for ghosts (Piśācas) and embodied beings, including those who have passed away. Therefore, You are Bhūtālayaḥ (The Abode of All Beings).


Shloka 363: Bhogadātā (भोगदाता)
भोगदाता दुःखसुखसाक्षा-त्कारप्रदत्वतः ॥ ३६३ ॥
He is Bhogadātā (The Bestower of Experience) because He grants the direct experience of both pleasure and pain.


Shloka 363: Bhrūmadhyagocaraḥ (भ्रूमध्यगोचरः)
अविभक्ते ध्रुवोर्मध्ये ध्येयो घूम-ध्यगो चरः ।
He is to be meditated upon in the indivisible, steady center between the eyebrows. Thus, He is Bhrūmadhyagocaraḥ (The One within the Range of the Mid-Brow).


Shloka 364-365: Mantraḥ (मन्त्रः), Mantrapatiḥ (मन्त्रपतिः) & Mantrī (मन्त्री)
मंत्राः सामर्थजूरूपा षडणैकाक्षरादयः ॥३६४॥ रहोविचाररूपाश्च राज्यभारोपयोगिनः । तद्रूपस्तदभिमानी देवता तस्य कारकः ॥ ३६५ ॥ तेन मन्त्रो मन्त्रपतिर्मन्त्री-त्यपि च गीयसे ।
Mantras are forms of power, such as six-syllabled or single-syllabled ones, or those useful for royal duties and consisting of secret deliberations. You are the very form of that, the deity who presides over and activates it. Therefore, You are sung as Mantraḥ (The Mantra Itself), Mantrapatiḥ (The Lord of Mantras), and Mantrī (The Possessor of Mantras).


Shloka 366: Madamattamanoramaḥ (मदमत्तमनोरमः)
मदः समाधिसंभूतध्येयोऽन्यविषयाग्रहः ॥ ३६६ ॥ रमसे तद्युते चित्ते मदमत्तमनोरमः ।
The divine intoxication (Mada) is born of deep meditation (Samādhi), is the object of contemplation, and is exclusive of other objects. You delight in a mind possessed by that intoxication. Thus, You are Madamattamanoramaḥ (Delighting in the Intoxicated Mind).


मेखलावान् मन्दगतिर्मतिमत्कमलेक्षणः ॥
महाबलो महावीर्यो महाप्राणो महामनाः ॥ १०६ ॥


Shloka 367: Mekhalāvān (मेखलावान्)
मेखलावान् रशनया मौञ्ज्या वा विलसत्कटिः ॥ ३६७॥
He whose waist shines with a girdle (Mekhalā) or a sacred Muñja-grass belt is Mekhalāvān (The One with a Girdle).


Shloka 368: Mandagatiḥ (मन्दगतिः)
येषां कापि गतिर्नास्ति मन्दानां ज्ञानकर्मणोः । अभावेन गतिस्तेषामपि मन्दगतिस्ततः ॥ ३६८ ॥
For those who are dull (Manda) and devoid of both knowledge and action, there is no progress. He becomes their progress (Gati); therefore, He is Mandagatiḥ (The Refuge of the Slow / The One with Slow Movement).


Shloka 369: Matimatkamaleksaṇaḥ (मतिमत्कमलेक्षणः)
यस्माज्ज्ञानयुता संप-त्तादृग् यस्य निरीक्षणम् । दृशैव दत्तधीश्रीको मतिमत्कम ले-क्षणः ॥ ३६९ ॥ प्राचा तु मतिमानिति भिन्ननामत्वेन पठितं, तत्कमलेक्षणनाम्न्नो मकारप्राये पठितुमयुक्तत्वादुपेक्ष्यम् ।
He whose mere glance bestows intelligence and prosperity is Matimatkamaleksaṇaḥ (The One with the Lotus-Eye of Intelligence). (The commentary notes that previous commentators read "Matimān" as a separate name, but disregards this as unsuitable.)








Shloka 370: Mahābalaḥ (महाबलः), Mahāvīryaḥ (महावीर्यः), Mahāprāṇaḥ (महाप्राणः) & Mahāmanāḥ (महामनाः)
बलवीर्यप्राणमनःसमष्ट्येकतनुर्भवान् । महाबलो महावीर्यो महाप्राणो महामनाः ॥ ३७० ॥
You are the collective embodiment of all strength, valor, life-force, and mind. Therefore, You are Mahābalaḥ (The Great in Strength), Mahāvīryaḥ (The Great in Valor), Mahāprāṇaḥ (The Great Life-Force), and Mahāmanāḥ (The Great of Mind).


Shloka 371: Yajñaḥ (यज्ञः) etc.
यज्ञ इत्यादिकं नामाष्टकं तु प्रकटार्थकं । रसः परम आनंदो रैसो वै स इति श्रुतेः ॥३७१॥
The eight names beginning with Yajña, etc., have clear meanings. He is the supreme essence (Rasa), the supreme Bliss, as stated in the Śruti: "He is indeed Rasa."