सविघ्ननाशिनीपीठः सर्वशक्त्यम्बुजाश्रयः ।
लिपिपद्मासनाधारो वह्निधामत्रयाश्रयः ॥ ३७॥






Shloka 139: Sarvaśakty-ambujāśrayaḥ (सर्वशक्त्यम्बुजाश्रयः)
सर्वशत्क्त्तयंबुजाश्रय इति ॥
अत्र पूर्वोक्तनवकपरं सर्वपद-मज्ञात्वा यत्प्राचोक्तं सर्वशक्तिर्नाम काचिदन्वर्थनामा दशमी शक्तिरेतादृशशक्तयो दशदिक्स्था इति, तदिदं मंत्रशास्त्र-ज्ञानाभावप्रयुक्तप्रलपनमित्युपेक्ष्यं ।
(The name is) Sarvaśakty-ambujāśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Lotus of All Powers). Here, not understanding that the word "Sarva" refers to the previously mentioned group of nine Śaktis, some previous commentators have said that "Sarvaśakti" is the name of a tenth Śakti... This is mere babbling born from a lack of knowledge of Mantra Śāstra and is to be disregarded.
Names 140-141: Lipipadmāsanādhāraḥ (लिपिपद्मासनाधार:) & Vahnidhāmatrayāśrayaḥ (वह्निधामत्रयाश्रयः)
द्विद्विस्वरककिंजल्कं पद्म-प्रासादकर्णिकं ।
कादिवर्गाष्टकदलं मातृकापद्ममुच्यते ॥१४०॥
तत्रस्थो लिपिपद्मासनाधार इति कथ्यते ।
कर्णिकोपर्युपर्यकैं-द्वन्याख्यं तेजसां त्रयं ॥ १४१ ॥
आस्तीर्ण तत्र निवसन् वह्निधामत्रयाश्रयः।
The "Mātṛkā Padma" (Lotus of the Letters) is described as having the vowels as its filaments, the palace (of consciousness) as its pericarp, and the eight groups of consonants as its eight petals. He, being situated there, is called Lipipadmāsanādhāraḥ (The Support of the Seat of the Lotus of Letters). Above the pericarp is the triad of lights known as Ka, E, and Dvanda. He, spread out and residing there, is the Vahnidhāmatrayāśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Three Dwellings of Fire).


यत्तु प्राचा मातृकाचक्रोपरि पद्मासनं वह्निसूर्यसोममया अंतरंतस्त्रयः प्राकारास्तदंतर्गणेशस्य गृह-मिति नामद्वयं व्याख्यातं, तदसांप्रदायिकत्वादुपेक्ष्यम् ।
"However, what has been explained by previous commentators—that the 'Lotus Seat' upon the matrix of letters (Mātṛkācakra), along with the three fortifications (Prākāra) within, made of fire, sun, and moon, constitutes the house of Ganesha, and they have interpreted the two names (Lipi-padmāsanādhāra and Vahnidhāmatrayāśraya) accordingly—that, due to its non-conformity with the established tradition (Asāmpradāyikatvāt), is to be disregarded."


उन्नतप्रपदो गूढगुल्फः संवृतपार्ष्णिकः ।
पीनजङ्घः श्लिष्टजानुः स्थूलोरुः प्रोन्नमत्कटिः ॥ ३८॥


Shloka 142: Unnataprapada (उन्नतप्रपद)
पादाग्रे उन्नते यस्य सोन्नतप्रपदो मतः ॥ १४२ ॥
कूर्मपृष्ठसमाकारभाव औन्नत्यमीरितम् ।
He whose forepart of the foot is raised is considered Unnataprapada (The One with Raised Forefeet). The raised part is said to be shaped like a tortoise's back.
Shloka 143: Gūḍhagulpha (गूढगुल्फ)
पादमूलगतावस्थि-ग्रंथी आच्छादितौ यदि ॥ १४३ ॥
नोन्नतत्वेन दृश्येते गूढ-गुल्फस्तदोच्यते ।
If the bony knots (the ankle bones) at the base of his feet are covered and 
not visible as protrusions, he is then called Gūḍhagulpha (The One with Concealed Ankles).


Shloka 144: Saṃvṛttapārṣṇika (संवृत्तपार्ष्णिक)
गुल्फाधोभागयोर्मासपूर्त्या संवृत्तपा-ष्णिकः ॥१४४॥
He whose heel-portion is rounded due to fullness of flesh below 
the ankles is Saṃvṛttapārṣṇika (The One with Rounded Heels).


Shloka 145: Pīnajaṅgha (पीनजङ्घ) & Śliṣṭajānuka (श्लिष्टजानुक)
पिंडिके मांसले यस्य पीनजङ्घः स कथ्यते ।
जंघोरुसंधियुग्मं चेदस्पष्टं श्लिष्टजानुकः ॥१४५॥
He whose calves (Piṇḍikā) are fleshy is called Pīnajaṅgha (The One with Fleshy Calves). If the pair of joints between his calves and thighs are indistinct, he is Śliṣṭajānuka (The One with Indistinct Knees).


Shloka 146: Sthūloru (स्थूलोरु) & Pronnamatkaṭi (प्रोन्नमत्कटि)
स्थूलोरु-रूरुयुगुलं यस्य स स्मृतः ।
आनघोन्नमत्कटिर्यस्य स प्रोक्तः प्रोन्नमत्कटिः ॥ १४६ ॥
He who has a pair of thick thighs is remembered as Sthūloru (The One with Thick Thighs). He whose hips are prominently raised is declared as Pronnamatkaṭi (The One with Protruding Hips).


निम्ननाभिः स्थूलकुक्षिः पीनवक्षा बृहद्भुजः ।
पीनस्कन्धः कम्बुकण्ठो लम्बोष्ठो लम्बनासिकः ॥ ३९॥


Shloka 147: Nimnanābhi (निम्ननाभि), Sthūlakukṣi (स्थूलकुक्षि), Pīnavakṣā (पीनवक्षा), Vṛhadbhuja (बृहद्भुज)
गांभीर्यतो निम्ननाभिः स्थूलकुक्षिः पिचंडिलः।
व्यूढो-रस्कः पीनवक्षा आजानुत्वाद्वृहद्भुजः ॥ १४७॥
Due to his profundity, he is Nimnanābhi (The One with a Deep Navel). He is Sthūlakukṣi (The Large-Bellied One). He is Pīnavakṣā (The Full-Breasted One). Because his arms reach his knees, he is Vṛhadbhuja (The Long-Armed One).






Shloka 148: Pīnaskandha (पीनस्कंध) & Kambukaṇṭha (कम्बुकण्ठ)
पीनस्कंधो मांसलांसः कम्बुकण्ठोऽनकंधरः ।
वलित्रितयसंयुक्तः कण्ठो यस्य स कीर्तितः ॥१४८॥
He is Pīnaskandha (The Broad-Shouldered One). He is Kambukaṇṭha (The One with a Conch-Neck), whose neck is adorned with three folds.


Shloka 149: Lamboṣṭha (लम्बोष्ठ) & Lambanāsika (लम्बनासिक)
लंबमानाधरोष्ठत्वाल्लं बोष्ठः स्याङ्गजा-ननः ।
शुण्डादण्डो लंबमानो यस्यासौ लम्बनासिकः ॥१४९॥
Because his lower lip is hanging down, the elephant-faced one (Aṅgajānana) is Lamboṣṭha (The Long-Lipped One). He whose trunk (Śuṇḍādaṇḍa) is hanging down is Lambanāsika (The Long-Nosed One).


भग्नवामरदस्तुङ्गसव्यदन्तो महाहनुः ।
ह्रस्वनेत्रत्रयः शूर्पकर्णो निबिडमस्तकः ॥ ४०॥


Shloka 150: Bhagnavāmarada (भग्नवामरद) & Tuṅgasavyadanta (तुङ्गसव्यदन्त)
भग्नवामरदो यस्य छिन्नाग्रो बामदन्तकः ।
दन्तोऽस्य दक्षिणस्तुंगः सव्यदन्तो यदुन्नतः ॥ १५० ॥
He whose left tusk is broken is Bhagnavāmarada (The One with a Broken Left Tusk). He whose right tusk is lofty and raised is Tuṅgasavyadanta (The One with a Lofty Right Tusk).


Shloka 151: Mahāhannu (महाहनु)
कपोलपरभा-गस्य महत्त्वेन महाहनुः ।
गजस्य यादृशं वक्रं तद्योग्यपरि-माणकम् ॥१५१॥
Due to the largeness of the posterior part of his cheeks, he is Mahāhannu (The Large-Jawed One). 
(His face is) curved like an elephant's and of a fitting proportion.


Shloka 152: Hrasvanetra (ह्रस्वनेत्र) & Śūrpakarṇa (शूर्पकर्ण)
न लोचनमनेनासौ ह्रस्वनेत्रत्रयः स्मृतः ।
यस्य शूर्पाकृती कर्णौ शूर्पकर्णः स उच्यते ॥ १५२ ॥
He is not (just) a being with (two) eyes; he is remembered as Hrasvanetra (The Three-Small-Eyed One). He whose ears are winnowing-basket-shaped (śūrpākṛtī) is called Śūrpakarṇa (The Winnowing-Basket-Eared One).


स्तबकाकारकुम्भाग्रो रत्नमौलिर्निरङ्कुशः ।
सर्पहारकटीसूत्रः सर्पयज्ञोपवीतवान् ॥ ४१॥


Shloka 153: Nibiḍamastaka (निबिडमस्तक) & Stabakākāra-kumbhāgra (स्तबकाकारकुम्भाग्र)
घन-त्वादतिकाठिन्यान्मूर्भो निबिडमस्तकः ।
स्तबकाकारकुंभाग्रो गुच्छोपमशिरोञ्चलः ॥ १५३ ॥
Due to its density and great hardness, his head is Nibiḍamastaka (The Dense-Headed One). The front of his temple is shaped like a flower-cluster, hence He is Stabakākāra-kumbhāgra (The One whose Temple-Front is like a Flower-Cluster).


Shloka 154: Ratnamaulī (रत्नमौलि) & Niraṅkuśa (निरंकुश)
रत्नोत्कीर्णकिरीटाढ्यो रत्नमौलिरुदीरितः ।
कुंभयोरंकुशा-स्पर्शात्स्वातंत्र्याद्वा निरंकुशः ॥ १५४ ॥
Adorned with a crown engraved with jewels, he is declared as Ratnamaulī (The Jewel-Crowned One). Because the goad (Aṅkuśa) touches his temples, or due to his absolute independence, he is Niraṅkuśa (The Unrestrained One).


सर्पकोटीरकटकः सर्पग्रैवेयकाङ्गदः ।
सर्पकक्षोदराबन्धः सर्पकक्ष्योदराबन्ध: ॥ ४२॥


Shloka 155: Sarpahāra-kaṭisūtra (सर्पहारकटिसूत्र), Sarpayajñopavītavān (सर्पयज्ञोपवीतवान्) & Sarpakoṭīra-kaṭaka (सर्पकोटीरकटक)
सर्पहारकटीसूत्रः सर्पयज्ञोपवीतवान् ।
सर्पकोटीरकटकः सर्पों यन्मौलिकंकणे ॥ १५५ ॥
He who wears serpents as his garland and his girdle is Sarpahāra-kaṭisūtra (The One with Serpents as His Garland and Girdle). He who has a serpent as his sacred thread is Sarpayajñopavītavān (The One with a Serpent Sacred Thread). He who wears serpents as his crown and his bracelets is Sarpakoṭīra-kaṭaka (The One with Serpents as His Diadem and Bracelets).


Shloka 156: Sarpagrāiveyakāṅgada (सर्पग्रैवेयकाङ्गद) & Sarpakakṣyodarābandha (सर्पकक्ष्योदराबन्ध)
सर्पात्मकण्ठदोर्भूषः सर्पग्रैवेयकांगदः ।
लक्ष्या च कटि-बंधाख्या कक्ष्याबंधश्च पन्नगौ ॥१५६॥
He who wears serpents as his necklace and his armlets is Sarpagrāiveyakāṅgada (The One with Serpents as His Necklace and Armlets). He for whom the two serpents known as the waist-girdle and the hip-girdle are visible is Sarpakakṣyodarābandha (The One with Serpents as His Girdle and Belly-Band).


Shloka 157: Sarpottarīyaka (सर्पोत्तरीयक)
यस्यासाते सर्पकक्ष्यो-दराबन्धः स कीर्तितः ।
'उदराबंध' इति दैर्ध्यमार्षमिति प्राञ्चः ।
सोत्तरीयो वासुकिना सर्पराजोत्तरीयकः ॥ १५७ ॥
He for whom these serpent ornaments are present is celebrated as such. (The commentator notes that previous scholars interpreted 'Udarābandha' based on its literal length). He who has the serpent-king Vāsuki as his upper garment is Sarpottarīyaka (The One with a Serpent-Shawl).


रक्तो रक्ताम्बरधरो रक्तमालाविभूषणः ।
रक्तेक्षणो रक्तकरो रक्तताल्वोष्ठपल्लवः ॥ ४३॥


Shloka 158: Raktaḥ (रक्तः), Raktāmbaradharaḥ (रक्ताम्बरधरः), Raktamālāvibhūṣaṇaḥ (रक्तमालाविभूषणः), Rakteṣaṇaḥ (रक्तेक्षणः), Raktakaraḥ (रक्तकरः) & Raktatālvoṣṭhapallavaḥ (रक्तताल्वोष्ठपल्लवः)
रक्तः कान्त्या वस्त्रमाल्य भूषादृक्करतालुना।
ओष्ठा-ग्रस्य च शोणत्वान्नामभिः पंचभिः स्तुतः ॥ १५८ ॥
He is praised by five names indicating a red hue: He is Raktaḥ (The Red One) due to his splendor, Raktāmbaradharaḥ (The Red-Robed One) due to his garments, Raktamālāvibhūṣaṇaḥ (The One Adorned with a Red Garland) due to his garland, Rakteṣaṇaḥ (The Red-Eyed One) due to his eyes, Raktakaraḥ (The Red-Handed One) due to the palms of his hands, and Raktatālvoṣṭhapallavaḥ (The One with a Red Palate and Lips) due to his palate and the tips of his lips.


श्वेतः श्वेताम्बरधरः श्वेतमालाविभूषणः ।
श्वेतातपत्ररुचिरः श्वेतचामरवीजितः ॥ ४४॥


Shloka 159: Śvetaḥ (श्वेतः), Śvetāmbaradharaḥ (श्वेताम्बरधरः), Śvetamālāvibhūṣaṇaḥ (श्वेतमालाविभूषणः), Śvetātapatraruciraḥ (श्वेतातपत्ररुचिरः) & Śvetacāmaravījitaḥ (श्वेतचामरवीजितः)
विद्याकामादिभिर्येयं रूपं बोधयितुं पुनः ।
प्रवृत्तं श्वेत इत्यादि स्पष्टार्थ नामपंचकम् ॥ १५९ ॥
In order to indicate again that form (which bestows) knowledge, desires, etc., the five names beginning with Śveta are employed; their meaning is clear. They are: Śvetaḥ (The White One), Śvetāmbaradharaḥ (The White-Robed One), Śvetamālāvibhūṣaṇaḥ (The One Adorned with a White Garland), Śvetātapatraruciraḥ (The One Resplendent with a White Canopy), and Śvetacāmaravījitaḥ (The One Fanned with a White Chowrie).


सर्वावयवसम्पूर्णसर्वलक्षणलक्षितः ।
सर्वाभरणशोभाढ्यः सर्वशोभासमन्वितः ॥ ४५॥


Shloka 160: Sarvāvayavasampūrṇa-sarvalakṣaṇalakṣitaḥ (सर्वावयवसम्पूर्णसर्वलक्षणलक्षितः)
सर्वागेषु समुद्रोक्तलक्षणैः पूरणादयम् ।
सर्वावयवसंपूर्ण-सर्वलक्षणलक्षितः ॥ १६० ॥
Because all his limbs are filled with all the characteristics mentioned in the scriptures, he is Sarvāvayavasampūrṇa-sarvalakṣaṇalakṣitaḥ (The One with All Limbs Complete and Endowed with All Auspicious Marks).


Shloka 161: Sarvābharaṇaśobhākhya (सर्वाभरणशोभाख्य) & Sarvaśobhā-samanvita (सर्वशोभासमन्वित)
सर्वाभरणशोभाख्योऽ-लंकारालंकृतत्वतः ।
लावण्याख्याङ्गकान्त्याढ्यः सर्वशोभा-समन्वितः ॥ १६१ ॥
He is called Sarvābharaṇaśobhākhya (The One whose Splendor is his Every Ornament) because he is adorned by ornaments. He is Sarvaśobhā-samanvita (The One United with All Splendor) because he is full of the beauty known as loveliness (Lāvaṇya) of limb.


सर्वमङ्गलमाङ्गल्यः सर्वकारणकारणम् ।
सर्वदैककरः शार्ङ्गी बीजपूरी गदाधरः ॥ ४६॥


Shloka 162: Sarvamaṅgalamāṅgalyaḥ (सर्वमङ्गलमाङ्गल्यः)
सर्वमंगलमांगल्यः शुभानां च शुभावहः ।
सर्वमंगला-ख्याया देव्या मंगलावह इति प्राञ्चः, तत्पक्षे आबन्तस्य पुंव-द्भावः केनेति विचार्यम् ।
सर्वस्य जगतो व्यक्तं परमाण्वादि-कारणम् ॥ १६२ ॥
He is the auspiciousness of all auspicious things and the bringer of all that is propitious. He is Sarvamaṅgalamāṅgalyaḥ (The Auspiciousness of All Auspiciousness). (The commentary discusses an alternate interpretation regarding the goddess Sarvamaṅgalā, concluding it is a subject for inquiry.)


Shloka 163: Sarvakāraṇakāraṇa (सर्वकारणकारण) & Sarvadaika-kara (सर्वदैककर)
सर्वदैककरः सर्व धत्ते मुख्यः करोऽस्य यत् ।
तेषामपि च हेतुत्वात् सर्वकारणकार-णम् ॥ १६३ ॥
He is Sarvadaika-kara — the one whose supreme, all-performing hand (or power) upholds and governs everything. Since he is the cause even of those causes, he is also Sarvakāraṇakāraṇa, the Cause of All causes.


Shloka 164: Śārṅgī (शार्ङ्गी)
शृंगोद्भवं धनुः शार्ङ्ग तद्वान् शाङ्गर्थथ नामभिः ।
दशभिदेश-हस्तस्यायुधान्यत्र गणेशितुः ॥ १६४ ॥
He is the one whose principal hand holds everything, always. The bow named Śārṅga, born from a horn, and he who holds it, is Śārṅgī (The Holder of the Śārṅga Bow). Here, the ten weapons in the ten directional hands of the Lord of Ganas are described by ten names.


इक्षुचापधरः शूली चक्रपाणिः सरोजभृत् ।
पाशी धृतोत्पलः शालिमञ्जरीभृत्स्वदन्तभृत् ॥ ४७॥


Shloka 165: Bījapūrī (बीजपूरी), Gadādharaḥ (गदाधरः), Ikṣucāpadharaḥ (इक्षुचापधरः), Śūlī (शूली), Cakrapāṇiḥ (चक्रपाणिः), Sarojabhṛt (सरोजभृत्), Pāśī (पाशी), Dhṛtotpalaḥ (धृतोत्पलः), Śālīmañjarībhṛt (शालीमञ्जरीभृत्) & Svadantabhṛt (स्वदन्तभृत्)
मातुलिंगं गदेक्षूत्थं धनुः शूलं सुदर्शनं ।
(शंख) पद्मप त्पलब्रीहिकणिशानि रदार्धकम् ॥ १६५ ॥
The ten weapons are: 1) Bījapūrī (The Holder of the Citron Fruit), 2) Gadādharaḥ (The Mace-Bearer), 3) Ikṣucāpadharaḥ (The Holder of the Sugarcane Bow), 4) Śūlī (The Trident-Bearer), 5) Cakrapāṇiḥ (The Discus-Bearer), 6) Sarojabhṛt (The Lotus-Bearer), 7) Pāśī (The Noose-Bearer), 8) Dhṛtotpalaḥ (The Blue Lotus-Bearer), 9) Śālīmañjarībhṛt (The Rice-Spike Bearer), and 10) Svadantabhṛt (The Holder of His Own Tusk).






A Scholarly Refutation
यत्तु प्राचा बीजा-पूरपदं दाडिमपरत्वेन व्याख्याय, इक्षुचापधरादि नामपंचकं मदनरुद्रविष्णुब्रह्मपरत्वेन व्याख्याय तदुत्तरनामद्वयं वर्षासु जलस्थलशोभाकरत्वाद्वरुणपरमेव व्याख्यातं, तदशभुजाया गणेशमूर्तेः 'बीजापूरगदेक्षुकार्मुकरुचा चक्राब्जपाशोत्पलव्रीह्य-ग्रस्वविषाणरत्न कलशप्रोद्यत्करांभोरुहः' इति ध्यानश्लोकस्थ-पदानां परशुरामकल्पसूत्रोक्तसांप्रदायिकार्थस्य स्वप्नेऽप्यश्रवणा-देवेत्युपेक्ष्यं ॥
However, what has been explained by previous commentators—interpreting 'Bījāpūra' as a pomegranate, and the five names beginning with 'Ikṣucāpadhara' (Holder of the Sugar-cane Bow) as referring to Madana, Rudra, Vishnu, and Brahma, and the next two names as referring to Varuṇa because he beautifies land and water in the rainy season—is to be disregarded. This is because they have never even heard in their dreams the traditional meaning found in the Paraśurāma-Kalpa-Sūtra for the words in the meditation verse describing the fourteen-armed Ganesha form: "He who holds in his lotus-hands the Bījāpūra (citron), mace, sugar-cane bow, discus, lotus, noose, blue-lotus, rice, a small tusk, a jewel, and a water-vessel..."


कल्पवल्लीधरो विश्वाभयदैककरो वशी ।
अक्षमालाधरो ज्ञानमुद्रावान् मुद्गरायुधः ॥ ४८॥


Shloka 166: 
अथ मंत्रांतरंगानां ध्याननामायुधान्यपि ।
सांकर्येण विनि-देंष्टुं नामान्यत्र त्रयोदश ॥ १६६ ॥
Now, in order to indicate collectively the names of the meditative forms, weapons, and other aspects intrinsic to the mantra, thirteen names are given here.


Shloka 167: Kalpavallīdharaḥ (कल्पवल्लीधरः) & Viśvābhayadaikakaraḥ (विश्वाभयदैककरः)
कल्पवल्लीधरः कल्प-लतां धत्ते करांबुजे ।
विश्वस्मादभयं धत्ते यस्य मुख्यः करः स तु ॥ १६७ ॥
महागणपतिर्विश्वाभयदैककरः स्मृतः ।
He holds the wish-fulfilling creeper in his lotus-hand and is Kalpavallīdharaḥ (The Holder of the Wish-fulfilling Creeper). He whose principal hand grants freedom from fear to the world is Viśvābhayadaikakaraḥ (The One whose Single Hand Gives Safety to the Universe).


Shloka 168: Vaśī (वशी)
वशेऽस्य विश्वं सर्वस्य वशीति श्रुतितो वशी ॥ १६८ ॥
The whole world is under his control; as the Śruti declares, he is Vaśī (The Supreme Controller) of all.
Shloka 169: Akṣamālādhara (अक्षमालाधर)
अकारादिक्षकारांतमातृकात्मकमालिका ।
उक्ताक्षमाला तद्धारी त्वक्षमालाधरो मतः ॥ १६९ ॥
The garland (Mālikā) consisting of the letters of the alphabet, from 'A' to 'Kṣa', is called the Akṣamālā (Rosary of Letters). He who bears that is considered Akṣamālādhara (The Bearer of the Rosary).


Shloka 170: Jñānamudrāvān (ज्ञानमुद्रावान्)
तर्जन्यंगुष्ठसंयोगो ज्ञान-मुद्रा हृदि स्थिताः ।
तादृशैककरो ज्ञानमुद्रावानिति कथ्यते ॥ १७० ॥
The joining of the index finger and the thumb is the Jñānamudrā (Gesture of Knowledge), and it is situated (symbolically) in the heart. He who has a single hand in such a gesture is called Jñānamudrāvān (The One Displaying the Gesture of Knowledge).


Shloka 171: Mudgarāyudha (मुद्गरायुध)
मुदं गिरंति यन्मत्रसाधनान्युरुबुन्नकं ।
मुसलं वायुधं यस्य स देवो मुद्गरायुधः ॥ १७१ ॥
He whose weapon (Āyudha) is a large, heavy club (Mudgara) that crushes (Giranti) the joy (Muda) of mantra-practices (of evil forces), is the Lord Mudgarāyudha (The One with the Club as his Weapon).


पूर्णपात्री कम्बुधरो विधृताङ्कुशमूलकः ।
मातुलिंगधरश्रूतकलिकाभृत् कुठारवान् ॥४९॥


Shloka 172: Pūrṇapātrī (पूर्णपात्री)
पूर्णपात्रं याज्ञिकेषु प्रसिद्धं तद्युतो मखः ।
यद्वा सुधा-घटयुतः पूर्णपात्रीति कीर्त्यते ॥ १७२ ॥
The Pūrṇapātra (Full Vessel) is well-known in Vedic rituals. He whose sacrifice is endowed with that, or he who holds a pot (Pātrī) full of nectar (Sudhā), is celebrated as Pūrṇapātrī (The One with the Full Vessel).


Shloka 173: Kambudhara (कंबुधर)
शंखस्य धारणा-द्धस्ते देवः कंबुधरः स्मृतः।
मद्यसंपुटकं धत्ते भृंगाणां संपुटायुते ॥ १७३ ॥
Because he holds a conch in his hand, the Lord is remembered as Kambudhara (The Conch-Bearer). He holds a casket of intoxicating perfume, which is a container for bees.
Shloka 174: Vidhṛtālisamudgakaḥ (विधृतालिसमुद्गकः), Mātuliṅgadharaḥ (मातुलिंगधरः) & Cūtakalikābhṛt (चूतकलिकाभृत्)
यो मदस्तं कटे धत्ते विधृतालिसमुद्ङ्गकः ।
बीजा-पूरफलं चाम्रमंजरीं च करे दधत् ॥ १७४ ॥
मातुलिंगधर-श्रुतकलिकाभृच्च कथ्यते ।
He who holds a casket of bees at his hip is Vidhṛtālisamudgakaḥ (The Bearer of the Bee-Casket). He who holds a citron fruit and a mango blossom in his hand is Mātuliṅgadharaḥ (The Holder of the Citron) and is also described as Cūtakalikābhṛt (The Holder of the Mango Blossom).


Shloka 175: Kuṭhāravān (कुठारवान्)
योगिज्ञानं केवलाख्यं कुठारं तस्य साक्ष्यसौ ।
ज्ञानार्थकात्तु शत्रंताद्धातोः सिद्धः कुठारवान् ।
'कुठारं केवले रत' इति हैमकोशः ॥ १७५ ॥
The knowledge of the Yogis, called "Kevala" (Absolute), is his axe (Kuṭhāra), and he is its witness. Alternatively, etymologically, from the root 'Śatṛ' (to know), the word 'Kuṭhāra' is derived, meaning "possessing an axe" (Kuṭhāravān). The Haima Kośa lexicon states, "Kuṭhāra is one who is devoted to the Absolute."


पुष्करस्थस्वर्णघटीपूर्णरत्नाभिवर्षकः ।
भारतीसुन्दरीनाथो विनायकरतिप्रियः ॥५०॥


Shloka 176: Puṣkarastha-svarṇaghaṭīpūrṇaratnābhivarṣakaḥ (पुष्करस्थस्वर्णघटीपूर्णरत्नाभिवर्षकः)
गुंडाग्रस्थ -स्वर्णकुंभपूर्णरत्नप्रदानतः ॥ १७६ ॥
पुष्कर स्थस्वर्णघटीपूर्णरत्नाभिवर्षकः ।
Because he gives from a golden pot full of jewels situated at the tip of his trunk, he is the one who showers jewels from a golden pot situated in Puṣkara (or from a lotus). Thus, He is Puṣkarastha-svarṇaghaṭīpūrṇaratnābhivarṣakaḥ (The One who Showers Jewels from a Golden Pot Situated in Puṣkara).


Shloka 177: Bhāratīsundarīnāthaḥ (भारतीसुंदरीनाथः)
भारतीसुंदरी-नाथो ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवात्मकः ॥ १७७ ॥
He is the Lord of Bhāratī-Sundarī (the goddess of speech and beauty) and is of the nature of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva. Thus, He is Bhāratīsundarīnāthaḥ (The Lord of Bhāratī-Sundarī).


Shloka 178: Vināyakaratipriya (विनायकरतिप्रियः)
लक्ष्मीवाचकमीकारं प्रश्लिष्यार्थोऽयमूह्यतां ।
विनायका ग्रहाः केचित्तैः सह क्रीडनं प्रियं ॥ १७८ ॥
पक्षिराजेन वाऽस्येति विनायकरतिप्रियः ।
The meaning of the word 'Lakṣmī' should be understood by joining it with the word 'Vācaka' (indicating). He finds delight (Rati) in playing with certain Vināyakas (Gana-deities) and Grahas (planetary deities), or with the king of birds (Garuḍa). Therefore, he is Vināyakaratipriya (The One who Finds Delight in the Vināyakas).


महालक्ष्मीप्रियतमः सिद्धलक्ष्मीमनोरमः ।
रमारमेशपूर्वाङ्गो दक्षिणोमामहेश्वरः ॥५१॥


Shloka 179: 
महालक्ष्मीसिद्धलक्ष्म्यावस्य द्वे वल्लभे इति ॥ १७९ ॥
For him, the two—Mahālakṣmī (the great goddess of prosperity) and Siddhalakṣmī (the goddess of spiritual accomplishment)—are his beloved (Vallabhe). Thus, he is Mahālakṣmīvallabha (The Beloved of Mahālakṣmī) and Siddhalakṣmīvallabha (The Beloved of Siddhalakṣmī).
Shloka 180: Mahālakṣmīpriyatama (महालक्ष्मीप्रियतम) & Siddhalakṣmīmanorama (सिद्धलक्ष्मीमनोरम)
महालक्ष्मीप्रियतमः सिद्धलक्ष्मीमनोरमः ।
अथ नामचतुष्केन देवस्यावरणात्मिकाः ॥ १८० ॥
He is the most beloved (Priyatama) of Mahālakṣmī and the delightful one (Manorama) to Siddhalakṣmī. Now, with the next four names, (are described) the deities constituting his protective enclosure (Āvaraṇa).


Shloka 181: Rāmārameśa-pūrvāṅgaḥ (रमारमेशपूर्वाङ्गः), Dakṣiṇomāmaheśvaraḥ (दक्षिणोमामहेश्वरः), Mahīvarāha-vāmāṅgaḥ (महीवराहवामाङ्गः) & Ratikandarpa-paścimaḥ (रतिकन्दर्पपश्चिमः)
प्राच्याम-वाच्यां चोदीच्यां प्रतीच्यां च स्थिताः क्रमात् ।
रमादामोदरौ गौरीशंकरौ भूमिसूकरौ ॥ १८१ ॥
रतिमाराविति द्वंद्वदेवताः कीर्तिताः स्फुटाः ।
Situated in the East, South, North, and West respectively are the divine pairs. 
* He who is the eastern pair, Rāma (Lakṣmī) and Rameśa (Viṣṇu), is Rāmārameśa-pūrvāṅgaḥ (The One whose Eastern Form is Lakṣmī and Viṣṇu). 
* He who is the southern pair, Umā and Maheśvara (Pārvatī and Śiva), is Dakṣiṇomāmaheśvaraḥ (The One whose Southern Form is Pārvatī and Śiva). 
* He who is the northern pair, Mahī (Earth) and Varāha, is Mahīvarāha-vāmāṅgaḥ (The One whose Northern Form is the Earth and Varāha). 
* He who is the western pair, Rati and Kandarpa (Kāma), is Ratikandarpa-paścimaḥ (The One whose Western Form is Rati and Kāma).


महीवराहवामाङ्गो रतिकन्दर्पपश्चिमः ।
आमोदमोदजननः सम्प्रमोदप्रमोदनः ॥५२॥
समेधितसमृद्धश्रीऋद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः ।
दत्तसौमुख्यसुमुखः कांतिकंदलिताश्रयः ॥५३॥


Shloka 183: Āmodamodajananah (आमोदमोदजननः), Sampramodapramodanaḥ (सम्प्रमोदप्रमोदनः), Samedhitasamṛddhiśrīḥ (समेधितसमृद्धिश्रीः) & Ṛddhisiddhipravartakaḥ (ऋद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः)
छंदोवशादक्रमेण प्रोक्ता द्वादशनामभिः ।
ऋद्ध्यामोदौ समृद्धि-प्रमोदौ च मिथुनी उभे ॥१८३॥
Through metrical arrangement, twelve names are presented. Ṛddhi and Āmoda form the first divine couple; Samṛddhi and Pramoda form the second. He who generates the delight of Āmoda is Āmodamodajananah (The Generator of Delight). He who causes great joy (Pramoda) is Sampramodapramodanaḥ (The Causer of Great Joy). He whose glory is increased by prosperity is Samedhitasamṛddhiśrīḥ (The One whose Splendor is Enhanced by Prosperity). He who sets in motion (bestows) Ṛddhi and Siddhi is Ṛddhisiddhipravartakaḥ (The Initiator of Prosperity and Accomplishment).


Shloka 184: Dattasaumukhyasumukhaḥ (दत्तसौमुख्यसुमुखः), Kāntikaṇḍalitāśrayaḥ (कांतिकंदलिताश्रयः), Madanāvatyāśritāṅghriḥ (मदनावत्याश्रिताङ्घ्रिः), Kṛtavaimukhyadurmukhaḥ (कृतवैमुख्यदुर्मुखः), Vighnasampallavopaghnaḥ (विघ्नसम्पल्लवोपघ्नः), Sarvonnatamadadravaḥ (सर्वोन्नतमदद्रवः), Vighnakṛnnimnacaraṇaḥ (विघ्नकृन्निम्नचरणः) & Drāviṇīśaktisatkṛtaḥ (द्राविणीशक्तिसत्कृतः)
सुमुखः कांतिरित्येकं दुर्मुखो मदनावती मदद्रवेत्येकं ।
विघ्नो विघ्नकृद्राविणीति च ॥१८४॥
Sumukha and Kānti constitute one pair. Durmukha and Madanāvatī form another. Madadravā is paired with Vighna; Vighnakṛt is joined with Drāviṇī. He who, being gracious (Sumukha), has bestowed benevolence is Dattasaumukhyasumukhaḥ (The Benevolent One who has Bestowed Grace). He who is the refuge of unfolding splendor (Kānti) is Kāntikaṇḍalitāśrayaḥ (The Abode of Unfolding Splendor). He at whose feet Madanāvatī has taken refuge is Madanāvatyāśritāṅghriḥ (The One at whose Feet Madanāvatī has Taken Refuge). He who has made Durmukha (The Ill-Faced One) turn away is Kṛtavaimukhyadurmukhaḥ (The One who Caused Durmukha to Turn Away). He who destroys the very sprout of obstacles is Vighnasampallavopaghnaḥ (The Destroyer of the Sprout of Obstacles). He whose intoxicating power flows forth, elevating all, is Sarvonnatamadadravaḥ (The One from whom the Intoxicating Power that Elevates All Flows). He whose feet are bowed to by Vighnakṛt (The Obstacle-Creator) is Vighnakṛnnimnacaraṇaḥ (The One whose Feet are Bowed to by the Obstacle-Creator). He who is honored by the power of Drāviṇī (The Melting One) is Drāviṇīśaktisatkṛtaḥ (The One Honored by the Power of Drāviṇī).


Verse 185 — The Role of Āmoda, Pramoda, and Samṛddhi
आमोदं मोदयत्येष प्रमोदस्य प्रमोदनैः ।
सहितश्च समृद्ध्या श्रीरनेनैवाभिवर्धिता ॥ १८५ ॥
He (Ganesha) brings forth joy through Āmoda, and delights Pramoda with his own delight-giving acts.
United with Samṛddhi, the goddess Śrī (Fortune) is enhanced and expanded by him alone.


Verse 186 — Siddhi’s Activity and the Grace of Sumukha
ऋद्धिदेव्यां स्थिता सिद्धिः प्रवर्तयति चाप्यसौ ।
सुमुखः स्वेषु सौमुख्यं यत्प्रसादात् प्रतिच्छति ॥ १८६॥
Siddhi, who dwells within the goddess Ṛddhi, is set into action by him. And Sumukha (the Auspicious-Faced One) receives his beauty and charm through the grace of Ganesha.


मदनावत्याश्रिताङ्घ्रिः कृतवैमुख्यदुर्मुखः ।
विघ्नसम्पल्लवः पद्मः सर्वोन्नतमदद्रवः ॥५४॥


Verse 187 — Kānti, Madanāvatī, and Durmukha’s Nature
यद्वशादाश्रयः कांतेर्देव्या अंकुरितोऽभवत् ।
धृतवान् मदनावत्या दौर्मुख्यं दुर्मुखे स्थितं ॥ १८७॥
By his power, the supporting essence of the goddess Kānti (Splendor) emerged into manifestation.
And through Madanāvatī, Durmukha sustains the harsh and fierce quality
that abides naturally within him.


Verse 188 — The Cutting of Obstacles and Protective Power
कृत्तं छिन्नमनेनैव सम्यग्विघ्नस्य पल्लवः ।
विस्तारस्तस्य चोपघ्न आश्रयो यस्य सेवने ॥१८८॥
By him alone, the tender shoots of obstacles are properly cut down and severed. For the one who takes refuge in his worship, the growth of opposing forces diminishes.


विघ्नकृन्निम्नचरणो द्राविणीशक्तिसत्कृतः ।
तीव्राप्रसन्ननयनो ज्वालिनीपालितैकदृक् ॥५५॥
मोहिनीमोहनो भोगदायिनीकान्तिमण्डनः ।
कामिनीकान्तवक्त्रश्रीरधिष्ठितवसुन्धरः ॥५६॥


Verse 189 — Madadravā and the Devotional Submission of Vighnakṛt
उन्निद्रानलसैवास्ते देवी नान्ना मदद्रवा ।
भक्त्या विघ्नकृतोऽधीने यस्य तञ्चरणांबुजे ॥ १८९॥
The goddess Madadravā remains ever-alert and never sluggish. And Vighnakṛt (the Remover of Obstacles) becomes submissive through devotion to the one devoted to his lotus-feet.




A Final Scholarly Refutation
यत्त्वत्र-प्राचां षोडशसु नामस्वर्थांतरवर्णनं पाठांतरावलंबनं, उपन्नपदे विसर्गापलापनेनोद्राविणीति पदकल्पनादिना च, कचिन्नामैक्य-करणं च, तत्सर्वमसांप्रदायिकत्वात् परशुरामकृत कल्पसूत्रा-दिविरोधाच्च मनसापि न स्मर्तव्यम् ।
However, whatever has been done by previous commentators here regarding these sixteen names—such as describing different meanings, relying on alternate readings, inventing the word 'Udrāviṇī' by dropping the Visarga in 'Upanṇa', and sometimes combining names into one—all of that, being non-traditional and contradicting texts like the Paraśurāma-Kalpa-Sūtra, should not be remembered even in the mind.


Shloka 190: Ṣaḍdiś (षड्दिश्)
अथ नामानि षट् प्राह षड्डिस्तीत्रादिशक्तिभिः ॥१९०॥
Now, he proclaims six names, (related to) the six directions, with the powers like Tīvrā, etc.


Shloka 191: Tīvrāprasannanayanaḥ (तीव्राप्रसन्ननयनः) & Jvālinīpālitāikadṛk (ज्वालिनीपालितैकदृक्)
तीव्रायां यस्य नयने प्रसाद-पिशुनेक्षणे ।
ज्वालिन्या रक्षणे मुख्या यदृष्टिर्मोहिनीमपि ॥ १९१ ॥
He on whom the gaze of Tīvrā, whose eyes are keen with grace, falls is Tīvrāprasannanayanaḥ (The One with the Graciously Keen Gaze of Tīvrā). He whose single gaze is protected by the principal gaze of Jvālinī is Jvālinīpālitāikadṛk (The One whose Gaze is Protected by Jvālinī).


Shloka 192: Mohinīmohanaḥ (मोहिनीमोहनः) & Bhogadāyinīkāntimaṇḍanaḥ (भोगदायिनीकान्तिमण्डनः)
यो मोहयति तस्मै श्रीगणाधिपतये नमः ।
त्वं भोगदायिनी शक्तेः कान्त्या मंडितपादुकः ॥ १९२ ॥
Salutations to that glorious Lord of Ganas who bewilders even Mohinī (the enchantress); He is Mohinīmohanaḥ (The Bewilderer of even Mohinī). "You are Bhogadāyinī (The Bestower of Enjoyment)," (saying this) the power of his splendor adorns his footwear; thus He is Bhogadāyinīkāntimaṇḍanaḥ (The One Adorned by the Splendor of Bhogadāyinī).