Shloka 74: Sarvanetrādhivāsaka (सर्वनेत्राधिवास:)
सर्वनेत्रेषु वसति य एष क्षीणपूरुषः ।
एष आत्मेति वचनात् सर्वनेत्राधिवासकः ॥ ७४ ॥
This being, who is the Inner Controller (Kṣīṇapuruṣa), dwells in all eyes. Because of the Vedic statement, "This is the Self," he is Sarvanetrādhivāsaka (The One who Resides in All Eyes).


Shloka 75: Vīrāsanāśraya (वीरासनाश्रय)
वामजानूपरिगतदक्षपादोपवे-शनं ।
वीरासनं तथा स्थानादेष वीरासनाश्रयः ॥ ७५ ॥
The posture where the left heel is placed at the base and the right foot is placed upon it (for meditation) is called the Vīrāsana. Because he remains in that posture, he is Vīrāsanāśraya (The One Seated in the Hero's Pose).


Shloka 76: Pītāmbara (पीतांबर) & Khaṇḍarada (खण्डरद)
निपीतं गगनं येन यस्य पीतोऽथ वा पटः ।
स तु पीतांबरः खण्डरदो दन्तार्धधारणात् ॥ ७६ ॥
He by whom the sky is consumed, or he who wears a yellow (Pīta) garment (Paṭa), is Pītāmbara (The Yellow-Robed One). He is Khaṇḍarada (The One with a Broken Tusk) because he holds (only) half (Ardha) of a tusk (Danta).


चित्राङ्गः श्यामदशनो भालचन्द्रो हविर्भुजः ।
योगाधिपस्तारकस्थः पुरुषो गजकर्णकः ॥ २०॥


Shloka 77: Citrāṅkaśyāmadaśana (चित्रांकश्यामदशन) & Bhālacandra (भालचन्द्र)
अर्धचन्द्रं दधन्मूर्भा खण्डेन्दुकृतशेखरः ।
श्यामैकप्रचुरैश्चित्रैरंकिते रदने सति ॥ ७७ ॥
चित्रां-कश्यामदशन इत्येवं स्तूयसे बुधैः।
भालचन्द्र इति ख्यातो भाले चंद्रस्य धारणात् ॥ ७८ ॥
He who bears the half-moon on his forehead, making it his crest jewel; 
he whose teeth are marked with various and distinct black lines
—is praised by the wise as Citrāṅkaśyāmadaśana (The One with Uniquely Marked, Dark Teeth). 
He is famous as Bhālacandra (The One with the Moon on his Forehead) 
because he wears the moon (Candra) on his forehead (Bhāla).


Shloka 79: Aṣṭamīcandra (अष्टमीचंद्र) & Caturbhuja (चतुर्भुज)
अष्टमीचंद्रसदृशं ललाटं यस्य सोऽथवा ।
चत्वारो बाहवो यस्य विग्रहे स चतुर्भुजः ॥ ७९ ॥
He whose forehead resembles the moon on the eighth lunar day (Aṣṭamīcandra), or he who has four arms in his form, is Caturbhuja (The Four-Armed One).


Shloka 80: Yogādhipa (योगाधिप)
योगाचार्यावतारा ये लैंगेऽष्टाविंशतिः स्मृताः ।
लकुलीशादयस्तत्तद्रूपो योगाधिपो मतः ॥ ८० ॥
The twenty-eight incarnations of Yoga teachers, like Lakulīśa, are remembered in the Liṅga Purāṇa. Since he assumes all those forms, he is considered Yogādhipa (The Lord of Yoga).


Shloka 81: Tārakastha (तारकस्थ) & Puruṣa (पुरुष)
प्रणवेना-भिषेयत्वात् तारकस्थ इति स्मृतः ।
पूर्षु सर्वासु शेतेऽसौ साक्षित्वेनेति पूरुषः ॥ ८१ ॥
He is remembered as Tārakastha (Established in the Liberating Syllable, Oṁ) because he is to be anointed/worshipped with the Praṇava (Oṁ). He is Puruṣa (The Supreme Being) because he "reposes" in all bodies as the witness.


गणाधिराजो विजयः स्थिरो गजपतिर्ध्वजी ।
देवदेवः स्मरः प्राणदीपको वायुकीलकः ॥ २१॥




Shloka 82: Gajakarṇaka (गजकर्णक) & Gaṇādhīrāja (गणाधिराज)
यस्य कर्णौ गजस्येव तेनासौ गजकर्णकः ।
आधीयंते यत्र काव्ये गणा मेयरसादयः ॥ ८२ ॥
गणा-धिराजस्तेनासौ राजते प्रतिपाद्यते ।
He whose ears are like those of an elephant is therefore Gajakarṇaka (The Elephant-Eared One). He in whom the "hosts" (Gaṇas)—such as the measurable elements (Meya) and the aesthetic sentiments (Rasa)—are established in poetry (Kāvya), is proclaimed as Gaṇādhīrāja (The Supreme King of Hosts).


Shloka 83: Vijayasthira (विजयस्थिर)
भक्तानां विजये स्थैर्ये शालित्वाद् विजयस्थिरः ॥ ८३ ॥
He is Vijayasthira (The Steady One in Victory) because he excels in granting victory and steadfastness to his devotees.


Shloka 84: Gajapatidhvajī (गजपतिध्वजी) & Devadeva (देवदेव)
गजेंद्राढ्यो ध्वजोऽस्येति मतो गजपतिध्वजी ।
देवदेवो वासवादिदैवतैरप्युपास्यते ॥ ८४ ॥
He is considered Gajapatidhvajī (The One with the Elephant-Lord on his Banner) because his banner is marked with a mighty elephant. He is Devadeva (The God of Gods) because he is worshipped even by deities like Vāsava (Indra).


Shloka 85: Smaraprāṇadīpaka (स्मरप्राणदीपक)
रुद्रेण दग्धदेहोऽपि प्राणानुज्जीवयन्नयम् ।
मन्मथस्य स्मरप्राणदीपकत्वेन कीर्त्यते ॥ ८५ ॥
Although his body was burnt by Rudra (Shiva), he revived him (the love-god, Manmatha). Therefore, he is celebrated as Smaraprāṇadīpaka (The Restorer of Life to Smara/Manmatha).


विपश्चिद्वरदो नादो नादभिन्नमहाचलः ।
वराहरदनो मृत्युञ्जयो व्याघ्राजिनाम्बरः ॥ २२ ॥


Shloka 86: Vāyukīlaka (वायुकीलक) & Vipraścidvarada (विपश्चिद्वरद)
नवद्वारि तनौ प्राणान् स्तंभयन् वायुकीलकः ।
राज्ञे विपश्चिदाख्याय चतुर्वा त्रीन् वरं ददत् ॥८६॥
अग्नया-त्मना त्वं वासिष्ठो विपश्चिद्वरदः स्मृतः ।
He is Vāyukīlaka (The One who Restrains the Wind) because he arrests the vital breaths (Prāṇa) in the body with its nine doors. He is remembered as Vipraścidvarada (The Boon-Giver to the Wise Vipraścit) because, in the form of Agni (fire), he granted three or four boons to the wise king Vipraścit.


Shloka 87: Nādonnāda (नादोन्नाद) & Bhinnabalāhaka (भिन्नबलाहक)
अल्पनादैर्महानादै-रपि येन विदारिताः ।
मेघाः स कथ्यते नादोन्नाद-भिन्नबलाहकः ॥ ८७ ॥
He by whom the clouds were torn asunder with both subtle and thunderous sounds (Nāda and Unnāda), is called Nādonnāda (The Source of Sound and Thunder) and Bhinnabalāhaka (The Splitter of Clouds).


Shloka 88: Varāhadaṃṣṭrā (वराहदंष्ट्रा) & Śobhājit (शोभाजित्)
वराहदंष्ट्राशोभाजिदेकदंतविराजितः ॥८८॥
He is adorned (Śobhājit) with tusks like those of a boar (Varāhadaṃṣṭrā) and splendid with his single tusk (Ekadanta).


Shloka 89: Varāharadana (वराहरदन) & Mṛtyuñjaya (मृत्युंजय)
इति भाष्यपुराणोक्तेर्वराहरदनो मतः ।
कालमृत्युं प्रमादं वा हरन् मृत्युंजयो मतः ॥ ८९ ॥
According to the statements of the Puranas and this commentary, he is considered Varāharadana (The Boar-Tusked One). He is considered Mṛtyuñjaya (The Conqueror of Death) because he removes (Haran) Time-Death (Kāla-Mṛtyu) or negligence (Pramāda).


Shloka 90: Vyāghrājināmbara (व्याघ्राजिनांबर)
प्रमादं वा मृत्युमहं ब्रवी-मीति तु भारतात् ।
वस्ते शार्दूलचर्मेति स्मृतो व्याघ्राजि-नांबरः ॥ ९० ॥
As stated in the Mahābhārata, "I declare myself to be death and negligence." He is remembered as Vyāghrājināmbara (The One Clad in a Tiger's Skin) because he wears the hide of a tiger (Śārdūla-carma).


इच्छाशक्तिभवो देवत्राता दैत्यविमर्दनः ।
शम्भुवक्त्रोद्भवः शम्भुकोपहा शम्भुहास्यभूः ॥ २३॥






Shloka 91: Icchāśaktidhara (इच्छाशक्तिधर) & Devatrāta (देवत्रात)
जगत्सिसृक्षाधारित्वात् इच्छाशक्तिधरो मतः । 
देव-नाताऽखिलान्देवांस्त्रायते दैत्यजाद्भयात् ॥ ९१ ॥
He is considered Icchāśaktidhara (The Holder of the Power of Will) because he is the basis for the desire to create the universe. He is Devatrāta (The Protector of the Gods) because he protects (Trāyate) all the gods from the fear born of demons.


Shloka 92: Daityavimardana (दैत्यविमर्दन) & Śivānanāt (शिवाननात्)
अत एव हरन् देवरिपून् दैत्यविमर्दनः ।
शंभुवक्त्रोद्भवो योऽयम-वतीर्णः शिवाननात् ॥ ९२ ॥
For this very reason, he is Daityavimardana (The Crusher of Demons) as he destroys the enemies of the gods. He is the one who originated from the mouth of Shambhu (Shiva) and descended from Shiva's face.


Shloka 93: Śambhukopahā (शंभुकोपहा) & Śambhuhāsya (शंभुहास्य)
पितुः क्रोधं हरन् बाल-लीलाभिः शंभुकोपहा ।
अज्ञवत् कतिचित् क्रीडाः कुर्वाणः शंसुहास्यभूः ॥ ९३ ॥
He is Śambhukopahā (The Remover of Shambhu's Anger) as he removes the anger of his father (Shiva) through his childish plays. He is Śambhuhāsya (The Cause of Shambhu's Laughter) as, by performing some playful acts like an ignorant child, he becomes the reason for Shiva's laughter.


शम्भुतेजाः शिवाशोकहारी गौरीसुखावहः ।
उमाङ्गमलजो गौरीतेजोभूः स्वर्धुनीभवः ॥ २४॥


Shloka 94: Śambhutejā (शंभुतेजा)
शंभुतेजा इति प्रोक्तः शिवतेजोऽस्ति यस्य सः ।
महिषादि-हतौ भग्नोत्साहायावर्धयन् बलम् ॥ ९४ ॥
He is proclaimed as Śambhutejā (The Splendor of Shambhu) because Shiva's splendor exists in him. He increased the strength of the gods when their enthusiasm was broken after being slain by (demons like) Mahisha.


Shloka 95: Dākṣāyaṇyaśokahā (दाक्षायण्याशोकहा) & Gaurīsukhāvaha (गौरीसुखावह)
दाक्षायण्याः शिवा-शोकहारीति परिगीयते ।
हर्ष गौर्यास्तपस्यंत्याः कुर्वन् गौरीसुखावहः ॥ ९५ ॥
He is celebrated in songs as Dākṣāyaṇyaśokahā (The Remover of the Sorrow of Dākṣāyaṇī, i.e., Parvati). He is Gaurīsukhāvaha (The Bringer of Joy to Gaurī) as he creates joy for Gaurī (Parvati) while she was performing penance.


Shloka 96: Umāṅgamalaja (उमाङ्गमलज)
निजांगोद्वर्तनोत्थेन मलेन प्रति-मामुमा ।
चक्रे तदंतः प्रविशन् उमाङ्गमलजो मतः ॥ ९६ ॥
With the dirt (Mala) arising from rubbing her own body, Uma (Parvati) created an image (of a child). He, entering into that image, is considered Umāṅgamalaja (Born from the Dirt of Uma's Body).


Shloka 97: Gaurītejobhū (गौरीतेजोभू)
चंडिकाभूयमात्मानं विष्णुब्रह्मादितेजसाम् ।
आधारत्वादसौ गौरीतेजोभूरिति कथ्यते ॥ ९७ ॥
Having assumed the form of Caṇḍikā, and being the support of the splendor of Vishnu, Brahma, and others, he is called Gaurītejobhū (Become the Splendor of Gaurī).


Shloka 98: Svardhanībhava (स्वर्धनीभव)
स्कन्दो गंगोद्भवस्तस्माद-भेदात् स्वर्धनीभवः ।
स्वर्धन्या उद्भवो यस्मादिति वा स्वर्धनीभवः ॥ ९८ ॥
Skanda (Kartikeya) was born from Gaṅgā. Due to non-difference from him (i.e., being one with his brother), Ganesha is Svardhanībhava (Born from Svadhānī/Gaṅgā). Or, he is so called because he was born from Svadhānī (another name for Parvati).


यज्ञकायो महानादो गिरिवर्ष्मा शुभाननः ।
सर्वात्मा सर्वदेवात्मा ब्रह्ममूर्धा ककुप्श्रुतिः ॥ २५॥


Shloka 99: Yajñakāya (यज्ञकाय) & Mahānāda (महानाद)
यज्ञकायोऽश्वमेधादिर्मखजातस्वरूपवान् ।
उच्चैस्तरां वषङ्कारोऽस्तुश्रौषड्येयजामहे ॥ ९९ ॥
आश्रावयेत्यादिरूपो महानाद इति स्मृतः ।
He is Yajñakāya (The One whose Body is Sacrifice) as his form is constituted by sacrifices like the Aśvamedha. He is remembered as Mahānāda (The Great Sound) because he is of the nature of the loud utterances "Vaṣaṭ," "Astu Śrauṣaṭ," "Yejāmabe," "Āśrāvaya," etc., (which are Vedic ritual calls).


Shloka 100: Girivarmā (गिरिवर्मा) & Śubhānana (शुभानन)
गिरिवर्माद्रयो यस्य विराजो देहतां गताः ॥ १०० ॥
मंगलनामानं प्राणं जनयन् स शुभाननः ।
The mountains, beginning with Girivarmā, have become the forms of his divine manifestations. Generating the life-force which is of an auspicious nature, he is Śubhānana (The Auspicious-Faced One).


Shloka 101: Sarvātmā (सर्वात्मा)
सर्वात्माऽप्येष सर्व खल्विदं ब्रह्मेति तु श्रुतेः ॥ १०१ ॥
He is also Sarvātmā (The Soul of All) because, as the Śruti says, "All this is indeed Brahman."


Shloka 102: Sarvadevātmā (सर्वदेवात्मा) & Brahmamūrdhā (ब्रह्ममूर्धा)
देहभूता यस्य सर्वदेवात्माखिलदेवताः ।
ब्रह्मव यस्य मूर्धा स ब्रह्ममूर्धेति कथ्यते ॥ १०२ ॥
He whose body consists of all the deities, who is the soul of all gods, is Sarvadevātmā (The Soul of All Gods). He whose head is Brahman, is called Brahmamūrdhā (The One whose Head is Brahman).


ब्रह्माण्डकुम्भश्चिद्व्योमभालःसत्यशिरोरुहः ।
जगज्जन्मलयोन्मेषनिमेषोऽग्न्यर्कसोमदृक् ॥ २६॥


Shloka 103: Brahmāṇḍakumbha (ब्रह्माण्डकुम्भ)
कर्णभूता दिशो यस्य कथितः स ककुश्रुतिः ।
ब्रह्मांडखर्परैंयुतं न्युजं सद्यस्य कुम्भति ॥ १०३॥
विश्वात्मनः स ब्रह्माण्डकुम्भ इत्यभिधीयते ।
He whose ears are the directions is called Kakuśruti (not the main name here). The universe (Brahmāṇḍa), which is like a pot (Kumbha), constitutes his body. Therefore, the Universal Soul is called Brahmāṇḍakumbha (The One whose Pot is the Universe).


Shloka 104: Cidyomabhāla (चिद्योमभाल)
ब्रह्माण्डखर्परांतर्यलग्नं खं तच्चिदंबरं ॥१०४॥
तदस्य ब्रह्मरंध्रं चियोमभालः स उच्यते ।
The space (Kha) within the shell of the universe is the consciousness-filled sky (Cidambara). That is his Brahmarandhra (the aperture at the crown of the head). Therefore, he is called Cidyomabhāla (The One whose Forehead is the Sky of Consciousness).
Shloka 105: Satyaśiroruh (सत्यशिरोरुह)
सत्यलोको यस्य कैश्यमसौ सत्यशिरोरुहः॥१०५॥
He whose head-dress (or cranial hair) is the world of Satya (the highest heaven) is Satyaśiroruh (The One on whose Head Grows the Satya Loka).


Shloka 106: Jagajjanmalayonmeṣanimeṣa (जगज्जन्मलयोन्मेषनिमेष)
उन्मेषाज्जायते यस्य निमेषाल्लीयते जगत् ।
जगज्जन्मलयोन्मेषनिमेष इति स स्मृतः ॥ १०६ ॥
From his opening of the eyes (Unmeṣa) the world is born, and by his closing of the eyes (Nimeṣa) it is dissolved. Therefore, he is remembered as Jagajjanmalayonmeṣanimeṣa (The One whose Opening and Closing of Eyes is the Creation and Dissolution of the World).


Shloka 107: Abhyarkasomadṛk (अभ्यर्कसोमदृक्)
ऊर्ध्वदक्षिणवामानि नेत्राणि जगदा-त्मनः ।
वह्निसूर्यैदवो यस्य क्रमात्सोऽभ्यर्कसोमदृक् ॥१०७॥
The upper, right, and left eyes of the Universal Soul are Agni (fire), Sūrya (sun), and Candra (moon) respectively. He, who possesses these in order, is Abhyarkasomadṛk (The One who has the Sun and Moon as his Eyes).
गिरीन्द्रैकरदो धर्माधर्मोष्ठः सामबृंहितः ।
ग्रहर्क्षदशनो वाणीजिह्वो वासवनासिकः ॥ २७॥


Shloka 108: Girīndraikarada (गिरींद्रैकरद)
एकस्थूलो बहिर्दतो गिरींद्रः कनकाचलः ।
विराड्ररूपजुषो यस्य गिरींद्रेकरदो हि सः ॥ १०८ ॥
He who has one large, external tusk and who is the Lord of Mountains (Girīndra), assuming the form of the cosmic being (Virāṭ), is indeed Girīndraikarada (The Lord of Mountains with a Single Tusk).


Commentary on a Previous Interpretation:
Sanskrit:
यत्तु-प्राचा गिरींद्रपदं हिमवत्परत्वेन व्याख्यातं, तत्सुमेरुकूटदंतायेति गणेशस्तव-राजविरुद्धत्वादनादेयम् ।
However, the previous interpretation which explains 'Girīndra' as referring to the Himalaya mountain is unacceptable, as it contradicts the description in the Ganesha-stava-rāja, which identifies him as the one whose tusk is the peak of Mount Meru.


Shloka 109: Dharma-adharmoṣṭha (धर्माधर्मोष्ठ)
पापपुण्ये यदोष्ठौ स धर्माधर्मोष्ठ उच्यते ।
धर्मोत्तरोष्ठो दुरिता-धरोष्ठ इति च स्मृतेः ॥ १०९ ॥
He whose two lips are righteousness and unrighteousness (Pāpa-Puṇya) is called Dharma-adharmoṣṭha (The One whose Lips are Dharma and Adharma). It is remembered that his upper lip is Dharma and his lower lip is sin.


Shloka 110: Sāmabṛṃhita (सामबृंहित)
यद्वं हितं सामवेदः स प्रोक्तः सामबृंहितः ।
स्तोत्रात्मकैः सामभिस्तोषित इति प्राचामर्थो...
सूर्योदयो ग्रहा यस्य कृत्तिकाद्याश्च तारकाः ॥ ११० ॥
He who is praised by the hymns of the Sāma Veda is proclaimed as Sāmabṛṃhita (The One Magnified by the Sāma Veda). (The commentator rejects an alternate interpretation as unsuitable.)


Shloka 111: Grahakṣedaśana (ग्रहक्षेदशन)
मुखांतःस्थाः सूक्ष्मदंतो ग्रहक्षेदशनो हि सः ॥ १११ ॥
He who has subtle teeth within his mouth, and who is the destroyer of the afflictions caused by planets, is Grahakṣedaśana (The Destroyer of Planetary Afflictions).


Shloka 112: Vāṇījihva (वाणीजिह्व) & Vāsavanāsika (वासवनासिक)
पुराणन्यायमीमांसाथर्वऋग्यजुषादिकाः ॥ १११ ॥
वाक्तती रसना यस्य स वाणीजिह्व उच्यते ॥
नासा यस्य शुनासीरः सोऽयं वासवनासिकः ॥ ११२ ॥
He whose tongue is the flow of speech—consisting of the Purāṇas, Nyāya, Mīmāṃsā, Atharva, Ṛg, and Yajur Vedas—is called Vāṇījihva (The One whose Tongue is Speech). He whose nose is the deity Śuna-sīra (Indra) is Vāsavanāsika (The One whose Nose is Indra).


कुलाचलांसः सोमार्कघण्टो रुद्रशिरोधरः ।
नदीनदभुजः सर्पाङ्गुलीकस्तारकानखः ॥ २८॥


Shloka 113: Kulācala (कुलाचल) & Somārkaghaṇṭa (सोमार्कघंट)
कुलाचलांसो विंध्याद्या यस्य स्कंधतया मताः ।
कंध-रोर्ध्वं मांसपिण्डावुन्नतौ घंटिके मते ॥ ११३ ॥
ते रवींदू यस्य सोमार्कघंटः कथितो हि सः।
He whose shoulders are the mountain ranges like the Vindhyas is Kulācala (The One whose Shoulders are Mountains). The two fleshy protuberances above his neck are considered to be the "bells" (Ghaṇṭike). He in whom the sun and moon are those two bells is declared as Somārkaghaṇṭa (The One with the Moon and Sun as Bells).


Shloka 114: Rudraśirodhara (रुद्रशिरोधर) & Nadīnadabhuja (नदीनदभुज)
यस्य ग्रीवा रुद्र एव सवै रुद्रशिरोधरः ॥ ११४ ॥
गंगाशोणादयो नद्यो नदा यस्य भुजाः स तु ॥ ११५ ॥
नदीनदभुजः सिंधुनदी नंदति वा भुजः ।
He whose neck is Rudra himself is Rudraśirodhara (The One who Bears Rudra as his Neck). He whose arms are rivers like the Ganga and Sonā is Nadīnadabhuja (The One whose Arms are Rivers). Or, he whose arms delight (Nandati) the ocean (Sindhu) and the rivers.


Shloka 116: Sarpāṅgulīka (सर्पाङ्गुलीक) & Tārakānakha (तारकानख)
सर्पागु-लीकः शेषाद्या अंगुल्यो यस्य पन्नगाः।
ध्रुवाद्या यन्नखास्ताराः स स्मृतस्तारकानखः ॥ ११६ ॥
He whose fingers are serpents like Śeṣa is Sarpāṅgulīka (The One whose Fingers are Serpents). He whose nails are the stars, beginning with Dhruva (the Pole Star), is remembered as Tārakānakha (The One whose Nails are Stars).


भ्रूमध्यसंस्थितकरो ब्रह्मविद्यामदोदकः ।
व्योमनाभिः श्रीहृदयो मेरुपृष्ठोऽर्णवोदरः ॥ २९॥


Shloka 117: Śaṇḍādaṇḍa (शंडादंड)
भ्रूमध्यसंस्थितकरो ध्रुवोर्घाणस्य संधिगम् ।
यत्तत्त्वं श्रुतिषूक्तं तच्छंडादंडात्म यस्य सः ॥ ११७ ॥
The principle (Tattva) stated in the Vedic scriptures (Śruti), which is situated between the eyebrows and is the support of the nose, is of the nature of Śaṇḍa and Daṇḍa. He whose essence is that is Śaṇḍādaṇḍa (The One whose Essence is Śaṇḍa and Daṇḍa).


Shloka 118: Brahmavidyāmadotkaṭa (ब्रह्मविद्यामदोत्कट)
प्रपंचमानापहृत्या ब्रह्मविद्यैव वै मद ।
तेनोद्भिन्नौ कटौ यस्य ब्रह्मविद्यामदो-त्कटः ॥ ११८ ॥
The intoxication (Mada) born from the knowledge of Brahman (Brahmavidyā) removes the sense of phenomenal reality. He whose hips (Kaṭi) are swollen with that (intoxication) is Brahmavidyāmadotkaṭa (The One Intoxicated with the Knowledge of Brahman).


Names 119-129: The Cosmic Body of Ganesha
The commentary continues to describe Ganesha's body as a microcosm of the universe:


119: Vyomanābhi (व्योमनाभि): 
यस्य व्योमबिलं नाभिर्योमनाभिरसौ मतः ।
ऋचः सामानि यजूंषि सा हि श्रीरमृता सतां ॥ ११९ ॥
He whose navel is the ethereal cavity (of space) is considered Vyomanābhi (The One whose Navel is the Sky). The Rig, Sāma, and Yajur Vedas are that (navel), which is the divine prosperity (Śrī) and the nectar (Amṛta) for the virtuous.


120: Śrīhṛdaya (श्रीहृदय) & Merupṛṣṭha (मेरुपृष्ठ): 
त्रैय्यर्थ एव यच्चित्तं स श्रीहृदय उच्यते ।
सुमेरुरेव यत्पृष्ठं मेरुपृष्ठः स उच्यते ॥ १२० ॥
He whose heart/mind is the very essence of the three Vedas is called Śrīhṛdaya (The One whose Heart is Śrī). He whose back is Mount Meru itself is called Merupṛṣṭha (The One whose Back is Meru).


कुक्षिस्थयक्षगन्धर्वरक्षःकिन्नरमानुषः ।
पृथ्वीकटिः सृष्टिलिङ्गः शैलोरुर्दस्रजानुकः ॥ ३०॥


Shloka 121: Arṇavodara (अर्णवोदर) & Kukṣiṣṭha-yakṣa-gandharva-rakṣaḥ-kinnara-mānuṣa (कुक्षिष्ठयक्षगन्धर्वरक्षःकिन्नरमानुष)
जठरांतर्जल-स्थानेऽर्णवा इत्यर्णवोदरः ।
अंत्राद्यवयवाः कुक्षौ यस्य यक्षादयः स तु ॥१२१॥
He is Arṇavodara (The Ocean-Bellied One) because the oceans (Arṇavāḥ) are in the watery region inside his belly. He in whose abdomen beings like Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, Kinnaras, and humans reside as its internal organs is Kukṣiṣṭha-yakṣa-gandharva-rakṣaḥ-kinnara-mānuṣa (The One in whose Womb Dwell Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, Kinnaras, and Humans).






122: Pṛthvīkaṭi (पृथ्वीकटि): 
कुक्षि-स्थयक्षगंधर्वरक्षः किन्नरमानुषः ।
पृथिव्येव कटिस्थानं यस्य पृथ्वीकटिस्तु सः ॥ १२२ ॥
He in whom the earth itself is the location of his waist/hips is Pṛthvīkaṭi (The Earth-Hipped One).


123: Śailorū (शैलोरु): 
सृष्टिलिंगस्तु यच्छेपः-स्थाने मैथुनजाः प्रजाः ।
शैलोरुः पर्वता एव यस्योरुस्थानतां गताः ॥ १२३ ॥
He is Śailorū (The Mountain-Thighed One) because the mountains themselves have become his thighs.


124: Dasrajānuka (दस्रजानुक) & Pātālajaṅgha (पातालजंघ): 
दस्रौ यस्याश्विनौ जानू स मतो दस्रजानुकः ।
पातालजंऋो यज्जंघात्मकं पातालसप्तकं ॥ १२४॥
He whose knees are the two Aśvini Kumaras (also called Dasra) is considered Dasrajānuka (The One with the Aśvinis as Knees). He is Pātālajaṅgha (The One whose Shanks are the Netherworlds) because the seven netherworlds (Pātāla-saptaka) constitute his shanks.




पातालजङ्घो मुनिपात्कालाङ्गुष्ठस्त्रयीतनुः ।
ज्योतिर्मण्डललाङ्गूलो हृदयालाननिश्चलः ॥ ३१॥


125: Muni-pāt (मुनिपात) & Kālāṅguṣṭha (कालांगुष्ठ): 
मुनि-पात् मुनिभिः पादलग्नैः पादात्मतां गतैः ।
कालांगुष्ठो महा-मृत्युर्यत्पादांगुलितां गतः ॥ १२५ ॥
He is Munipāt (The One whose Feet are the Sages) because the sages, who are attached to his feet, have become his feet. He is Kālāṅguṣṭha (The One whose Toes are Time) because Great Death (Mahāmṛtyu, a form of Time) has become his toes.


126: Trayītanu (त्रयीतनु)  & Jyotirmaṇḍalalāḍūla (ज्योतिर्मण्डललाडूल): 
अयुक्तावयवा यस्य श्रुतयः स त्रयीतनुः ।
शिंशुमाराभिधं ज्योतिश्चक्रं पुच्छं हि यस्य सः ॥ १२६ ॥
He whose body is the three Vedas (which have no physical limbs) is Trayītanu (The One whose Body is the Three Vedas). He is (also called Jyotirmaṇḍalalāḍūla) because the constellation known as Śiśumāra (the dolphin) is his tail.


127: Hṛdayālāna (हृदयालान): 
ज्योतिर्मण्डललाडूलो ब्रह्मात्रोक्तं गजाकृति ।
भक्तानां हृदयान्येवास्यालानं गजबंधनम् ॥१२७॥
The hearts of his devotees themselves are the post to which this 
elephant-form is tied (ālāna - the tying post for an elephant).


हृत्पद्मकर्णिकाशाली वियत्केलिसरोवरः ।
सद्भक्तध्याननिगडः पूजावारिनिवारितः ॥ ३२॥


128: Hṛdantaradaharakrīḍāsara (हृदन्तर्दहरक्रीडासर): 
तत्रापगतचाञ्चल्यो हृदयालाननिश्चलः । 
हृदंतर्दहराकाशं यस्य क्रीडासरः स तु ॥ १२८ ॥
He who, having abandoned all restlessness, is steadfastly fixed at the post of the heart. 
He for whom the subtle space (Daharakāśa) within the heart is a pleasure-lake (krīḍāsaraḥ).


129: Sadbhaktadhyānanigaḍa (सद्भक्तध्याननिगड): 
हृत्पद्म-कर्णिकाशालिवियत्केलिसरोवरः । 
सर्वगोऽपि परिच्छिन्नो भक्तैर्ध्यानेन यः स तु ॥ १२९ ॥
He for whom the lotus of the heart, with the sky in its pericarp, is a playful lake. 
Though all-pervading (sarvagaḥ), he is localized (paricchinnaḥ) and 
bound (nigaḍa - fettered) by the meditation (dhyānena) of his true devotees.


Shloka 130: Pūjāvārinivārita (पूजावारीनिवारित)
पूजैव कथिता वारी गजबंधनशृङ्खला ।
संनिरुद्धस्तया देवः पूजावारीनिवारितः ॥ १३० ॥
Worship (Pūjā) itself is said to be the water (Vārī) and the chain for binding the elephant. The Lord, who is restrained by that, is Pūjāvārinivārita (The One Restrained by the Water of Worship).


यत्तु -प्राचा वारीपदं ह्रस्वांतं पठता पूजां वारयंतीति पूजावारिणो राक्षसाः, तैरयं दूरीकृतोऽसेवित इति व्याख्यातं, तादृशार्थेन कीदृशी देवतास्तुतिः संपद्यत इति चिंत्यम् ।
Now, regarding this: The earlier commentators, reading the word 'vārī' with a short 'i' (as 'vāri'), have explained it (as follows): "The 'pūjā-vāriṇaḥ' are demons (Rākṣasas) who ward off (vārayanti) worship (pūjā). By them, this Lord (Ganesha) was driven away and not served." One must ponder, what kind of praise of the deity is accomplished by such a meaning?


The Commentator's Rebuttal and Correct Interpretation
ह्रस्वांत एव पाठ इति यदि शपथे प्रवर्तसे तदापि वारिपदं हि परिखाजलपरत्वेन व्याख्याय तदवगुंठितः पूजकैर्दुरधिगम इति व्याख्येयम्;
Even if you insist on taking an oath that the reading is indeed with a short 'i', even then, the word 'vāri' should be interpreted as meaning 'moat-water' (the water in a fortress trench). Thus, the meaning should be: "He who is concealed by a moat, is difficult for worshippers to approach."


पूजा-रंभे देवतायाः संनिरोधनावगुंठनविषयकप्रार्थनादेर्विधानात् ।
...because the ritual injunctions prescribe that at the beginning of worship, there are prayers, etc., for the confinement and veiling (saṃnirodhana, avaguṃṭhana) of the deity (to invite and secure the divine presence in the ritual area).


Conclusion of the Argument and the Next Name
संनिरोधनावगुंठनविषयकप्रार्थनादेर्विधानात् ।
...because the ritual injunctions prescribe that at the beginning of worship, there are prayers, etc., for the confinement (saṃnirodhana) and veiling (avaguṃṭhana) of the deity (to invite and secure the divine presence in the ritual area).


प्रतापी काश्यपो मन्ता गणको विष्टपी बली ।
यशस्वी धार्मिको जेता प्रथमः प्रमथेश्वरः ॥ ३३॥


Names 131-135: Various Glorious Names
Shloka 131: Pratāpī (प्रतापी): 
प्रतापी तापकत्वेन पराक्रमयुतोऽथवा ॥ १३१ ॥
He is Pratāpī (The One with Blazing Splendor) because of his power to 
scorch (his enemies), or because he is endowed with valor.
Shloka 132: Kaśyapasuta (कश्यपसुत): 
कश्य-पस्य मुनेः कुक्षाववतीर्ण इति स्मृतः । 
कथापुराणे गाणेशे स कश्यपसुतो मतः ॥१३२॥
He is remembered as one who descended into the womb of the sage Kaśyapa. 
In the Ganesha Purāṇa, he is considered the son of Kaśyapa.
Shloka 133: Gaṇapa (गणप), Viṣṭapī (विष्टपी) & Balī (बली)
गणपोऽध्वर्युहोत्रादीन् पातीति चतुरो गणान् ।
विष्टपी भुवनाधारो बलसामान्यवान् बली ॥ १३३ ॥
He is Gaṇapa (The Protector of the Hosts) because he protects the four hosts: the Adhvaryu, Hotṛ, and other priests. He is Viṣṭapī (The Supporter of the Worlds) because he supports the worlds. He is Balī (The Powerful One) because he possesses common and extraordinary strength.


Shloka 134: Yaśasvī (यशस्वी), Dhārmika (धार्मिक) & Svojas (स्वोजस्)
यशस्वी पुण्यकीर्त्याढ्यो धार्मिको धर्मवर्धकः ।
अष्टमो धातुरोजः स्यात् खोजास्तद्यस्य शोभनं ॥ १३४ ॥
He is Yaśasvī (The Glorious One), abundant with pious fame. He is Dhārmika (The Righteous One), the augmenter of Dharma. The eighth derivative of the root 'dhā' is 'ojas', meaning splendor. He whose splendor (Ojas) is splendid (Sva) is Svojas (The One of Innate Splendor).


Shloka 135: Prathama (प्रथम) & Prathameśvara (प्रथमेश्वर): 
प्रथमः सर्वकार्यादौ पूज्यत्वात्सर्वदेहिनाम् । 
प्रथमा ब्रह्मविष्ण्वी-शास्तदीशः प्रथमेश्वरः ॥ १३५ ॥
He is Prathama (The First) because he is worshipped at the beginning of all undertakings by all beings. He is Prathameśvara (The First Lord) because he is the lord of the first (primary) deities: Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Īśa (Shiva).


चिन्तामणिर्द्वीपपतिः कल्पद्रुमवनालयः ।
रत्नमण्डपमध्यस्थो रत्नसिंहासनाश्रयः ॥ ३४॥


Names 136-138: Cintāmaṇi-dvīpapatiḥ, Kalpadruma-vanālayaḥ, Ratnamaṇḍapa-madhyasthaḥ, Ratnasiṃhāsanāśrayaḥ (चिन्तामणिर्द्वीपपतिः, कल्पद्रुमवनालयः, रत्नमण्डपमध्यस्थ:, रत्नसिंहासनाश्रयः)
चिंतामणिद्वीपपूर्व रत्नसिंहासनावधि ।
यस्योपभोग्यं संप्रोक्तश्चतुर्भिरिह नामभिः ॥ १३६ ॥
His enjoyable realm, described by four names here, extends from the "Isle of the Wish-Fulfilling Gem" in the east to the "Jeweled Throne." He is: Cintāmaṇi-dvīpapatiḥ (The Lord of the Isle of the Wish-Fulfilling Gem), Kalpadruma-vanālayaḥ (The One whose Grove is the Wish-Fulfilling Trees), Ratnamaṇḍapa-madhyasthaḥ (The One Seated in the Middle of the Jeweled Pavilion), and Ratnasiṃhāsanāśrayaḥ (The One Abiding on the Jeweled Throne).


तीव्राशिरोद्धृतपदो ज्वालिनीमौलिलालितः ।
नन्दानन्दितपीठश्रीर्भोगदो भूषितासनः ॥ ३५॥
सकामदायिनीपीठः स्फुरदुग्रासनाश्रयः ।
तेजोवतीशिरोरत्नं सत्यानित्यावतंसितः ॥ ३६॥


Tīvrāśiroddhṛtapadaḥ, Jvālinīmaulilālitaḥ, Nandānanditapīṭhaśrīḥ, Bhogadābhūṣitāsanaḥ, Sakāmadāyinīpīṭhaḥ, Sphuradugrāsanāśrayaḥ (तीव्राशिरोद्धृतपद:, ज्वालिनीमौलिलालित:, नन्दानन्दितपीठश्री:, भोगदाभूषितासन:, सकामदायिनीपीठः, स्फुरदुग्रासनाश्रय:)
तीव्रा च ज्वालिनी नंदा भोगदा कामदायिनी ।
उग्रा तेजोवती सत्या नवमी विघ्ननाशिनी ॥ १३७ ॥
पत्राष्टके कर्णिकायां संत्येताः पीठशक्तयः।
नवैताः पद्मसहिताः कथिता दशनामभिः ॥ १३८ ॥
Tīvrā, Jvālinī, Nandā, Bhogadā, Kāmadāyinī, Ugrā, Tejovatī, Satyā, and the ninth, Vighnanāśinī—these (nine) Śaktis reside on the eight petals and the pericarp of the (lotus) seat. These nine, along with the lotus itself, are described by ten names. These names are: Tīvrāśiroddhṛtapadaḥ (The One whose Seat is Elevated by Tīvrā), Jvālinīmaulilālitaḥ (The One Adorned by Jvālinī on His Head), Nandānanditapīṭhaśrīḥ (The One whose Seat is Delighted by Nandā), Bhogadābhūṣitāsanaḥ (The One whose Seat is Adorned by Bhogadā), Sakāmadāyinīpīṭhaḥ (The One whose Seat is Kāmadāyinī), and Sphuradugrāsanāśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Radiant and Terrible Seat). Here, with this last name, the second hundred is completed.