Ganesha Sahasranama
Composed by Bhaskararaya Dikshita, along with his commentary


· Invocation by the Commentator -




गणेशोवः पायात् प्रणमत गणेशं जगदिदं
गणेशेन त्रातंनम इह गणेशाय महते ॥
गणेशान्नास्त्यन्यत्रिजगतिगणेशस्य महिमा
गणेशेमच्चित्तं निवसतु गणेश ! त्वमव माम् ॥
May Ganesha protect you. Bow down to Ganesha; 
this entire world is sustained by Ganesha. 
Salutations to that great Ganesha here. 
There is none other than Ganesha in the three worlds; 
Such is the glory of Ganesha. May my mind dwell upon Ganesha. 
O Ganesha! Please protect me.










गुरुरेव गतिर्गुरुमेव भजेगुरुणैव सहास्मि नमो गुरवे ॥
न गुरोःपरमं शिशुरस्मि गुरोर्मतिरस्ति गुरौ मम पाहि गुरो !॥
The Guru alone is the ultimate goal, I worship the Guru alone, 
I exist because of the Guru alone, salutations to the Guru. 
I know nothing higher than the Guru, I am but a child; 
my intellect is fixed upon the Guru. O Guru! Please protect me.






· The Commentator's Pledge -


प्राचांकुसृष्टिरचनैकमयस्वभावामज्ञातगाणपततन्त्रपुराणभावाम्॥
व्याख्यामुदस्य सुविभाव्यगणेशनामान्यर्थापयामितदुपासकतोषहेतोः ॥
The compositions of the ancients, whose nature is imbued with the essence of the Vedas, whose true nature regarding the Ganapatya Tantra and Puranas is not understood... Setting aside (other interpretations), I will elucidate the meanings of the thousand names of Ganesha, for the satisfaction of his devotees.


नन्वर्धानाझ्यनंताः फणिपतिधिषणा शक्यकृत्स्नप्रकाशा
मन्दस्तत्र प्रवृत्तोऽप्युपहसितपदंस्याज्जनस्येति चेन्न ॥
यत्तार्थ्यद्योमणिभ्यामपिदुरधिगमं कृत्स्नशो दुष्प्रकाशं
तत्खद्योतःपतन् खं किमपि विशदयत्येव नेहास्त्यवद्यं
If it is said: "The names are infinite, profound, and as vast as the serpent-king Shesha; how can one of dull intellect, attempting to explain them fully, avoid becoming an object of ridicule?" Then, no! That which is difficult to grasp even for the sun and the moon, which is entirely hard to illuminate... even a firefly, falling in the sky, clarifies it to some extent. Here, there is no fault.


नाम्नामर्थश्चिदाकाशस्तंद्योतयितुमुद्यतः ।
ग्रन्थःखद्योतनामाऽस्तु ब्रह्म खं गगनं च खम् ॥
The meaning of the names is the Consciousness-Space (Chidakasha). This text, which endeavors to illuminate it, may be called "Khadyota" (The Firefly). (For) Brahman is Space, and Space is the sky (Akasha).


केषांन दुष्करं नाम्नां साकल्येनार्थवर्णनम् ।
अतःसंक्षिप्य वक्तव्ये श्लोकैरेव स वर्ण्यते ॥
For whom is it not difficult to describe the meaning of all the names in their entirety? 
Therefore, that (meaning) which needs to be stated is described concisely, in verses alone.














• Examination of Other Viewpoints •


त्रिविधभेदमवाङ्मनसगोचरंस्वप्रकाशं मुक्तोपसृष्यं परं ब्रह्म ।
The Supreme Brahman is beyond the reach of speech and mind,self-luminous, and is served by the liberated. It is considered to have a threefold distinction.


तन्निर्विकल्पेन तद्विषयकसविलासाज्ञाननिवृत्त्याकण्ठचामी-
करन्यायेन तदात्मतावाप्तिरूपो मोक्ष इत्यविवादम् ।
It is undisputed that liberation(Moksha) is the attainment of identity with that (Brahman), through the cessation of the ignorance pertaining to it, by means of Nirvikalpa (non-dual) knowledge, just as a necklace is realized to be nothing but gold.


स च निर्विकल्पःशुद्धचित्तानामेव न मलिनाशयानाम्; चित्तशुद्धौ 
तु श्रौतस्मार्तकर्माणि तत्तद्वर्णाश्रमोचितानि वेदे कर्मकांडसम -धिगम्यानि बहिरङ्गोपायाः।
And that Nirvikalpa(state) is only for those with pure minds, not for those with impure inner dispositions. For the purification of the mind, the Vedic and scriptural duties (Shrauta and Smarta Karmas) prescribed for the various castes and stages of life, as obtained from the Karma Kanda section of the Vedas, are the external means.


तस्यैव ब्रह्मणःसगुण-निर्गुणभेदेन द्विविधस्योपासनानि वेदे रहस्यतरोपनिषत्कांडसमधिगम्यानि अन्तरङ्गोपायाः ।
For that very Brahman,which is of two kinds—Saguna (with attributes) and Nirguna (without attributes)—the modes of worship, as obtained from the more secret Upanishad section of the Vedas, are the internal means.


बहिरङ्गानुष्ठानशीलानामेव त्वन्तरङ्गानुष्ठा-नेऽधिकारः,सगुणं तु 
रूपमुपासकानुग्रहार्थं कल्पितमेवेत्युपा-सकरुचिवैचित्र्येण नानाविधम् ।
However,only those who are diligent in the external practices are entitled to the internal practices. The Saguna (form with qualities) is indeed imagined for the grace of the worshipper, and is of various kinds due to the diversity of tastes among devotees.












तेषु'आदित्यमंबिकां विष्णुं गणनाथं महेश्वरम्' इति स्मृत्युक्तरूपाणि 
तत्तदवांतरमूर्ति-भेदाश्च तत्तज्जन्मायातत्संस्कारानुगुण्येनोपास्यानीति सर्वेऽपी-श्वरा एव ।
Among these,the forms mentioned in the Smritis—such as Aditya, Ambika, Vishnu, Ganapati (Gananatha), and Maheshvara—and their various sub-forms are to be worshipped according to the inherent predispositions (Samskaras) brought from previous births. Thus, all of them are indeed (different forms of) the same Ishvara (Lord).


अत एव पुराणान्यपितत्तदुपासकानुजिघृक्षया प्रवृत्तानि तस्य तस्यैव सर्वोत्तमत्वम्; अन्येषां ततोऽपकर्ष च नहिनिंदान्यायेन प्रतिपादयंति कल्पभेदेनैकस्मादन्येषामु-त्पत्तिः संभवतीत्यादिकमाकरेषु स्पष्टम्ः
For this reason alone,the Puranas also, composed with the desire to protect their respective worshippers, proclaim the supreme excellence of that particular (deity) and the inferiority of others, following the maxim of "praising by not praising" (Nahi Ninda Nyaya). It is clear in the source texts that, through different narrations, the origin of one from another is possible, and so on.


तत्र गणपतिविषयेहेरंबोपनिषद्भणेशोपनिषदाद्याः श्रुतय ऐदंपर्येण गाणपत-तन्त्राणि 
गणेशोपपुराणं पुराणान्तरेष्वपि तत्र तत्र सर्वोत्तम-त्वनिरूपणभागाश्चेति शतशः प्रमाणानि तत्तद्विदां स्पष्टानि ।
Regarding Ganapati,the Upanishads like the Heramba Upanishad and the Ganapati Upanishad, the Ganapatya Tantras which have this intent, the Ganesha Purana, and the sections in other Puranas that establish his supreme status—these hundreds of evidences are clear to the experts in those fields.


एतेन निघण्टुग्रन्थेऽग्न्यादिदेवपत्यन्तदेवतानांमध्ये गणपतेरनिर्देशादसत्त्वमाशंक्य 
'मरुतो गणानामधिपतये' इत्यभ्यातानमंत्रे कथनात्सत्त्वसमर्थनं प्राचामपास्तम्;
Through this(reasoning), the refutation by the ancients is established: (they refute) the doubt about Ganesha's non-existence based on his not being mentioned in the Nighantu lexicon among the deities from Agni to the lord of the deities, and the subsequent effort to prove his existence by citing the Abhyatana mantra, "To Marut, the lord of the hosts (Ganas)".


कर्मकाण्डीयदेवतामध्येगणनाभावस्याप्रयोजकत्वात्, तत्रैकपंचाशदधिकशतदेवतानामेव 
गणनेन ततोऽधिकानां परःशतदेवतानां वेदे पुराणेषु च प्रसिध्दानामसिद्ध्यापत्तेः;
(Because)the non-inclusion in the list of Karma-kanda deities is inconclusive, for if only the 151 deities are counted, then the other hundreds of deities well-known in the Vedas and Puranas would have to be considered non-existent.






'वायु'पदस्य सूत्रात्मनि क्वचित्प्रयुक्तत्वेन तत्पर्याय-'मरुत्' शब्दस्य 
बहुवचनान्तस्यापि परमेश्वरपरत्वसमर्थनप्रयासस्य क्लिष्टतरत्वात् ।
And the effort to prove that the word 'Marut', which is in the plural and a synonym of Vayu (who is sometimes used to denote the Sutratman, the thread-soul), refers to the Supreme Lord, is far-fetched and overly complicated.


उपनिषदांप्रमाणमूर्धन्यानां सत्त्वेऽपि एवं प्रमाणगवेषणस्य करभमनुसरामः । 
'कामधेनौ स्थितायाम्' इति न्यायेन निरसनीयत्वात् ।
When the Upanishads,which are the foremost authority, exist, pursuing such (inferior) evidence is like (seeking) a donkey (when one has a wish-fulfilling cow). It is to be rejected by the maxim, "When the Kamadhenu (wish-fulfilling cow) is present" (why seek lesser things?).


'पुराणेष्वर्थवादत्वंये वदन्ति नराधमाः' इत्यादिबृहन्नारदीयादिवचनेनार्थवादशून्य 
पुराणानामर्थवादजटिलं कर्मकाण्डमपेक्ष्य तत्त्वनिर्णये प्रबलत्वात् ।
For,by statements like "Only the worst of men say that the Puranas are mere Arthavada (eulogistic explanations)" from the Brihan-Naradiya and other texts, the Puranas, which are not devoid of profound meaning, are stronger than the Karma-kanda (which is full of Arthavada) in determining the truth.


'श्रुतिस्मृतीहि नेत्रे द्वे पुराणं हृदयं मतम् । श्रुतिस्मृतिभ्यां हीनोऽन्धः काणः स्यादेकया विना । पुराणहीनाद्धृच्छून्यात्काणान्धावपि तौ वरौ' इत्यादिवचनैर्देवतातत्त्वनिर्णये कर्मकाण्डमपेक्ष्य 
पुराणानामेवाधिक्यस्य भक्तिमीमांसातंत्रे समर्थितत्वात् ।
And by statements such as"The Sruti and Smriti are the two eyes; the Purana is considered the heart. One without Sruti and Smriti is blind; without one of them, he is one-eyed. But one without the Purana is heartless; the blind and one-eyed are better than him," the superiority of the Puranas over the Karma-kanda in determining the true nature of the deities is established in the Bhakti Mimamsa texts.


शिवविष्णुदेवीविषयकाणामिव गणपतिविषयाणामुपनिषदामपि जागरूकत्वाच्च ।
And because the Upanishads pertaining to Ganapati are also well-known,just like those pertaining to Shiva, Vishnu, and the Goddess.


कर्मकाण्डेऽपिअभ्यातानामत्र कदर्थनमपेक्ष्य स्पष्टतरस्य 'गणानां त्वा' इति मंत्रस्य 
वेदत्रयेऽपि पठ्यमानस्य शरणीकर्तुं युक्तत्वाच्चेति दिक् ।
And even within the Karma-kanda,instead of misinterpreting the Abhyatana mantra, it is more appropriate to take refuge in the clearer mantra, "Gananam Tva" ("I invoke you, the leader of the Ganas"), which is recited in three Vedas. And so on (this is the direction of the argument).


तदुपासनंचैकाक्षरषडक्षराष्टाविंशत्यक्षरादिबहुविधगणपतिमंत्रजपादिरूपं बहुविधम् तदंगत्वेन क्रत्वर्थः । स्वतंत्रतया पुरुषार्थश्च सहस्रनामस्तवपाठोऽपि सहस्त्रनामस्तवस्यापि पुराणतंत्रभेदेन बहुविधस्य मध्येऽयमेव बहुभिरुपासकैः परिगृहीत इत्ययमेव व्याक्रियते ॥
The worship of him(Ganesha) is of many kinds, such as the repetition of various Ganesha mantras like the one-syllable (e.g., Gam), the six-syllable, and the twenty-eight-syllable mantras. It can be performed as an auxiliary part of a Vedic ritual (Kratvartha) or independently for one's spiritual goal (Purushartha). The recitation of the Thousand Name Hymn (Sahasranama Stotra) is also (a form of worship). Even among the many versions of the Sahasranama Stotra found in different Puranas and Tantras, this one alone is accepted by many devotees, and hence this one alone is being explained.


• Introduction to This Text •
अयंच स्तवः पद्मपुराणीय इति प्राचो व्याचक्षते । गणेशपुराणे तु बहुभिरवलोक्यते ।
The ancients declare that this hymn(stotra) is from the Padma Purana. 
However, it is widely found in the Ganesha Purana.


गणेशपुराणेतावदुपा-सनाखण्डे- 'अष्टादशपुराणानि विस्तराच्छ्रावितानि नः । 
अन्ये-षामपि शुश्रूषा वर्तते वह्निसंभवा' इति सूतं प्रत्यूषीणां प्रश्ने सूतवाक्यम्-'अन्यान्युपपुराणानि वर्ततेऽष्टादशैव तु । गाणेशं नारदीयं नारसिंहादिकान्यपि' इत्युक्त्वा पुनर्गणेश-पुराणे मूलप्रश्नस्योत्तरम्
Now,in the Upasana Kanda of the Ganesha Purana itself, in response to the sages' question to Suta, Suta's statement is: "You have narrated the eighteen major Puranas to us in detail. We are also curious about the others, O son of Fire (Suta)." Replying to this, Suta said, "There are other Upa-Puranas as well, indeed eighteen in number, such as the Ganesha, the Naradiya, the Narasimha, etc." Then, again in the Ganesha Purana, the answer to the original question [about its own origin] is given.


'ब्रह्मणाकथितं पूर्व व्यासायामित-तेजसे । भृगवे कथितं तेन सोमकान्ताय तेन च' इत्यादिना 
पुराणमवतार्य कतिचिदूव्याख्यानानि निर्वर्ण्य षटूत्रिंशम-ध्यायमारभ्य गृत्समदोपाख्यानं प्रवर्तितम् ।
With verses beginning with,"It was first narrated by Brahma to Vyasa of immeasurable splendor. By him, it was told to Bhrigu, and by him to Somakanta," the Purana is introduced. After describing a few commentaries, beginning from the thirty-sixth chapter, the story of Gritsamada is commenced.










तदीयक्षुतात्त्रिपुरासुरस्योत्पत्तिस्तस्य तपस्तस्मै वरदानं तस्य त्रैलोक्यजयः शिवेन सह युद्धं 
शिवपराजयो नारदं प्रति शिवकृतप्रश्ने-त्येतावदुत्क्रांते नारदवाक्ये- 'युद्धाय गन्तुकामेन 
नार्चितो गणपस्त्वया । अतः पराभवं प्राप्तोऽस्यग्निनेत्रपिधानधृक्' इत्यादि ।
From his(Gritsamada's) hunger, the origin of the demon Tripurasura, his penance, the boon granted to him, his conquest of the three worlds, his battle with Shiva, the defeat of Shiva—when this much had been narrated, in response to a question posed by Shiva to Narada, Narada said, "You, who wished to go to battle, did not worship Ganapa (Ganesha). Therefore, you have met with defeat, O one who holds the fire (of the third eye)."


ततःसोऽतप्यत तपोऽत्युग्रं दशवर्षाणि शंकरः । ततस्तस्य मुखांभोजान्निर्गतोऽभूत्पुमान् परः । 
पञ्चवक्रो दश-भुजो भालचन्द्रः शशिप्रभः । मुण्डमालः सर्पभूषो मुकुटाङ्ग-दभूषणः । 
अग्न्यर्कशशिनो भाभिस्तिरस्कुर्वन् दशायुधः ।' इत्यादिना गणेशाविर्भावतत्प्रसादवरदानादिकमुक्तत्वा,
Then,Lord Shankara (Shiva) performed an extremely severe penance for ten years. Then, from his lotus-like mouth emerged the Supreme Being. He had five faces, ten arms, a crescent moon on his forehead, and the radiance of the moon. He was adorned with a garland of skulls and serpent ornaments, and wore a crown and armlets. With his splendor, he eclipsed the light of Agni (Fire), Surya (Sun), and Shashi (Moon), and he held ten weapons. In this manner, the manifestation of Ganesha, his grace, the granting of boons, etc., are described.


'ततःस्वनाम्नामवदत् सहस्रं तस्मै गणेशः प्रणताय दिव्यम् । शिवस्य भक्त्या परितुष्टचित्तो 
जयप्रदं कामकरं जनानाम् ॥' इत्यादिना तपःसमाप्तिः पञ्चचत्वारिंशेऽध्याये वर्णिता ॥
Then,with verses like, "Then, Ganesha, whose heart was pleased with Shiva's devotion, recited the divine thousand of his own names to him (Shiva) who was bowing down. It bestows victory and fulfills the desires of the people," the completion of the penance is described in the forty-fifth chapter.


• The Structure and Ritual Details of the Hymn • 
तत उत्तरेऽध्यायेब्रह्माणं प्रति व्यासकृतप्रश्नः
व्यास उवाच॥
कथंनाम्नां सहस्रं स्वं गणेश उपदिष्टवान् ।
शिवायैतन्ममाचक्ष्व लोकानुग्रहतत्पर ! इति ॥
Then,in the subsequent chapter, there is a question posed by Vyasa to Brahma:
Vyasa said:
"O you who are intent on blessing the worlds!Please tell me how Ganesha instructed Shiva in his own thousand names."


ततः-ब्रह्मोवाच॥
'देव! एवं पुरारातिः' इत्यादिश्लोकचतुष्टयेन पूर्वोक्तविस्तृ-तकथायाः संक्षेपेणानुवादः ।
Then,Brahma replied:
With four verses beginning with'Deva! Evam Purarātih' ("O God! Thus, the enemy of the triple fortress [Shiva]..."), there is a concise recapitulation of the previously mentioned detailed story.


तदिदंस्तोत्रं गणेशपुराणे षट्चत्वा-रिंशत्तमाध्यायरूपम् । अत्र पूर्वपीठिकाभागः पंचश्लोकात्मकः । 
मध्ये नामभागः सार्धषट्षष्टट्युत्तरशतश्लोकात्मकः । अन्त्यः फलश्रुतिभागः सार्धत्रिचत्वारिंशच्लोकात्मकः ।
This very hymn,in the Ganesha Purana, constitutes the forty-sixth chapter. Here, the preliminary section (Peethika) consists of five verses. The middle section containing the names consists of 166 and a half verses. The final section, which describes the benefits (Phalashruti), consists of 43 and a half verses.


संहत्य पञ्च-दशोत्तरेद्वे शते श्लोकानामुक्त्वा सप्तचत्वारिंशेऽध्याये 
पुन-र्युद्धं त्रिपुरसंहारादिकं चोक्त्वा त्रिपुराख्यानमुपसंहृतमिति स्थितिः ।
In total,having stated 215 verses, the narrative of Tripura is concluded in the forty-seventh chapter by again describing the battle and the destruction of Tripurasura, etc.


पद्मपुराणीयेतु पाठे पूर्वपीठिकायां प्रथमश्लोको नास्ति । द्वितीयश्लोके 'देवः पूर्वम्' इति पाठः । 
फलश्रुतौ यो 'नामभिहुनेदेतैः' इत्याद्याश्चत्वारः श्लोका न सन्ति इति । दशोत्तरैव शतद्वयीति विशेषः ।
However,in the version from the Padma Purana, the first verse of the preliminary section is absent. In the second verse, the reading is 'Devah Pūrvam' ("The god, previously..."). In the Phalashruti section, the four verses beginning with 'Nāmabhir hunedetaih' ("One who performs a fire ritual with these names...") are not present. The special feature is that it consists of only 210 verses.


अस्य स्तोत्रस्य महागणपतिरेव मंत्रद्रष्टत्वादृषिः,प्रतिपाद्य-त्वाद्देवता च, अनुष्टुप् छंदः, 
गंबीजं, हुंशक्तिः, स्वाहा कीलकम्, चतुर्विधपुरुषार्थसिद्धयर्थे जपादौ विनियोगः ।
For this hymn,the sage (Rishi) is Mahaganapati himself, as he is the seer of the mantra. The deity (Devata) is also he, as he is the one being propounded. The meter (Chandas) is Anushtup. The seed (Bija) is 'Gam'. The power (Shakti) is 'Hum'. The pin (Kilaka) is 'Svaha'. Its application (Viniyoga) is in recitation, etc., for the attainment of the fourfold goals of human life (Purushartha: Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksha).


गांगींइति षट् दीर्धेः षडंगानि ।
The six limbs(Shadanga) for meditation are (to be visualized with) the six long vowels (in the mantra 'Gām', 'Gīm', etc.).


'पञ्चवक्त्रोदशभुजः' इत्यादि पूर्वोक्तं ध्यानमिति द्रष्टव्यम् ॥
The meditation(Dhyana) form is to be understood as the one stated before, beginning with "He who has five faces and ten arms..."


• Now, the Explanation of the Verses •
व्यासप्रश्नःस्पष्टार्थः ॥
The question posed by Vyasa is clear in meaning.


एवंव्यासेन पृष्टमर्थ दीनजनानुजिघृक्षयोपदिदिक्षुर्भगवान् ब्रह्मा 'सहस्रनाममंत्रोऽयं जपितव्यः शुभाप्तये' इति मंत्रजपं विधास्य गुरुसंप्रदायशुद्धिमन्तरेण लब्धस्य फलानावहत्वाद्गुरुपरंपरा ज्ञानावश्यकत्वं ध्वनयितु-माख्यायिकां पूर्व विस्तृत्य वर्णितानामपि पुनः संक्षिप्यानु-वदति-देव इत्यादिना ।
Having been asked this meaning by Vyasa,Lord Brahma, who wished to teach out of compassion for the distressed, and who was about to prescribe the recitation of the mantra with the words "This thousand-name mantra should be chanted for attaining auspiciousness," now reiterates the story concisely with the words beginning with "Deva..." He does this to imply the necessity of the Guru lineage (Guru Parampara), because knowledge obtained without the purity of an authentic tradition yields no fruit, even though it had been described in detail before.


॥ व्यास उवाच ॥
कथंनाम्नां सहस्रं स्वं गणेश उपदिष्टवान् ।
शिवायैतन्ममाचक्ष्व लोका-नुग्रहतत्पर ! ॥१॥
Vyasa said: O you who are intent on blessing the worlds!
Please tell me how Ganesha instructed his own thousand names to Shiva.


॥ ब्रह्मोवाच॥
देव एवंपुरा-रातिः पुरत्रयजयोद्यमे ।
अनर्चनाद्गणेशस्य जातोविघ्न्नाकुलः किल ॥ २ ॥
Brahma said: 
O God(Vyasa)! It is said that the enemy of the triple fortress (Shiva), while undertaking 
the campaign to conquer the three cities, became beset with obstacles due to not worshipping Ganesha.






मनसास विनिर्धाय ततस्तद्विघ्नकारणम् ।
महा-गणपतिंभक्त्या समभ्यर्च्य यथाविधि ॥ ३ ॥
Having mentally ascertained the cause of those obstacles,
that unconquered one (Shiva) devoutly and properly worshipped Mahaganapati.


विघ्नप्रशमनोपायमपृच्छदपराजितः।
संतुष्टःपूजया शंभोर्महागणपतिः स्वयम् ॥ ४ ॥
He,the undefeated one (Shiva), asked for the means to pacify the obstacles. 
Mahaganapati himself, pleased by Shambhu's (Shiva's) worship,


सर्वविघ्नैकहरणंसर्वकामफलप्रदम् ।
ततस्तस्मैसर्वनाम्नां सहस्रमिदमब्रवीत् ॥ ५ ॥
...then spoke to him this collection of all names,a thousand in number, 
which removes all obstacles and bestows the fruits of all desires.


Commentary on the Verses and the Importance of Guru Parampara
एवंपूर्वाध्यायैरुक्तरीत्या उक्तं च 'गुरुक्रममविज्ञायोपास्ते यः स्वेष्टदेवताम् । 
सोपास्तिर्निष्फला ज्ञेया भस्मन्यर्पितहव्यवत्। तस्माद्यत्नेन विज्ञेया मूलाद्गुरुपरंपरा' इति ।
As stated in the previous chapters in this manner,it is also said: "The worship performed by one who worships their chosen deity without knowing the Guru lineage is to be known as fruitless, like an oblation offered into ashes. Therefore, one must diligently know the Guru lineage from its origin."


Sanskrit then details a specific Guru lineage (Parampara) for Ganapatya mantras:
· Ādi-Guru (Primordial Guru): Ganapati himself.
· Kula-Gurus (9): Gana-krīḍa, Vikata, etc.
· Vidyā-Gurus (9): Surānanda, etc.
· Santāna-Gurus (20): Vināyaka, etc. (Each of these 38 are further divided into Divine, Siddha, and Human streams).
· Subsequent Gurus (21): From Kapila to Vyasa.
· Later Gurus (42): From Ganaka to Shankaracharya.
· Total: 101 Gurus, as established by Vidyaranya Shripada in the "Vidyarṇava."








प्रायेणास्मिंस्तोत्रेप्राथमिकनामशतद्वयमध्ये तानि सर्वाणि व्यक्तीभवन्तीति रहस्यम् ।
The secret is that almost all of these (Guru names) are manifested within 
the first two hundred names of this hymn.


शङ्करभगवत्पादेभ्योऽ-र्वाचीनातु स्वनाथपर्यंता गुरुपरंपरा स्वस्वदेशिकमुखा देवावगन्तव्या ॥
The Guru lineage after Shankaracharya up to one's own spiritual preceptor(Svanatha) 
should be learned from the mouth of one's own Guru.


Commentary on the Act of Receiving the Mantra
गुरोःप्रसादफलमाह-संतुष्ट इति । उपदेशक्रममाह-सर्वविघ्नेति । 
अखिलानिष्टबाधकेषूपायेष्वस्य मुख्यत्वकथ-नाय-एकेति । चतुर्वर्गसाधनत्वकथनाय-सर्वकामेति ।
The phrase"संतुष्टः" (pleased) indicates the fruit of the Guru's grace. The phrase "सर्वविघ्नैकहरणं" (removes all obstacles) explains the method of instruction. The word "एक" (the one) is used to state its primacy among all means that remove inauspiciousness. The phrase "सर्वकामफलप्रदम्" (bestows the fruits of all desires) states its power to accomplish the four goals of life (Purusharthas).


ईदृश-गुरुपरंपरामूलभूतोगणेश एव शिष्यभक्तिमाहात्म्यात् 
स्वमु-खेनैव स्वकीयं महामन्त्रं एनमुपादिक्षदित्याह-स्वकमब्रवी-दिति ।
It is said,"स्वकमब्रवीत्" (he spoke his own [mantra]), meaning that Ganesha himself, who is the root of such a Guru lineage, directly instructed this great mantra of his own through his own mouth, due to the greatness of the disciple's (Shiva's) devotion.


ततश्चान्यैरप्ययंमंत्रः प्रोक्तगुरुपरंपराश्चरमेष्वन्यतमं गुरुं भक्त्या संतोष्य 
तन्मुखादेव लब्ध्वा जपनीयः; न पुस्तक-मात्रेण गृहीत्वा जप्तव्य इति तात्पर्यार्थः ।
Therefore, the essential meaning is:This mantra should be received from the mouth of one's own Guru—who is one of the last in the proclaimed Guru lineage—by pleasing him with devotion, and then chanted. It should not be taken merely from a book and chanted.
















ॐ गणेश्वरो गणक्रीडो गणनाथो गणाधिपः ॥
एकदंष्ट्रो वक्रतुण्डो गजवक्त्रो महोदरः ॥ ६ ॥


Shloka 1: Gaṇeśvaraḥ (गणेश्वरः)
ॐवियदादिप्रपञ्चस्य समूहोगण उच्यते ।
तदात्मकस्तदी-शश्च तेन देवोगणेश्वरः ॥ १ ॥
Om! The collection of the entire universe, beginning from space (Vyoma/Akasha), is called a "Gaṇa" (host/group). He whose very nature is that (Gaṇa) and who is its lord (Īśa)—by that (definition), the Lord is called Gaṇeśvara (The Lord of Hosts).


Names 2-3: The Guru Lineage as Forms of Ganesha
साक्षाच्छिष्योगणेशस्य गणक्रीडाभिधो गुरुः ।
तच्छिष्योविकटस्तस्य शिष्यो वै विघ्न-नायकः ॥ २ ॥
The direct disciple of Ganesha is the Guru namedGaṇakrīḍa. His disciple is Vikaṭa, and his disciple, indeed, is Vighna-nāyaka (The Leader of Obstacles).


इत्यादयोऽप्यभेदेन गणेशाएव देशिकाः ।
मंत्रारंभेगुरुं स्मृत्वा वश्यकत्वेन कीर्तिताः ॥ ३ ॥
These and others(in the Guru lineage) are, without difference, themselves Ganesha in the form of spiritual teachers (Deśikāḥ). They are mentioned at the beginning of the mantra (in the Nyasa rituals) to be remembered as the Guru, for the purpose of bringing the mantra under one's control (Vashyakaraṇa).


Shloka 4: Gaṇakrīḍa (गणक्रीड)
वियदादि-गणस्यान्तःप्रविश्य क्रीडनेन वा ।
गणक्रीड इतिप्रोक्तस्तं-त्सृष्ट्वेत्यादिविश्श्रुतेः ॥ ४ ॥
He is called Gaṇakrīḍa because he enters into and "plays" (Krīḍa) within the host of elements beginning with space (Vyoma), or because he creates that very host and then sports within it, as stated in the Vedic revelation (Śruti).




Shloka 5: Gaṇanātha (गणनाथ)
गणनंगुणसंख्यानामथशब्दात्तु मंगलम् ।
कृतेतयोर्बहुव्रीहौ गणनाथ इति स्मृतः ॥ ५ ॥
"Gaṇa"means the counting (or collection) of the primary qualities (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas), and "Nātha" (from the word "Nātha") signifies auspiciousness. When a compound (Bahuvrihi Samasa) is formed from these two (words), he is remembered as Gaṇanātha (The Lord of the Qualities and the Auspicious Lord).


Shloka 6: Gaṇādhipa (गणाधिप)
आदित्यविश्ववस्वाद्यारुद्रान्ता गणदेवताः ।
तदाधिपत्यशालि-त्वान्मम देवोगणाधिपः ॥ ६ ॥
The groups of deities(Gaṇa-devatās), beginning with the Ādityas and Viśvadevas and ending with the Rudras, (are presided over by him). Because he holds lordship over them, my Lord is Gaṇādhipa (The Overlord of the Hosts of Deities).


Shloka 7: Vikaṭa / Ekadanta (विकट / एकदन्त)
एकामुख्या केवला वा दंष्ट्रा यस्य गणेशितुः ।
भूम्युद्धारेजगन्नाशे वैकदंष्ट्रः स कीर्त्यते ॥ ७ ॥
He who has one(Eka), prominent or single, tusk (Damshtra), the ruler of the Ganas (Gaṇeśituḥ), is celebrated as Vikaṭa (The Formidable One) and Ekadanta (The Single-Tusked One). (The story is that he broke it off) for lifting the earth (as an instrument) and for the destruction of the universe (at the end of time).


Shloka 8: Vakratuṇḍa (वक्रतुण्ड)
शुण्डादण्डस्य वक्रत्वाद्वक्रतुण्ड इतीर्यते ।
श्रियंतनोति रम्याणां विकारोऽपीति लोकवाकू ॥ ८ ॥
Because his trunk(Śuṇḍā) is curved (Vakra), he is declared as Vakratuṇḍa (The Curved-Trunked One). A popular saying (Lokavāk) also states that "even a curved (or unique) form bestows (Sri) prosperity and beauty upon the lovely."


Shloka 9: Gajavaktra / Mahodara (गजवक्त्र / महोदर)
गजस्येव मुखंयस्य गजवक्त्रः स उच्यते ।
अनंतकोटि-ब्रह्माण्डपूर्णकुक्षिर्महोदरः॥ ९ ॥
He who has a face(Vaktra) like an elephant's (Gaja's) is called Gajavaktra (The Elephant-Faced One). He whose belly (Udara) is vast (Maha) and filled with countless crores of universes (Brahmāṇḍas) is called Mahodara (The Great-Bellied One).


लंबोदरो धूम्रवर्णो विकटो विघ्ननायकः ॥ 
सुमुखो दुर्मुखो बुद्धो विघ्नराजो गजाननः ॥ ७॥


Shloka 10: Lambodara and Dhūmravarṇa (लम्बोदर / धूम्रवर्ण)
ब्रह्माण्डालंबनंयस्य कुक्षिर्लम्बोदरस्तु सः ।
वायोबींजेधूम्रवर्णं तद्रूपत्वादसावपि ॥ १० ॥
He whose belly(Kukshi) is the support of the universe (Brahmāṇḍa) is indeed Lambodara (The Pot-Bellied One). The seed syllable (Bija) of Vayu (the wind god) is of a smoky/gray color (Dhūmravarṇa); because he is of that form, he is also (called) Dhūmravarṇa (The Smoke-Colored One).


Shloka 11: Vikaṭa (विकट)
'कटेवर्षावरणयो' रिति धातोरनावृतः ।
विभुत्वाद्विकटः प्रोक्तः स यस्य विगतः कटः ॥ ११ ॥
From the verbal root'Kaṭ' (meaning 'to cover' or 'to surround'), he is called Vikaṭa (The Formidable One) because he is uncovered (Anāvṛtaḥ) and all-pervading (Vibhutvāt). Or (it can mean) he from whom all coverings (Kaṭa) have vanished (Vigataḥ).


Shloka 12: Vighnanāyaka (विघ्ननायक)
विघ्न्नान्नयत्यभक्तौघान्विघ्नानामधिपोऽथ वा ।
यद्वाविहन्ति नयति प्राणिनो विघ्ननायकः ॥ १२॥
He is Vighnanāyaka because he leads away (Nayati) hosts of non-devotees through obstacles (Vighnān), or because he is the lord (Adhipa) of obstacles. Alternatively, because he destroys (Vihanti) obstacles and leads (Nayati) beings to liberation.


Shloka 13: Sumukha (सुमुख)
आरंभाःशोभना येन यस्य शोभनमाननम् ।
स एव सुमुखस्तस्मैसुमुखाय नमो नमः ॥ १३॥
He by whom all undertakings become auspicious(Śobhanā), and whose face (Ānanam) is beautiful (Śobhanam), he alone is Sumukha (The Auspicious-Faced One). Salutations again and again to that Sumukha.








Shloka 14: Durmukha (दुर्मुख)
दुःस्पर्श वासुदुर्दर्शमग्नेः सूर्यस्य वा मुखम् ।
तद्रूपत्वादभक्तेषुतथात्वाच्चैष दुर्मुखः ॥ १४ ॥
The face of Agni(fire) or Surya (sun) is painful to touch or very difficult to look at. Because he assumes that form for non-devotees, and because of that nature, he is (also) Durmukha (The Fearsome-Faced One).


Shloka 15: Buddha (बुद्ध)
नित्यबुद्धस्वरूपत्वात्अविद्यावृत्तिनाशनः ।
यद्वाजिना-वतारत्वाद् बुद्ध इत्यभिधीयते ॥ १५ ॥
Because his essential nature is eternally enlightened(Nitya-Buddha) and he is the destroyer of the modifications of ignorance (Avidyā), or because he is an incarnation of a Jina (a conqueror, like the Buddha), he is described as Buddha (The Enlightened One).


Shloka 16: Vighnarāja (विघ्नराज)
विन्नैर्विराजतेतेषां राजा विघ्नस्तु विघ्नकः ।
भक्ताधीनश्च राजाच विघ्नराज-स्ततो मतः ॥ १६ ॥
He shines(Virajate) with obstacles (Vighnaiḥ) for (non-devotees); he is the king (Rājā) who creates obstacles (Vighnakṛt). And for devotees, he is a king who is under their control (Bhakta-adhīna). Therefore, he is considered Vighnarāja (The King of Obstacles).


Shloka 17: Gajānana (गजानन)
'अन प्राणन'इत्यस्माद्धातोर्णिचि ततो ल्युटि ।
गजाननयतीत्यर्थेसाधुरेष गजाननः ॥ १७॥
From the verbal root'An' (meaning 'to breathe' or 'to live'), in its causal form (Nici), and then with the suffix 'Lyut', the word is formed with the meaning "he who causes (elephants) to breathe/live" or "he who leads/moves elephants." Thus, this (name) Gajānana (Elephant-Faced) is grammatically correct.


Philosophical Defense Against Repetition


यत्तु-प्राचा गजवक्त्र-गजाननपदयोरवयवार्थाभेदे पौनरुक्त्या सहस्र-नामस्तुतिबाध एव...
Now, if some (critics) say:"Since the words Gajavaktra and Gajānana have the same meaning in their components ('Gaja' meaning elephant, and 'Vaktra/Anana' meaning face), their use constitutes repetition (Punrukti), which invalidates the very purpose of a hymn of a thousand names...


...न ह्येकमेव नाम सहस्रवारमावर्तितंस्तुतये पर्याप्तं भवतिः...
...for a eulogy is not accomplished by repeating the same name a thousand times...


ततश्च नाम्नांसहस्रेण स्तुतिर्न कृता भवतिः अतः सर्वाणि नामानि प्रत्येकं 
परस्परभिन्नार्थप्रकाशकान्येवेत्युक्तम्, तत् प्रतिज्ञा-मात्रम् ;
...and therefore the eulogy with a thousand names would not have been made.Hence, the claim that all names individually reveal mutually distinct meanings is merely an assertion (Pratijñāmātram).


The Commentator's Rebuttal


नामशब्दस्य प्रातिपदिकवाचकत्वेनाथैक्येऽपिशब्द-भेदमात्रेण नामसहस्रकरणकस्तुतिबाधाभावात् ।
Our Refutation:Even if the meaning (of two names) is the same, the word 'Nāma' (name) refers to a specific word-form (Prātipadika). Therefore, merely by the difference in the words (Śabda-bheda), there is no invalidation of the eulogy composed of a thousand names.


एतेनैकस्यैव नाम्न आवृत्तौतदापत्तिर्निरस्ता।
By this reasoning,the problem (you raised) concerning the repetition of a single name is refuted.


किंबहुना, अर्थभेदाच्छब्द‌भेदं गौणमप्यंगीकृत्याचार्य भगवत्पादैर्विष्णुसहस्रनामस्तुति निर्वाह-करणात्...
Moreover,even accepting a secondary meaning based on a difference in words, the revered Acharya Shankara Bhagavatpada (Adi Shankara) also maintained the validity of the Vishnu Sahasranama in this way...


...शब्दभेदेनामभेदात् कैमुतिकन्यायेनापि तदबाधः ।
...since a difference in words constitutes a difference in names,by 
the principle of "how much more so" (Kaimutika Nyāya), there is no invalidation.




The Final Verdict on Interpretation


अतोनिगमनिरुक्तादिप्रसिद्ध्यनुरोधादक्लिष्टोऽर्थो यथालाभं वर्ण्यतां नाम । न पुनरर्थभेद एवापेक्षित इति निर्बन्धो युक्तः।
Therefore,the meaning of a name should be explained as one finds it, in accordance with the well-known (etymological) principles of Nirukta, striving for a straightforward (Aklishta) interpretation. It is not justified to insist that a difference in meaning is absolutely required in every case.


A Challenge to the Critic


एवंप्रौढिमतस्तव गस्थः खान्तान्तस्थ इति नाम्नोरेका-र्थत्वेन व्याचक्षाणस्य कथं न लज्जा...
O, one who is so learned!How is it that you feel no shame while explaining names like 'Gajastha' (seated on an elephant) and 'Khāntāntastha' (residing in the cavity of the heart) as having the same meaning (i.e., 'residing within')?...


...कथंवा किरीटी कुंडली हारी वनमालीति नाम्नां त्वदीयपाठरीत्या पुनरुक्तानां 
अर्जुन-शेषमनोहरबलरामपरत्वेन संभवदर्थातराणामप्येकविधानार्थक-त्वेन तावकं वर्णनं युज्यताम् ?
...Or,according to your method of interpretation, how can your own commentary justify names like 'Kirīṭī' (wearer of a crown), 'Kuṇḍalī' (wearer of earrings), 'Hārī' (wearer of a garland), and 'Vanamālī' (wearer of a forest garland)? Though they have potentially different meanings (by referring to different ornaments), you would have to consider them repetitive, as they all essentially mean 'one who wears something'. How is your description consistent?


Dismissal of Overly Complex Interpretations


यदपि-लंबोदरपदंविराडात्म-परं, विघ्न्नपदं वायुपरं, गजाननपदं सूर्यपरमित्यादिरीत्या सां-प्रतिकलक्षणानेयार्थलक्षणादिभिर्जघन्यवृत्तिभिर्व्याख्यातम्,-तन्मुखे संभवतीत्यादिबहुतरन्यायविरुद्धं क्लिष्टतरं कुसृष्टिरूपं चेति न तादृशार्थज्ञानमदृष्टं जनयितुं अलमिति प्रामाणिकैरु-पेक्ष्यमिति दिक् ।
And as for that (other type of interpretation)which explains 'Lambodara' as referring to the Virat (cosmic) form, 'Vighna' as referring to Vayu (the wind), 'Gajānana' as referring to Surya (the sun), etc., using forced, secondary, and implied meanings (Lakshana) like Sampratikalaksana—such interpretation is contradicted by many logical principles, is extremely convoluted (Klishtatara), and is a product of poor scholarship (Kusrishti). Such interpretation cannot generate the spiritual merit (Adrishta) that comes from true knowledge. Therefore, it should be disregarded by authoritative scholars. This is the direction (of our conclusion).


भीमः प्रमोद आमोदः सुरानन्दो मदोत्कटः ।
हेरम्बः शम्बरः शम्भुर्लम्बकर्णो महाबलः ॥ ८ ॥


Shloka 18: Bhīma (भीम) & Pramoda (प्रमोद)
दुष्टानां भयकारित्वाद् भीम इत्युच्यते बुधैः ।
इष्टलाभा-त्सुखं यत्तु स प्रमोद इति स्मृतः ॥१८॥
Because he causes fear in the wicked, he is called Bhīma (The Terrifying) by the wise. And the happiness that arises from the attainment of a desired object is called Pramoda (Joy), and he is that.


Shloka 19: Āmoda (आमोद)
ततः प्राक् सुखमामो-ददृष्टार्थप्राप्तिनिश्चयात् ।
इष्टार्थभोगजनितं सुखमानन्द उच्यते ॥ १९ ॥
The happiness that arises prior to that (Pramoda), from the certainty of attaining a seen object, is called Āmoda (Delight). The happiness generated by the enjoyment of a desired object is called Ānanda.


Shloka 20: Surānanda (सुरानन्द)
स सुरोत्थः सुरथ्यो वा सुरानन्दस्तदात्मना ।
अत एवान्यविषयमोषादात्मैकभावतः ॥ २० ॥
That bliss (Ānanda) which arises from the gods (Sura) or which exists in heaven (Surathī), is Surānanda (Bliss of the Gods). His very nature is that. Therefore, he steals away the mind from other sense objects, leading to a state of oneness with the Self.


Shloka 21: Madotkaṭa (मदोत्कट) & Heraṃba (हेरंब)
मदेनावरणोत्क्रांत्या मदोत्कट इति स्मृतः ।
हः शंकरे रविः शब्दे शैवतंत्रप्रवर्तनात् ॥ २१ ॥
Because he has transcended (Uttkrānti) the veil of spiritual intoxication (Mada), he is remembered as Madotkaṭa (Supremely Intoxicated). The syllable "Ha" refers to Shiva (Shankara), "Ra" to fire (Pavaka), and "Mba" to sound (Shabda). Because he propounds the Shaiva Tantras, he is called Heraṃba.


Shloka 22: Śaṃbara (शंबर)
उद्दामशौर्यवत्त्वाद्वा हेरंब इति कथ्यते ।
शं सुखं तद्वरं श्रेष्ठं यस्मिन्नस्ति स शंबरः ॥ २२ ॥
Alternatively, due to his immense valor, he is called Heraṃba. He in whom exists supreme (Vara), excellent (Shreṣṭha) bliss (Śhaṃ) is Śaṃbara.
Shloka 23: Śaṃbhu (शंभु)
शंबं वा कुलिशं राति यद्वा सलिलविग्रहः ।
शंभुस्तु शं भवत्यस्माच्छिवाभेदेन वोदितः ॥ २३ ॥
Or, he who bestows (Rāti) the weapon (Kuliśa, i.e., the goad) of bliss (Śhaṃ). Or, he whose form is water (Salila, i.e., cool and soothing). But Śaṃbhu is so called because from him comes welfare (Śhaṃ - auspiciousness). He is declared to be non-different from Shiva.


Shloka 24: Lambakarṇa (लम्बकर्ण)
यत्र कापि कृतं भक्तैराह्वानस्तवनादिकम् ।
नातिदूर इवाकर्ण्य लंबकर्ण इति स्मृतः ॥ २४ ॥
Wherever the invocation, praise, etc., is made by devotees, he hears it as if it is not very far away. Thus, he is remembered as Lambakarṇa (The Long-Eared One).


नन्दनोऽलम्पटोऽभीरूर्मेघनादो गणञ्जयः ।
विनायको विरूपाक्षो वीरः शूरवरप्रदः ॥ ९॥


Shloka 25: Mahābala (महाबल) & Nandana (नंदन)
महान् बला-सुरो येन बलित्वाद्वा महाबलः ।
नंदिः समृद्धिवाचीति तद्धेतौ ल्युटि नंदनः ॥ २५ ॥
He by whom the great demon Bala was (destroyed), or due to his great strength (Bali), he is Mahābala (Of Great Strength). "Nandi" means prosperity. With the suffix 'Lyut' indicating the reason, he is Nandana (The Prosperous One) because he is the cause of prosperity.


Shloka 26: Alampaṭa (अलम्पट) & Abhīru (अभीरु)
अलं-पटसमृद्धत्वादलंकारः पटोऽस्य वा ।
अभीरुर्भयशून्यत्वादं-गनारहितोऽथ वा ॥२६॥
Because he is abundantly (Alaṃ) adorned with silk garments (Paṭa), he is Alampaṭa (The One Abundantly Clad in Silk). He is Abhīru (The Fearless) because he is devoid of fear, or because he is without (a) body (i.e., he is formless).


Shloka 27: Meghanāda (मेघनाद)
मेघनादः प्रसिद्धार्थो मेघान् नाश-यतीति वा ।
एकैकं यत्नतः शत्रु जयति प्राकृतो जनः ॥ २७ ॥
Meghanāda (Cloud-Roarer) has the well-known meaning (of thunder). Or, it means he who destroys (Nāśayati) the clouds (Megha) (of ignorance). An ordinary man conquers one enemy at a time with great effort...


Shloka 28: Gaṇañjaya (गणंजय) & Vināyaka (विनायक)
अनायासादयं व्यूहान् जयतीति गणंजयः ।
विः पक्षिरूपो जीवौघस्तन्ने तृत्वाद्विनायकः ॥ २८ ॥
...but this one conquers (Jayati) entire armies (Vyūhān) without effort, hence he is Gaṇañjaya (Conqueror of Hosts). "Vi" can mean a bird (in the form of Garuda) or the host of individual souls (Jīvaugha). Because he is the leader (Netṛtva) of them, he is Vināyaka (The Supreme Leader).


Shloka 29: Virūpākṣa (विरूपाक्ष)
धीरशूरो धैर्यशौर्यसामानाधिकरण्यतः ॥ २९ ॥
He is Virūpākṣa (The Odd-Eyed One) because his eyes are dissimilar—one is the sun and the other is the moon (or fire). (The name Dhīraśūra is mentioned separately in the commentary).


महागणपतिर्बुद्धिप्रियः क्षिप्रप्रसादनः ।
रुद्रप्रियो गणाध्यक्ष उमापुत्रोऽघनाशनः ॥ १० ॥


Shloka 30: Varaprada (वरप्रद) & Mahāgaṇapati (महागणपति)
वरान् स्वपादसेविभ्यो ददातीति वरप्रदः ।
गुणगुल्मादयः सेनाभेदास्तेषु य उत्तमः ॥३०॥
He is Varaprada (The Boon-Giver) because he gives (Dadāti) boons (Varān) to those who serve his feet. The different armies (like Guṇa, Gulma, etc.) are various types of hosts (Gaṇa)...


स्थूलास्तानपि पातीति महागणपतिर्मतः ।
...and he who protects (Pātī) even those gross ones (Sthūlāḥ) is considered Mahāgaṇapati (The Great Lord of Hosts).


Shloka 31: Buddhipriya (बुद्धिप्रिय) & Kṣipraprasādana (क्षिप्रप्रसादन)
बुद्धिप्रियः संशयप्न्नो बुद्धिः स्यान्निश्चयात्मिका ॥ ३१ ॥
क्षिप्रप्रसादनः क्षिप्रं भक्तैर्ध्यातः प्रसीदति ।
He is Buddhipriya (Dear to Intellect) because he is the beloved of Buddhi (the goddess of intellect), whose nature is decisiveness, which destroys doubt. He is Kṣipraprasādana (The Quickly Appeased One) because he becomes pleased (Prasīdati) quickly (Kṣipram) when meditated upon by devotees.


Shloka 32: Rudrapriya (रुद्रप्रिय)
रुद्रप्रिय इति प्रोक्तो रुट्रैकादशिनीप्रियः ॥ ३२ ॥
He is proclaimed as Rudrapriya (Dear to Rudra) because he is dear to the group of eleven Rudras.




Shloka 33: Gaṇādhyakṣa (गणाध्यक्ष) & Umāputra (उमापुत्र)
गणाध्यक्षस्तु षटूत्रिंशत्तत्त्वसंदोहपालकः ।
उमापुत्रस्तु पॅल्लोकात्पार्वत्या अपि तारकः ॥३३॥
He is Gaṇādhyakṣa (The Superintendent of Hosts) as he is the protector of the collection of thirty-six cosmic principles (Tattvas). He is Umāputra (The Son of Uma) as he is the son of Pārvatī. He is also the savior (Tāraka) of even her (i.e., he saved Parvati from grief).


Shloka 34: Mahodara (महोदर) & Aghanaśana (अघनाशन)
महोदरोऽप्यसावल्पनैवेद्येनैव तृष्यति।
अशनं न घनं दुःखहरणाद्वा घनाशनः ॥३४॥
Although he is Mahodara (The Great-Bellied One), he is satisfied with even a small offering of food. He is Aghanaśana (The One whose Food is Not Abundant / The Destroyer of Sorrows) because his food (Aśana) is not abundant (Ghana), or because he destroys (Aśana) dense masses (Ghana) of sorrow.


कुमारगुरुरीशानपुत्रो मूषकवाहनः ।
सिद्धिप्रियः सिद्धिपतिः सिद्धः सिद्धिविनायकः ॥ ११ ॥


Shloka 35: Kumāraguru (कुमारगुरु)
सनत्कुमाररूपोऽपि विद्यामुपदिशन् गुरुः ।
स्कन्दपूर्वभव-त्वाद्वा कुमारगुरुरीरितः ॥ ३५॥
Although he is in the form of Sanatkumāra (the eternal youth), he is the Guru who instructs knowledge. Or, because he existed even before Skanda (Kartikeya), he is declared as Kumāraguru (The Preceptor of the Young Gods/The Preceptor who is ever-youthful).


Shloka 36: Īśānaputra (ईशानपुत्र) & Mūṣakavāhana (मूषकवाहन)
ईशानपुत्र इत्युक्तः शिति-कण्ठात्मजत्वतः ।
उन्दुरुं वाहनीकृत्य ख्यातो मूषकवाहनः ॥३६॥
He is called Īśānaputra (The Son of Īśāna/Shiva) because he is the son of Shiti-kaṇṭha (the blue-throated one, Shiva). He is famous as Mūṣakavāhana (The One whose Vehicle is a Mouse) because he has made a mouse (Ūnduru) his vehicle (Vāhana).


Shloka 37: Siddhipriya (सिद्धिप्रिय) & Siddhipati (सिद्धिपति)
सिद्धिप्रियः प्रिया अस्येत्यणिमाद्यष्टसिद्धयः ।
अणि-माद्यष्टसिद्धीनां पाता सिद्धिपतिस्ततः ॥३७॥
He is Siddhipriya (The Lover of Siddhis) because the eight supernatural powers (Siddhis) starting with Aṇimā (the power to become minute) are his beloveds (Priyāḥ). Thereafter, he is Siddhipati (The Lord of Siddhis) because he is the protector (Pātā) of the eight Siddhis.


Shloka 38: Siddha (सिद्ध) & Siddhivināyaka (सिद्धिविनायक)
गोरक्षादिमहा-सिद्धरूपत्वात् सिद्ध उच्यते ।
भक्ते सिद्धिर्विशेषेण नयन् सिद्धिविनायकः ॥ ३८ ॥
He is called Siddha (The Perfected One) because he assumes the form of great perfected beings like Gorakṣa. He is Siddhivināyaka (The Vināyaka who Bestows Accomplishment) because he specially bestows perfection (Siddhi) upon his devotee.


अविघ्नस्तुम्बुरुः सिंहवाहनो मोहिनीप्रियः ।
कटङ्कटो राजपुत्रः शाकलः संमितोऽमितः ॥ १२॥


Shloka 39: Avighna (अविघ्न)
भावप्रधाननिर्देशादवित्वं पशुतां हरन् ।
विन्नैर्विरहितत्वाद्वाऽप्यविघ्न इति कथ्यते ॥ ३९ ॥
Because the primary intent (in worship) is to indicate his state of being without (obstacles), and because he removes the beast-like nature (Paśutā, i.e., spiritual ignorance) from beings, or simply because he is devoid of obstacles (Vighna), he is called Avighna (The Non-Obstacle).


Shloka 40: Tumburu (तुम्बुरु)
रोरूयमाणस्तुंवेन वैणि कैरिति तुंबुरुः ।
इमे गायंति वीणायां ऐतमेवेति हि श्रुतिः ॥ ४० ॥
He is called Tumburu (named after a celestial Gandharva musician) because he is praised (Rorūyamāṇaḥ) by the Tumburu Gandharvas playing the Vīṇā. Indeed, the Vedic scripture (Śruti) says, "These (Gandharvas) sing of him alone to the accompaniment of the Vīṇā."


Shloka 41: Siṃhavāhana (सिंहवाहन)
मयूरमूषकौ यद्वत्तथा सिंहोऽपि वाहनम् ।
गौर्या वा सिंहवाहाया अभेदात्सिंहवाहनः ॥४१॥
Just as (he has) a peacock and a mouse (as vehicles), similarly a lion (Siṃha) is also his vehicle (Vāhana). Or, due to his non-difference from Gaurī (Pārvatī), who has a lion as her vehicle, he is Siṃhavāhana (The Lion-Mounted).
Shloka 42: Mohinīpriya (मोहिनीप्रिय)
मोहिनीशः शिवस्तस्मादभिन्नो मोहिनीप्रियः ।
कटमावृत्ति-मज्ञानं नीहारेणेति हि श्रुतेः ॥ ४२ ॥
Mohinīśa means "The Lord of Mohinī" (Shiva). Therefore, being non-different from him (Shiva), Ganesha is Mohinīpriya (The Beloved of Mohinī). As the Śruti says, "(He) covers ignorance with a veil."


Shloka 43: Kaṭaṅkaṭa (कटंकट) & Rājaputra (राजपुत्र)
कटयत्वावृणोतीति ज्ञानदानात्कटंकटः ।
वरेण्याख्यस्य पृथिवीनेतुः पुत्रवदाचरन् ॥ ४३ ॥
चंद्रो वा पुत्रवद्यस्य राजपुत्रः स उच्यते ॥
He is Kaṭaṅkaṭa because he covers (Āvṛṇoti) with a veil (Kaṭa) and gives (Ka) knowledge (through his grace). Behaving like a son towards the ruler of the earth named Vareṇya, or because the moon (Candra) is like his son, he is called Rājaputra (The Prince).


Shloka 44: Śālaka (शालक) & Saṃmita (संमित)
शः परोक्षेऽलकः केशे यस्यैकांशोऽप्यचाक्षुषः ॥ ४४॥
शातींद्रियः शालतेऽसौ राजतेवेति शालकः ।
अंगुष्ठमात्रमित्यादि श्रुत्या व्याप्तोऽपि संमितः ॥ ४५ ॥
He whose smallest part (Ekāṃśa) is imperceptible to the senses (A-cākṣuṣaḥ)—where "Śa" means "subtle" and "Alaka" can mean "lock of hair" or "subtle"—is Śālaka. He shines (Śālate) and glows like a king, controlling the senses (Śatīndriya). Although he is all-pervading, as stated in Śruti ("of the size of a thumb"), he is also Saṃmita (Measured/Limited, i.e., he has a specific, knowable form).


Shloka 46: Amita (अमित)
मशकेनापि नागेन शम इत्यपि च श्रुतेः ।
परिमाणं त्वणु स्थूलं ह्रस्वं दीर्घ चतुर्विधम् ॥४६॥
(He can be perceived as being as small as) a gnat or (as large as) a great serpent, as stated in the Śruti. Measurement is of four kinds: minute (Aṇu), gross (Sthūla), short (Hrasva), and long (Dīrgha)...


तन्नास्तीत्य मितोऽस्थूलमनण्वित्यादितः श्रुतेः ।
...Because, as the Śruti says ("not gross, not minute..."), He is beyond these very measurements, He is Amita (The Immeasurable).


कूष्माण्डसामसम्भूतिर्दुर्जयो धूर्जयो जयः ।
भूपतिर्भुवनपतिर्भूतानां पतिरव्ययः ॥ १३॥


Shloka 47: Kūṣmāṇḍa-sāma-sambhūti (कूष्माण्डसामसम्भूति)
कूष्माण्डसामसंभूतिः कूष्माण्डैर्जुहुयादिति ॥ ४७ ॥
विधौ प्रसिद्धा मंत्राश्च सामान्यस्य विभूतयः ।
He is Kūṣmāṇḍa-sāma-sambhūti (The One Born from the Kūṣmāṇḍa Sāman) because he is born from the Kūṣmāṇḍa Sāman (a Vedic chant), or because one offers oblations with pumpkins (Kūṣmāṇḍa) as prescribed in ritual codes. The mantras (associated with him) are well-known in the injunctions, and they are the manifestations of the universal (principle).


Shloka 48: Durjaya (दुर्जय)
अजय्यो बलिभि-दैत्यैर्मनसापीति दुर्जयः ॥४८॥
He is Durjaya (The Difficult to Conquer) because he cannot be conquered even in mind by demons like Bali.


Shloka 49: Dhūrjaya (धूर्जय) & Jaya (जय)
धुरं वहत्यनायासाज्जगतामिति धूर्जयः ।
जयो जयस्वरूपत्वाद्भारताद्यात्मकत्वतः ॥ ४९ ॥
He is Dhūrjaya (The Bearer of the Burden) because he effortlessly bears the burden (Dhura) of the worlds. He is Jaya (Victory) because his very nature is victory, and because he is the essence of (epics like) the Mahābhārata, etc., which culminate in victory.


Shloka 50: Bhūpati (भूपति), Bhuvanapati (भुवनपति), Bhūtānāmpati (भूतानांपति)
भूपतिर्भुवनपतिर्भूतानां पतिरित्यमी ।
भ्रातरोऽग्नेस्तदात्म-त्वाद्भूपत्यादिः प्रकीर्तितः ॥ ५० ॥
These—Bhūpati (Lord of the Earth), Bhuvanapati (Lord of the World), and Bhūtānāmpati (Lord of Beings)—are the brothers of Agni (the fire god). Because Ganesha has their nature (i.e., he is the overlord they serve), he is celebrated by these names beginning with Bhūpati.


विश्वकर्ता विश्वमुखो विश्वरूपो निधिर्गुणः ।
कविः कवीनामृषभो ब्रह्मण्यो ब्रह्मवित्प्रियः ॥ १४॥


Shloka 51: Avyaya (अव्यय) & Viśvakartā (विश्वकर्ता)
अव्ययो नाशराहित्याद् विश्वकर्ता जगत्कृतेः ।
विश्वस्य मुखमारंभो यस्माद्विश्वं मुखेऽस्य वा ॥५१॥
He is Avyaya (The Imperishable) because he is devoid of destruction. He is Viśvakartā (The Creator of the Universe) because he is the creator (Kartā) of the world (Jagat). He is the source/origin (Mukha) of the universe (Viśva), or the universe is within his mouth.


Shloka 52: Viśvamukha (विश्वमुख) & Viśvarūpa (विश्वरूप)
विश्वस्य मुखवत्तृप्तिहेतुर्विश्वमुखस्ततः ।
सर्वप्रपंचरूपत्वाद् विश्वरूप इति स्मृतिः ॥ ५२ ॥
Therefore, he is Viśvamukha (The One whose Face is the Universe) because he is the cause of satisfaction, like food (which enters through the mouth). Because his form is the entire phenomenal creation, he is remembered as Viśvarūpa (The One of Universal Form).


Shloka 53: Viśvarūpa (विश्वरूप) - Alternate Meaning
अथवा विश्वरूपोऽसौ त्वष्ट्रा दैवपुरोहितः ।
वियदादिजगज्जातं नित-रां यत्र धीयते ॥ ५३ ॥
Alternatively, he is Viśvarūpa (here, referring to the sage of that name) who was the priest of the gods. (The name is apt for Ganesha because) the entire universe, from space (Vyoma) onwards, is meditated upon within him most intensely.


Shloka 54: Nidhi (निधि) & Ghṛṇi (घृणि)
महापद्मादिनवकरूपत्वाद्वा निधिः स्मृतः ।
घृणिरादित्यरूपत्वाद् घृणिः सूर्य इति श्रुतेः ॥५४॥
He is remembered as Nidhi (The Treasure) because he is the nine treasures (Nidhis) like Mahāpadma. He is Ghṛṇi (The Radiant One) because of his solar nature; as the Śruti says, "Ghṛṇi is the sun."


Shloka 55: Kavi (कवि) & Kavīnāmṛṣabha (कवीनामृषभ)
कार्यत्वात्काव्यकर्तृत्वात् कविरेष तथा कविं ।
कवीनामुप-मश्रुत्या कवीनामृषभोऽप्ययम् ॥ ५५ ॥
He is Kavi (The Wise Poet/Seer) because he is the object of poetic description and the composer of poetry. And he is the one who protects the wise. Through the Vedic analogy, he is also the Kavīnāmṛṣabha (The Foremost among all Poets).




Shloka 56: Brahmaṇya (ब्रह्मण्य) & Brahmanaspati (ब्रह्मणस्पति)
ब्रह्मण्यो ब्राह्मणे वेदे साधुस्तपसि धातरि ।
वाग्वै ब्रह्मपतिस्तस्या इत्येष ब्रह्म-णस्पतिः ॥ ५६ ॥
He is Brahmaṇya (The Upholder of Sacred Law) because he is virtuous (Sādhu) in relation to Brahmins, the Vedas, and penance. He is Brahmanaspati (The Lord of Sacred Speech) because, as the Śruti says, "Speech is indeed Brahman; he is its lord."


ज्येष्ठराजो निधिपतिर्निधिप्रियपतिप्रियः ।
हिरण्मयपुरान्तःस्थः सूर्यमण्डलमध्यगः ॥ १५ ॥


Shloka 57: Jyeṣṭharāja (ज्येष्ठराज) & Nidhipati (निधिपति)
ज्येष्ठराज इति ख्यातो ज्येष्ठाख्ये सान्नि राजनात् ।
एष नाम्ना निधिपतिर्निधीनां परिपालनात् ॥ ५७॥
He is famous as Jyeṣṭharāja (The King of the Eldest) because he reigns (Rājanāt) in the assembly (Sānni) of the deity Jyeṣṭhā. By name, he is Nidhipati (The Lord of Treasures) because he protects (Pari-pālanāt) the treasures (Nidhīs).


Shloka 58: Nidhipriyapati-priya (निधिप्रियपतिप्रिय)
निधीनां त्वा निधिपतिं हवामह इति श्रुतेः ।
निधिप्रिया ये पतयो राज-राजादयो नृपाः ॥ ५८ ॥
तैरप्युपास्य इत्येष निधिप्रियपतिप्रियः ।
As the Śruti says, "We invoke you, O Lord of Treasures." The lords who are dear to the treasures, such as the king of kings and other rulers, also worship him. Therefore, he is Nidhipriyapati-priya (The Beloved of the Lords who are dear to the Treasures).


Shloka 59: Hiraṇmayapura-antaḥstha (हिरण्मयपुरान्तःस्थ)
हिरण्मय-पुरान्तःस्थो दहराकाशमध्यगः ॥ ५९ ॥
चिन्मयब्रह्मपूर्दे-हस्तदंत हृदये स्थितेः ।
He who resides within the city of gold (the heart) is Hiraṇmayapura-antaḥstha (The One who Dwells Inside the Golden City). He dwells in the subtle space within the heart. His body is the abode filled with the consciousness that is Brahman, and he is situated within the cavity of the heart.


Shloka 60: Sūryamaṇḍala-madhyaga (सूर्यमण्डलमध्यग)
ध्येयत्वादंतरादित्ये सूर्यमंडल-मध्यगः ॥ ६० ॥
He is to be meditated upon as the inner sun and as the one residing in the center of the solar orb; thus He is Sūryamaṇḍala-madhyaga (The One Situated in the Center of the Solar Orb).


कराहतिध्वस्तसिन्धुसलिलः पूषदन्तभित् ।
उमाङ्ककेलिकुतुकी मुक्तिदः कुलपावनः ॥ १६॥


Shloka 61: Karāhati-vidhvastasindhusalila (कराहतिविध्वस्तसिन्धुसलिल)
शुण्डादण्डाभिघातेन रिक्तमब्धि चकार यः ॥
कराहति-ध्वस्तसिंधुसलिलः स ततो मतः ॥ ६१ ॥
He who, with the blow of his trunk, emptied the ocean and destroyed its water is therefore considered Karāhati-vidhvastasindhusalila (The One who with a Blow of His Trunk Destroyed the Ocean's Water).


Shloka 62: Pūṣadantabhit (पूषदंतभित्)
वीरभद्रो दक्ष-मुखे पूष्णो दंतानपातयत् ।
तद्रूपत्वादसौ देवः कथ्यते पूषदंतभित् ॥ ६२ ॥
(Virabhadra, a form of Shiva,) knocked out the teeth of the god Pūṣan in the assembly of Dakṣa. Because he (Ganesha) is of that same form (as the supreme Shiva), this god is declared as Pūṣadantabhit (The Smasher of Pūṣan's Teeth).


Shloka 63: Umāṅkakelikutukī (उमाङ्ककेलिकुतुकी)
गौर्युत्संगे कृताक्रीडो न बाल्यात्किंतु कौतुकात् ।
अत एवोमाङ्ककेलिकुतुकी विबुधैः स्मृतः ॥६३॥
He who played in Gauri's lap, not out of childishness but out of divine delight (Kautuka). For this very reason, the wise remember him as Umāṅkakelikutukī (The One who takes Delight in Playing on Uma's Lap).


Shloka 64: Muktida (मुक्तिद) & Kulapālana (कुलपालन)
निगडो मोचनान्मोक्षदानाद्वा मुक्तिदो मतः ।
वंशस्य कौल-तंत्रस्याप्यवनात् कुलपालनः ॥ ६४ ॥
He is considered Muktida (The Giver of Liberation) because he releases from fetters or bestows liberation (Mokṣa). He is Kulapālana (The Protector of the Family Lineage) because he protects (Avana) the lineage (Vaṃśa) and the Kaula Tantra tradition.


किरीटी कुण्डली हारी वनमाली मनोमयः ।
वैमुख्यहतदैत्यश्रीः पादाहतिजितक्षितिः ॥ १७॥


Shloka 65: Kirīṭī (किरीटी) & Kuṇḍalī (कुंडली)
( यदाभिमुख्यराहित्यान्नष्टा संपत्सुरद्विषाम्) ।
किरीटी मौलिभूषावानथवाऽर्जुनरूपधृक् ।
कुंडली कर्णभूषावान् अथवा शेषरूपधृक् ॥ ६५ ॥
(He is the one from whose lack of favor the prosperity of the enemies of the gods perishes). 
He is Kirīṭī (The Wearer of the Crown) as he is adorned with a crown, or because he assumed the form of Arjuna. He is Kuṇḍalī (The Wearer of Earrings) as he wears earrings, or because he assumed the form of Śeṣa (the serpent).


Shloka 66: Hārī (हारी) & Vanamālī (वनमाली)
हारी मुक्तादिमाला धृगथवाऽ-त्यंतसुंदरः।
वनमाली दधात्येष मालामापादलंबिनीम् ॥६६॥
He is Hārī (The Wearer of Garlands) as he wears a garland of pearls, etc., or because he is extremely beautiful. He is Vanamālī (The Wearer of the Forest Garland) as he wears a garland that hangs down to his feet.


Shloka 67: Manomaya (मनोमय)
मनोमयः स्वसंकल्पकल्पितैककलेवरः ।
यदाभिमुख्यराहि-त्यान्नष्टा संपत्सुरद्विषाम् ॥ ६७ ॥
He is Manomaya (Made of Mind) because his entire body is fashioned by his own will. (It is repeated that) from the lack of his favor, the prosperity of the enemies of the gods perishes.


Shloka 68: Vaimukhya-hata-daitya-śrīḥ (वैमुख्यहतदैत्यश्रीः) & Pādāhati-jita-kṣiti (पादाहतिजितक्षिति)
यत्पादाघातमात्रेण पृथ्वी नम्रा बभूव सः ।
वैमुख्यहतदैत्यश्रीः पादाहतिजित-क्षितिः ॥ ६८ ॥
He at whose mere stamp of the foot the earth became bowed down; he by whose disfavor the glory of the demons is destroyed is Vaimukhya-hata-daitya-śrīḥ (The One by whose Disfavor the Glory of Demons is Destroyed), and he whose kick of the foot conquers the earth is Pādāhati-jita-kṣiti (The One who Conquered the Earth with a Kick).




सद्योजातः स्वर्णमुञ्जमेखली दुर्निमित्तहृत् ।
दुःस्वप्नहृत्प्रसहनो गुणी नादप्रतिष्ठितः ॥ १८॥


Shloka 69: Sadyojāta-svarṇa-muñja-mekhalī (सद्योजातस्वर्णमुञ्जमेखली)
मुञ्जाख्यहैमतृणजां मौञ्जीं तात्कालिकीं दधत् ।
सद्यो-जातस्वर्णमुञ्जमेखलीति निगद्यते ॥ ६९ ॥
He who, immediately upon birth, wore the sacred girdle made of golden Muñja grass is proclaimed as Sadyojāta-svarṇa-muñja-mekhalī (The One who at Birth Wore the Girdle of Golden Muñja Grass).


Shloka 70: Durnimittahṛt (दुर्निमित्तहृत्)
मूर्तिस्फोटन-भूकम्पमहोल्कापतनादिभिः ।
संसूचितान्यरिष्टानि हन्त्यतो दुर्निमित्तहृत् ॥ ७० ॥
He destroys the calamities portended by evil omens such as the cracking of idols, earthquakes, and the falling of great meteors. Therefore, he is Durnimittahṛt (The Remover of Evil Omens).


Shloka 71: Duḥsvapnahṛt (दुःस्वप्नहृत्) & Prasahana (प्रसहन)
दुःस्वप्नमपि सुस्वप्नं कुर्वन् दुःस्वप्न-हृन्मतः ।
भक्तापराधान् क्षमते तेन प्रसहनः स्मृतः ॥ ७१ ॥
He is considered Duḥsvapnahṛt (The Remover of Bad Dreams) because he turns even a bad dream into a good dream. He is remembered as Prasahana (The Forgiver) because he forgives the offenses of his devotees.


Shloka 72: Guṇī (गुणी) & Nādapratiṣṭhita (नादप्रतिष्ठित)
विशोकविजिघत्सत्वप्रमुख्यैः स्यात् गुणैर्गुणी ।
अस्ति प्रणव-बिन्द्वन्तेऽर्धचन्द्राद्यक्षराष्टकम् ॥ ७२ ॥
तत्र नादस्तृतीयस्त-द्वाच्यो नादप्रतिष्ठितः ।
He is Guṇī (The Embodiment of Qualities) because he possesses qualities such as freedom from sorrow and an indomitable spirit. There exists the group of eight letters, beginning with 'Ardhacandra', at the end of the Praṇava (Oṁ) followed by the Bindu. Among them, the third is Nāda. He, who is denoted by that, is Nādapratiṣṭhita (Established in the Primordial Sound).


सुरूपः सर्वनेत्राधिवासो वीरासनाश्रयः ।
पीताम्बरः खण्डरदः खण्डवैशाखसंस्थितः ॥ १९॥
Shloka 73: Surūpa (सुरूप)
सुरूपो भूरिलावण्याद्यद्वा तत्त्वनिरूपणात् ॥ ७३ ॥
He is Surūpa (The Beautiful-One) because of his abundant loveliness, 
or because he is ascertained (Nirūpaṇa) as the ultimate reality (Tattva).


Conclusion of the First Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ ।
गणेशसहस्त्रनाम खद्योते प्रथमं शतम् ॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), composed by Bhāskara, 
Also known as Agnicit, ends the first hundred of the Ganesha Sahasranama.


Shloka 74: Sarvanetrādhivāsaka (सर्वनेत्राधिवास:)
सर्वनेत्रेषु वसति य एष क्षीणपूरुषः ।
एष आत्मेति वचनात् सर्वनेत्राधिवासकः ॥ ७४ ॥
This being, who is the Inner Controller (Kṣīṇapuruṣa), dwells in all eyes. Because of the Vedic statement, "This is the Self," he is Sarvanetrādhivāsaka (The One who Resides in All Eyes).


Shloka 75: Vīrāsanāśraya (वीरासनाश्रय)
वामजानूपरिगतदक्षपादोपवे-शनं ।
वीरासनं तथा स्थानादेष वीरासनाश्रयः ॥ ७५ ॥
The posture where the left heel is placed at the base and the right foot is placed upon it (for meditation) is called the Vīrāsana. Because he remains in that posture, he is Vīrāsanāśraya (The One Seated in the Hero's Pose).


Shloka 76: Pītāmbara (पीतांबर) & Khaṇḍarada (खण्डरद)
निपीतं गगनं येन यस्य पीतोऽथ वा पटः ।
स तु पीतांबरः खण्डरदो दन्तार्धधारणात् ॥ ७६ ॥
He by whom the sky is consumed, or he who wears a yellow (Pīta) garment (Paṭa), is Pītāmbara (The Yellow-Robed One). He is Khaṇḍarada (The One with a Broken Tusk) because he holds (only) half (Ardha) of a tusk (Danta).


चित्राङ्गः श्यामदशनो भालचन्द्रो हविर्भुजः ।
योगाधिपस्तारकस्थः पुरुषो गजकर्णकः ॥ २०॥


Shloka 77: Citrāṅkaśyāmadaśana (चित्रांकश्यामदशन) & Bhālacandra (भालचन्द्र)
अर्धचन्द्रं दधन्मूर्भा खण्डेन्दुकृतशेखरः ।
श्यामैकप्रचुरैश्चित्रैरंकिते रदने सति ॥ ७७ ॥
चित्रां-कश्यामदशन इत्येवं स्तूयसे बुधैः।
भालचन्द्र इति ख्यातो भाले चंद्रस्य धारणात् ॥ ७८ ॥
He who bears the half-moon on his forehead, making it his crest jewel; 
he whose teeth are marked with various and distinct black lines
—is praised by the wise as Citrāṅkaśyāmadaśana (The One with Uniquely Marked, Dark Teeth). 
He is famous as Bhālacandra (The One with the Moon on his Forehead) 
because he wears the moon (Candra) on his forehead (Bhāla).


Shloka 79: Aṣṭamīcandra (अष्टमीचंद्र) & Caturbhuja (चतुर्भुज)
अष्टमीचंद्रसदृशं ललाटं यस्य सोऽथवा ।
चत्वारो बाहवो यस्य विग्रहे स चतुर्भुजः ॥ ७९ ॥
He whose forehead resembles the moon on the eighth lunar day (Aṣṭamīcandra), or he who has four arms in his form, is Caturbhuja (The Four-Armed One).


Shloka 80: Yogādhipa (योगाधिप)
योगाचार्यावतारा ये लैंगेऽष्टाविंशतिः स्मृताः ।
लकुलीशादयस्तत्तद्रूपो योगाधिपो मतः ॥ ८० ॥
The twenty-eight incarnations of Yoga teachers, like Lakulīśa, are remembered in the Liṅga Purāṇa. Since he assumes all those forms, he is considered Yogādhipa (The Lord of Yoga).


Shloka 81: Tārakastha (तारकस्थ) & Puruṣa (पुरुष)
प्रणवेना-भिषेयत्वात् तारकस्थ इति स्मृतः ।
पूर्षु सर्वासु शेतेऽसौ साक्षित्वेनेति पूरुषः ॥ ८१ ॥
He is remembered as Tārakastha (Established in the Liberating Syllable, Oṁ) because he is to be anointed/worshipped with the Praṇava (Oṁ). He is Puruṣa (The Supreme Being) because he "reposes" in all bodies as the witness.


गणाधिराजो विजयः स्थिरो गजपतिर्ध्वजी ।
देवदेवः स्मरः प्राणदीपको वायुकीलकः ॥ २१॥




Shloka 82: Gajakarṇaka (गजकर्णक) & Gaṇādhīrāja (गणाधिराज)
यस्य कर्णौ गजस्येव तेनासौ गजकर्णकः ।
आधीयंते यत्र काव्ये गणा मेयरसादयः ॥ ८२ ॥
गणा-धिराजस्तेनासौ राजते प्रतिपाद्यते ।
He whose ears are like those of an elephant is therefore Gajakarṇaka (The Elephant-Eared One). He in whom the "hosts" (Gaṇas)—such as the measurable elements (Meya) and the aesthetic sentiments (Rasa)—are established in poetry (Kāvya), is proclaimed as Gaṇādhīrāja (The Supreme King of Hosts).


Shloka 83: Vijayasthira (विजयस्थिर)
भक्तानां विजये स्थैर्ये शालित्वाद् विजयस्थिरः ॥ ८३ ॥
He is Vijayasthira (The Steady One in Victory) because he excels in granting victory and steadfastness to his devotees.


Shloka 84: Gajapatidhvajī (गजपतिध्वजी) & Devadeva (देवदेव)
गजेंद्राढ्यो ध्वजोऽस्येति मतो गजपतिध्वजी ।
देवदेवो वासवादिदैवतैरप्युपास्यते ॥ ८४ ॥
He is considered Gajapatidhvajī (The One with the Elephant-Lord on his Banner) because his banner is marked with a mighty elephant. He is Devadeva (The God of Gods) because he is worshipped even by deities like Vāsava (Indra).


Shloka 85: Smaraprāṇadīpaka (स्मरप्राणदीपक)
रुद्रेण दग्धदेहोऽपि प्राणानुज्जीवयन्नयम् ।
मन्मथस्य स्मरप्राणदीपकत्वेन कीर्त्यते ॥ ८५ ॥
Although his body was burnt by Rudra (Shiva), he revived him (the love-god, Manmatha). Therefore, he is celebrated as Smaraprāṇadīpaka (The Restorer of Life to Smara/Manmatha).


विपश्चिद्वरदो नादो नादभिन्नमहाचलः ।
वराहरदनो मृत्युञ्जयो व्याघ्राजिनाम्बरः ॥ २२ ॥


Shloka 86: Vāyukīlaka (वायुकीलक) & Vipraścidvarada (विपश्चिद्वरद)
नवद्वारि तनौ प्राणान् स्तंभयन् वायुकीलकः ।
राज्ञे विपश्चिदाख्याय चतुर्वा त्रीन् वरं ददत् ॥८६॥
अग्नया-त्मना त्वं वासिष्ठो विपश्चिद्वरदः स्मृतः ।
He is Vāyukīlaka (The One who Restrains the Wind) because he arrests the vital breaths (Prāṇa) in the body with its nine doors. He is remembered as Vipraścidvarada (The Boon-Giver to the Wise Vipraścit) because, in the form of Agni (fire), he granted three or four boons to the wise king Vipraścit.


Shloka 87: Nādonnāda (नादोन्नाद) & Bhinnabalāhaka (भिन्नबलाहक)
अल्पनादैर्महानादै-रपि येन विदारिताः ।
मेघाः स कथ्यते नादोन्नाद-भिन्नबलाहकः ॥ ८७ ॥
He by whom the clouds were torn asunder with both subtle and thunderous sounds (Nāda and Unnāda), is called Nādonnāda (The Source of Sound and Thunder) and Bhinnabalāhaka (The Splitter of Clouds).


Shloka 88: Varāhadaṃṣṭrā (वराहदंष्ट्रा) & Śobhājit (शोभाजित्)
वराहदंष्ट्राशोभाजिदेकदंतविराजितः ॥८८॥
He is adorned (Śobhājit) with tusks like those of a boar (Varāhadaṃṣṭrā) and splendid with his single tusk (Ekadanta).


Shloka 89: Varāharadana (वराहरदन) & Mṛtyuñjaya (मृत्युंजय)
इति भाष्यपुराणोक्तेर्वराहरदनो मतः ।
कालमृत्युं प्रमादं वा हरन् मृत्युंजयो मतः ॥ ८९ ॥
According to the statements of the Puranas and this commentary, he is considered Varāharadana (The Boar-Tusked One). He is considered Mṛtyuñjaya (The Conqueror of Death) because he removes (Haran) Time-Death (Kāla-Mṛtyu) or negligence (Pramāda).


Shloka 90: Vyāghrājināmbara (व्याघ्राजिनांबर)
प्रमादं वा मृत्युमहं ब्रवी-मीति तु भारतात् ।
वस्ते शार्दूलचर्मेति स्मृतो व्याघ्राजि-नांबरः ॥ ९० ॥
As stated in the Mahābhārata, "I declare myself to be death and negligence." He is remembered as Vyāghrājināmbara (The One Clad in a Tiger's Skin) because he wears the hide of a tiger (Śārdūla-carma).


इच्छाशक्तिभवो देवत्राता दैत्यविमर्दनः ।
शम्भुवक्त्रोद्भवः शम्भुकोपहा शम्भुहास्यभूः ॥ २३॥






Shloka 91: Icchāśaktidhara (इच्छाशक्तिधर) & Devatrāta (देवत्रात)
जगत्सिसृक्षाधारित्वात् इच्छाशक्तिधरो मतः । 
देव-नाताऽखिलान्देवांस्त्रायते दैत्यजाद्भयात् ॥ ९१ ॥
He is considered Icchāśaktidhara (The Holder of the Power of Will) because he is the basis for the desire to create the universe. He is Devatrāta (The Protector of the Gods) because he protects (Trāyate) all the gods from the fear born of demons.


Shloka 92: Daityavimardana (दैत्यविमर्दन) & Śivānanāt (शिवाननात्)
अत एव हरन् देवरिपून् दैत्यविमर्दनः ।
शंभुवक्त्रोद्भवो योऽयम-वतीर्णः शिवाननात् ॥ ९२ ॥
For this very reason, he is Daityavimardana (The Crusher of Demons) as he destroys the enemies of the gods. He is the one who originated from the mouth of Shambhu (Shiva) and descended from Shiva's face.


Shloka 93: Śambhukopahā (शंभुकोपहा) & Śambhuhāsya (शंभुहास्य)
पितुः क्रोधं हरन् बाल-लीलाभिः शंभुकोपहा ।
अज्ञवत् कतिचित् क्रीडाः कुर्वाणः शंसुहास्यभूः ॥ ९३ ॥
He is Śambhukopahā (The Remover of Shambhu's Anger) as he removes the anger of his father (Shiva) through his childish plays. He is Śambhuhāsya (The Cause of Shambhu's Laughter) as, by performing some playful acts like an ignorant child, he becomes the reason for Shiva's laughter.


शम्भुतेजाः शिवाशोकहारी गौरीसुखावहः ।
उमाङ्गमलजो गौरीतेजोभूः स्वर्धुनीभवः ॥ २४॥


Shloka 94: Śambhutejā (शंभुतेजा)
शंभुतेजा इति प्रोक्तः शिवतेजोऽस्ति यस्य सः ।
महिषादि-हतौ भग्नोत्साहायावर्धयन् बलम् ॥ ९४ ॥
He is proclaimed as Śambhutejā (The Splendor of Shambhu) because Shiva's splendor exists in him. He increased the strength of the gods when their enthusiasm was broken after being slain by (demons like) Mahisha.


Shloka 95: Dākṣāyaṇyaśokahā (दाक्षायण्याशोकहा) & Gaurīsukhāvaha (गौरीसुखावह)
दाक्षायण्याः शिवा-शोकहारीति परिगीयते ।
हर्ष गौर्यास्तपस्यंत्याः कुर्वन् गौरीसुखावहः ॥ ९५ ॥
He is celebrated in songs as Dākṣāyaṇyaśokahā (The Remover of the Sorrow of Dākṣāyaṇī, i.e., Parvati). He is Gaurīsukhāvaha (The Bringer of Joy to Gaurī) as he creates joy for Gaurī (Parvati) while she was performing penance.


Shloka 96: Umāṅgamalaja (उमाङ्गमलज)
निजांगोद्वर्तनोत्थेन मलेन प्रति-मामुमा ।
चक्रे तदंतः प्रविशन् उमाङ्गमलजो मतः ॥ ९६ ॥
With the dirt (Mala) arising from rubbing her own body, Uma (Parvati) created an image (of a child). He, entering into that image, is considered Umāṅgamalaja (Born from the Dirt of Uma's Body).


Shloka 97: Gaurītejobhū (गौरीतेजोभू)
चंडिकाभूयमात्मानं विष्णुब्रह्मादितेजसाम् ।
आधारत्वादसौ गौरीतेजोभूरिति कथ्यते ॥ ९७ ॥
Having assumed the form of Caṇḍikā, and being the support of the splendor of Vishnu, Brahma, and others, he is called Gaurītejobhū (Become the Splendor of Gaurī).


Shloka 98: Svardhanībhava (स्वर्धनीभव)
स्कन्दो गंगोद्भवस्तस्माद-भेदात् स्वर्धनीभवः ।
स्वर्धन्या उद्भवो यस्मादिति वा स्वर्धनीभवः ॥ ९८ ॥
Skanda (Kartikeya) was born from Gaṅgā. Due to non-difference from him (i.e., being one with his brother), Ganesha is Svardhanībhava (Born from Svadhānī/Gaṅgā). Or, he is so called because he was born from Svadhānī (another name for Parvati).


यज्ञकायो महानादो गिरिवर्ष्मा शुभाननः ।
सर्वात्मा सर्वदेवात्मा ब्रह्ममूर्धा ककुप्श्रुतिः ॥ २५॥


Shloka 99: Yajñakāya (यज्ञकाय) & Mahānāda (महानाद)
यज्ञकायोऽश्वमेधादिर्मखजातस्वरूपवान् ।
उच्चैस्तरां वषङ्कारोऽस्तुश्रौषड्येयजामहे ॥ ९९ ॥
आश्रावयेत्यादिरूपो महानाद इति स्मृतः ।
He is Yajñakāya (The One whose Body is Sacrifice) as his form is constituted by sacrifices like the Aśvamedha. He is remembered as Mahānāda (The Great Sound) because he is of the nature of the loud utterances "Vaṣaṭ," "Astu Śrauṣaṭ," "Yejāmabe," "Āśrāvaya," etc., (which are Vedic ritual calls).


Shloka 100: Girivarmā (गिरिवर्मा) & Śubhānana (शुभानन)
गिरिवर्माद्रयो यस्य विराजो देहतां गताः ॥ १०० ॥
मंगलनामानं प्राणं जनयन् स शुभाननः ।
The mountains, beginning with Girivarmā, have become the forms of his divine manifestations. Generating the life-force which is of an auspicious nature, he is Śubhānana (The Auspicious-Faced One).


Shloka 101: Sarvātmā (सर्वात्मा)
सर्वात्माऽप्येष सर्व खल्विदं ब्रह्मेति तु श्रुतेः ॥ १०१ ॥
He is also Sarvātmā (The Soul of All) because, as the Śruti says, "All this is indeed Brahman."


Shloka 102: Sarvadevātmā (सर्वदेवात्मा) & Brahmamūrdhā (ब्रह्ममूर्धा)
देहभूता यस्य सर्वदेवात्माखिलदेवताः ।
ब्रह्मव यस्य मूर्धा स ब्रह्ममूर्धेति कथ्यते ॥ १०२ ॥
He whose body consists of all the deities, who is the soul of all gods, is Sarvadevātmā (The Soul of All Gods). He whose head is Brahman, is called Brahmamūrdhā (The One whose Head is Brahman).


ब्रह्माण्डकुम्भश्चिद्व्योमभालःसत्यशिरोरुहः ।
जगज्जन्मलयोन्मेषनिमेषोऽग्न्यर्कसोमदृक् ॥ २६॥


Shloka 103: Brahmāṇḍakumbha (ब्रह्माण्डकुम्भ)
कर्णभूता दिशो यस्य कथितः स ककुश्रुतिः ।
ब्रह्मांडखर्परैंयुतं न्युजं सद्यस्य कुम्भति ॥ १०३॥
विश्वात्मनः स ब्रह्माण्डकुम्भ इत्यभिधीयते ।
He whose ears are the directions is called Kakuśruti (not the main name here). The universe (Brahmāṇḍa), which is like a pot (Kumbha), constitutes his body. Therefore, the Universal Soul is called Brahmāṇḍakumbha (The One whose Pot is the Universe).


Shloka 104: Cidyomabhāla (चिद्योमभाल)
ब्रह्माण्डखर्परांतर्यलग्नं खं तच्चिदंबरं ॥१०४॥
तदस्य ब्रह्मरंध्रं चियोमभालः स उच्यते ।
The space (Kha) within the shell of the universe is the consciousness-filled sky (Cidambara). That is his Brahmarandhra (the aperture at the crown of the head). Therefore, he is called Cidyomabhāla (The One whose Forehead is the Sky of Consciousness).
Shloka 105: Satyaśiroruh (सत्यशिरोरुह)
सत्यलोको यस्य कैश्यमसौ सत्यशिरोरुहः॥१०५॥
He whose head-dress (or cranial hair) is the world of Satya (the highest heaven) is Satyaśiroruh (The One on whose Head Grows the Satya Loka).


Shloka 106: Jagajjanmalayonmeṣanimeṣa (जगज्जन्मलयोन्मेषनिमेष)
उन्मेषाज्जायते यस्य निमेषाल्लीयते जगत् ।
जगज्जन्मलयोन्मेषनिमेष इति स स्मृतः ॥ १०६ ॥
From his opening of the eyes (Unmeṣa) the world is born, and by his closing of the eyes (Nimeṣa) it is dissolved. Therefore, he is remembered as Jagajjanmalayonmeṣanimeṣa (The One whose Opening and Closing of Eyes is the Creation and Dissolution of the World).


Shloka 107: Abhyarkasomadṛk (अभ्यर्कसोमदृक्)
ऊर्ध्वदक्षिणवामानि नेत्राणि जगदा-त्मनः ।
वह्निसूर्यैदवो यस्य क्रमात्सोऽभ्यर्कसोमदृक् ॥१०७॥
The upper, right, and left eyes of the Universal Soul are Agni (fire), Sūrya (sun), and Candra (moon) respectively. He, who possesses these in order, is Abhyarkasomadṛk (The One who has the Sun and Moon as his Eyes).
गिरीन्द्रैकरदो धर्माधर्मोष्ठः सामबृंहितः ।
ग्रहर्क्षदशनो वाणीजिह्वो वासवनासिकः ॥ २७॥


Shloka 108: Girīndraikarada (गिरींद्रैकरद)
एकस्थूलो बहिर्दतो गिरींद्रः कनकाचलः ।
विराड्ररूपजुषो यस्य गिरींद्रेकरदो हि सः ॥ १०८ ॥
He who has one large, external tusk and who is the Lord of Mountains (Girīndra), assuming the form of the cosmic being (Virāṭ), is indeed Girīndraikarada (The Lord of Mountains with a Single Tusk).


Commentary on a Previous Interpretation:
Sanskrit:
यत्तु-प्राचा गिरींद्रपदं हिमवत्परत्वेन व्याख्यातं, तत्सुमेरुकूटदंतायेति गणेशस्तव-राजविरुद्धत्वादनादेयम् ।
However, the previous interpretation which explains 'Girīndra' as referring to the Himalaya mountain is unacceptable, as it contradicts the description in the Ganesha-stava-rāja, which identifies him as the one whose tusk is the peak of Mount Meru.


Shloka 109: Dharma-adharmoṣṭha (धर्माधर्मोष्ठ)
पापपुण्ये यदोष्ठौ स धर्माधर्मोष्ठ उच्यते ।
धर्मोत्तरोष्ठो दुरिता-धरोष्ठ इति च स्मृतेः ॥ १०९ ॥
He whose two lips are righteousness and unrighteousness (Pāpa-Puṇya) is called Dharma-adharmoṣṭha (The One whose Lips are Dharma and Adharma). It is remembered that his upper lip is Dharma and his lower lip is sin.


Shloka 110: Sāmabṛṃhita (सामबृंहित)
यद्वं हितं सामवेदः स प्रोक्तः सामबृंहितः ।
स्तोत्रात्मकैः सामभिस्तोषित इति प्राचामर्थो...
सूर्योदयो ग्रहा यस्य कृत्तिकाद्याश्च तारकाः ॥ ११० ॥
He who is praised by the hymns of the Sāma Veda is proclaimed as Sāmabṛṃhita (The One Magnified by the Sāma Veda). (The commentator rejects an alternate interpretation as unsuitable.)


Shloka 111: Grahakṣedaśana (ग्रहक्षेदशन)
मुखांतःस्थाः सूक्ष्मदंतो ग्रहक्षेदशनो हि सः ॥ १११ ॥
He who has subtle teeth within his mouth, and who is the destroyer of the afflictions caused by planets, is Grahakṣedaśana (The Destroyer of Planetary Afflictions).


Shloka 112: Vāṇījihva (वाणीजिह्व) & Vāsavanāsika (वासवनासिक)
पुराणन्यायमीमांसाथर्वऋग्यजुषादिकाः ॥ १११ ॥
वाक्तती रसना यस्य स वाणीजिह्व उच्यते ॥
नासा यस्य शुनासीरः सोऽयं वासवनासिकः ॥ ११२ ॥
He whose tongue is the flow of speech—consisting of the Purāṇas, Nyāya, Mīmāṃsā, Atharva, Ṛg, and Yajur Vedas—is called Vāṇījihva (The One whose Tongue is Speech). He whose nose is the deity Śuna-sīra (Indra) is Vāsavanāsika (The One whose Nose is Indra).


कुलाचलांसः सोमार्कघण्टो रुद्रशिरोधरः ।
नदीनदभुजः सर्पाङ्गुलीकस्तारकानखः ॥ २८॥


Shloka 113: Kulācala (कुलाचल) & Somārkaghaṇṭa (सोमार्कघंट)
कुलाचलांसो विंध्याद्या यस्य स्कंधतया मताः ।
कंध-रोर्ध्वं मांसपिण्डावुन्नतौ घंटिके मते ॥ ११३ ॥
ते रवींदू यस्य सोमार्कघंटः कथितो हि सः।
He whose shoulders are the mountain ranges like the Vindhyas is Kulācala (The One whose Shoulders are Mountains). The two fleshy protuberances above his neck are considered to be the "bells" (Ghaṇṭike). He in whom the sun and moon are those two bells is declared as Somārkaghaṇṭa (The One with the Moon and Sun as Bells).


Shloka 114: Rudraśirodhara (रुद्रशिरोधर) & Nadīnadabhuja (नदीनदभुज)
यस्य ग्रीवा रुद्र एव सवै रुद्रशिरोधरः ॥ ११४ ॥
गंगाशोणादयो नद्यो नदा यस्य भुजाः स तु ॥ ११५ ॥
नदीनदभुजः सिंधुनदी नंदति वा भुजः ।
He whose neck is Rudra himself is Rudraśirodhara (The One who Bears Rudra as his Neck). He whose arms are rivers like the Ganga and Sonā is Nadīnadabhuja (The One whose Arms are Rivers). Or, he whose arms delight (Nandati) the ocean (Sindhu) and the rivers.


Shloka 116: Sarpāṅgulīka (सर्पाङ्गुलीक) & Tārakānakha (तारकानख)
सर्पागु-लीकः शेषाद्या अंगुल्यो यस्य पन्नगाः।
ध्रुवाद्या यन्नखास्ताराः स स्मृतस्तारकानखः ॥ ११६ ॥
He whose fingers are serpents like Śeṣa is Sarpāṅgulīka (The One whose Fingers are Serpents). He whose nails are the stars, beginning with Dhruva (the Pole Star), is remembered as Tārakānakha (The One whose Nails are Stars).


भ्रूमध्यसंस्थितकरो ब्रह्मविद्यामदोदकः ।
व्योमनाभिः श्रीहृदयो मेरुपृष्ठोऽर्णवोदरः ॥ २९॥


Shloka 117: Śaṇḍādaṇḍa (शंडादंड)
भ्रूमध्यसंस्थितकरो ध्रुवोर्घाणस्य संधिगम् ।
यत्तत्त्वं श्रुतिषूक्तं तच्छंडादंडात्म यस्य सः ॥ ११७ ॥
The principle (Tattva) stated in the Vedic scriptures (Śruti), which is situated between the eyebrows and is the support of the nose, is of the nature of Śaṇḍa and Daṇḍa. He whose essence is that is Śaṇḍādaṇḍa (The One whose Essence is Śaṇḍa and Daṇḍa).


Shloka 118: Brahmavidyāmadotkaṭa (ब्रह्मविद्यामदोत्कट)
प्रपंचमानापहृत्या ब्रह्मविद्यैव वै मद ।
तेनोद्भिन्नौ कटौ यस्य ब्रह्मविद्यामदो-त्कटः ॥ ११८ ॥
The intoxication (Mada) born from the knowledge of Brahman (Brahmavidyā) removes the sense of phenomenal reality. He whose hips (Kaṭi) are swollen with that (intoxication) is Brahmavidyāmadotkaṭa (The One Intoxicated with the Knowledge of Brahman).


Names 119-129: The Cosmic Body of Ganesha
The commentary continues to describe Ganesha's body as a microcosm of the universe:


119: Vyomanābhi (व्योमनाभि): 
यस्य व्योमबिलं नाभिर्योमनाभिरसौ मतः ।
ऋचः सामानि यजूंषि सा हि श्रीरमृता सतां ॥ ११९ ॥
He whose navel is the ethereal cavity (of space) is considered Vyomanābhi (The One whose Navel is the Sky). The Rig, Sāma, and Yajur Vedas are that (navel), which is the divine prosperity (Śrī) and the nectar (Amṛta) for the virtuous.


120: Śrīhṛdaya (श्रीहृदय) & Merupṛṣṭha (मेरुपृष्ठ): 
त्रैय्यर्थ एव यच्चित्तं स श्रीहृदय उच्यते ।
सुमेरुरेव यत्पृष्ठं मेरुपृष्ठः स उच्यते ॥ १२० ॥
He whose heart/mind is the very essence of the three Vedas is called Śrīhṛdaya (The One whose Heart is Śrī). He whose back is Mount Meru itself is called Merupṛṣṭha (The One whose Back is Meru).


कुक्षिस्थयक्षगन्धर्वरक्षःकिन्नरमानुषः ।
पृथ्वीकटिः सृष्टिलिङ्गः शैलोरुर्दस्रजानुकः ॥ ३०॥


Shloka 121: Arṇavodara (अर्णवोदर) & Kukṣiṣṭha-yakṣa-gandharva-rakṣaḥ-kinnara-mānuṣa (कुक्षिष्ठयक्षगन्धर्वरक्षःकिन्नरमानुष)
जठरांतर्जल-स्थानेऽर्णवा इत्यर्णवोदरः ।
अंत्राद्यवयवाः कुक्षौ यस्य यक्षादयः स तु ॥१२१॥
He is Arṇavodara (The Ocean-Bellied One) because the oceans (Arṇavāḥ) are in the watery region inside his belly. He in whose abdomen beings like Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, Kinnaras, and humans reside as its internal organs is Kukṣiṣṭha-yakṣa-gandharva-rakṣaḥ-kinnara-mānuṣa (The One in whose Womb Dwell Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, Kinnaras, and Humans).






122: Pṛthvīkaṭi (पृथ्वीकटि): 
कुक्षि-स्थयक्षगंधर्वरक्षः किन्नरमानुषः ।
पृथिव्येव कटिस्थानं यस्य पृथ्वीकटिस्तु सः ॥ १२२ ॥
He in whom the earth itself is the location of his waist/hips is Pṛthvīkaṭi (The Earth-Hipped One).


123: Śailorū (शैलोरु): 
सृष्टिलिंगस्तु यच्छेपः-स्थाने मैथुनजाः प्रजाः ।
शैलोरुः पर्वता एव यस्योरुस्थानतां गताः ॥ १२३ ॥
He is Śailorū (The Mountain-Thighed One) because the mountains themselves have become his thighs.


124: Dasrajānuka (दस्रजानुक) & Pātālajaṅgha (पातालजंघ): 
दस्रौ यस्याश्विनौ जानू स मतो दस्रजानुकः ।
पातालजंऋो यज्जंघात्मकं पातालसप्तकं ॥ १२४॥
He whose knees are the two Aśvini Kumaras (also called Dasra) is considered Dasrajānuka (The One with the Aśvinis as Knees). He is Pātālajaṅgha (The One whose Shanks are the Netherworlds) because the seven netherworlds (Pātāla-saptaka) constitute his shanks.




पातालजङ्घो मुनिपात्कालाङ्गुष्ठस्त्रयीतनुः ।
ज्योतिर्मण्डललाङ्गूलो हृदयालाननिश्चलः ॥ ३१॥


125: Muni-pāt (मुनिपात) & Kālāṅguṣṭha (कालांगुष्ठ): 
मुनि-पात् मुनिभिः पादलग्नैः पादात्मतां गतैः ।
कालांगुष्ठो महा-मृत्युर्यत्पादांगुलितां गतः ॥ १२५ ॥
He is Munipāt (The One whose Feet are the Sages) because the sages, who are attached to his feet, have become his feet. He is Kālāṅguṣṭha (The One whose Toes are Time) because Great Death (Mahāmṛtyu, a form of Time) has become his toes.


126: Trayītanu (त्रयीतनु)  & Jyotirmaṇḍalalāḍūla (ज्योतिर्मण्डललाडूल): 
अयुक्तावयवा यस्य श्रुतयः स त्रयीतनुः ।
शिंशुमाराभिधं ज्योतिश्चक्रं पुच्छं हि यस्य सः ॥ १२६ ॥
He whose body is the three Vedas (which have no physical limbs) is Trayītanu (The One whose Body is the Three Vedas). He is (also called Jyotirmaṇḍalalāḍūla) because the constellation known as Śiśumāra (the dolphin) is his tail.


127: Hṛdayālāna (हृदयालान): 
ज्योतिर्मण्डललाडूलो ब्रह्मात्रोक्तं गजाकृति ।
भक्तानां हृदयान्येवास्यालानं गजबंधनम् ॥१२७॥
The hearts of his devotees themselves are the post to which this 
elephant-form is tied (ālāna - the tying post for an elephant).


हृत्पद्मकर्णिकाशाली वियत्केलिसरोवरः ।
सद्भक्तध्याननिगडः पूजावारिनिवारितः ॥ ३२॥


128: Hṛdantaradaharakrīḍāsara (हृदन्तर्दहरक्रीडासर): 
तत्रापगतचाञ्चल्यो हृदयालाननिश्चलः । 
हृदंतर्दहराकाशं यस्य क्रीडासरः स तु ॥ १२८ ॥
He who, having abandoned all restlessness, is steadfastly fixed at the post of the heart. 
He for whom the subtle space (Daharakāśa) within the heart is a pleasure-lake (krīḍāsaraḥ).


129: Sadbhaktadhyānanigaḍa (सद्भक्तध्याननिगड): 
हृत्पद्म-कर्णिकाशालिवियत्केलिसरोवरः । 
सर्वगोऽपि परिच्छिन्नो भक्तैर्ध्यानेन यः स तु ॥ १२९ ॥
He for whom the lotus of the heart, with the sky in its pericarp, is a playful lake. 
Though all-pervading (sarvagaḥ), he is localized (paricchinnaḥ) and 
bound (nigaḍa - fettered) by the meditation (dhyānena) of his true devotees.


Shloka 130: Pūjāvārinivārita (पूजावारीनिवारित)
पूजैव कथिता वारी गजबंधनशृङ्खला ।
संनिरुद्धस्तया देवः पूजावारीनिवारितः ॥ १३० ॥
Worship (Pūjā) itself is said to be the water (Vārī) and the chain for binding the elephant. The Lord, who is restrained by that, is Pūjāvārinivārita (The One Restrained by the Water of Worship).


यत्तु -प्राचा वारीपदं ह्रस्वांतं पठता पूजां वारयंतीति पूजावारिणो राक्षसाः, तैरयं दूरीकृतोऽसेवित इति व्याख्यातं, तादृशार्थेन कीदृशी देवतास्तुतिः संपद्यत इति चिंत्यम् ।
Now, regarding this: The earlier commentators, reading the word 'vārī' with a short 'i' (as 'vāri'), have explained it (as follows): "The 'pūjā-vāriṇaḥ' are demons (Rākṣasas) who ward off (vārayanti) worship (pūjā). By them, this Lord (Ganesha) was driven away and not served." One must ponder, what kind of praise of the deity is accomplished by such a meaning?


The Commentator's Rebuttal and Correct Interpretation
ह्रस्वांत एव पाठ इति यदि शपथे प्रवर्तसे तदापि वारिपदं हि परिखाजलपरत्वेन व्याख्याय तदवगुंठितः पूजकैर्दुरधिगम इति व्याख्येयम्;
Even if you insist on taking an oath that the reading is indeed with a short 'i', even then, the word 'vāri' should be interpreted as meaning 'moat-water' (the water in a fortress trench). Thus, the meaning should be: "He who is concealed by a moat, is difficult for worshippers to approach."


पूजा-रंभे देवतायाः संनिरोधनावगुंठनविषयकप्रार्थनादेर्विधानात् ।
...because the ritual injunctions prescribe that at the beginning of worship, there are prayers, etc., for the confinement and veiling (saṃnirodhana, avaguṃṭhana) of the deity (to invite and secure the divine presence in the ritual area).


Conclusion of the Argument and the Next Name
संनिरोधनावगुंठनविषयकप्रार्थनादेर्विधानात् ।
...because the ritual injunctions prescribe that at the beginning of worship, there are prayers, etc., for the confinement (saṃnirodhana) and veiling (avaguṃṭhana) of the deity (to invite and secure the divine presence in the ritual area).


प्रतापी काश्यपो मन्ता गणको विष्टपी बली ।
यशस्वी धार्मिको जेता प्रथमः प्रमथेश्वरः ॥ ३३॥


Names 131-135: Various Glorious Names
Shloka 131: Pratāpī (प्रतापी): 
प्रतापी तापकत्वेन पराक्रमयुतोऽथवा ॥ १३१ ॥
He is Pratāpī (The One with Blazing Splendor) because of his power to 
scorch (his enemies), or because he is endowed with valor.
Shloka 132: Kaśyapasuta (कश्यपसुत): 
कश्य-पस्य मुनेः कुक्षाववतीर्ण इति स्मृतः । 
कथापुराणे गाणेशे स कश्यपसुतो मतः ॥१३२॥
He is remembered as one who descended into the womb of the sage Kaśyapa. 
In the Ganesha Purāṇa, he is considered the son of Kaśyapa.
Shloka 133: Gaṇapa (गणप), Viṣṭapī (विष्टपी) & Balī (बली)
गणपोऽध्वर्युहोत्रादीन् पातीति चतुरो गणान् ।
विष्टपी भुवनाधारो बलसामान्यवान् बली ॥ १३३ ॥
He is Gaṇapa (The Protector of the Hosts) because he protects the four hosts: the Adhvaryu, Hotṛ, and other priests. He is Viṣṭapī (The Supporter of the Worlds) because he supports the worlds. He is Balī (The Powerful One) because he possesses common and extraordinary strength.


Shloka 134: Yaśasvī (यशस्वी), Dhārmika (धार्मिक) & Svojas (स्वोजस्)
यशस्वी पुण्यकीर्त्याढ्यो धार्मिको धर्मवर्धकः ।
अष्टमो धातुरोजः स्यात् खोजास्तद्यस्य शोभनं ॥ १३४ ॥
He is Yaśasvī (The Glorious One), abundant with pious fame. He is Dhārmika (The Righteous One), the augmenter of Dharma. The eighth derivative of the root 'dhā' is 'ojas', meaning splendor. He whose splendor (Ojas) is splendid (Sva) is Svojas (The One of Innate Splendor).


Shloka 135: Prathama (प्रथम) & Prathameśvara (प्रथमेश्वर): 
प्रथमः सर्वकार्यादौ पूज्यत्वात्सर्वदेहिनाम् । 
प्रथमा ब्रह्मविष्ण्वी-शास्तदीशः प्रथमेश्वरः ॥ १३५ ॥
He is Prathama (The First) because he is worshipped at the beginning of all undertakings by all beings. He is Prathameśvara (The First Lord) because he is the lord of the first (primary) deities: Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Īśa (Shiva).


चिन्तामणिर्द्वीपपतिः कल्पद्रुमवनालयः ।
रत्नमण्डपमध्यस्थो रत्नसिंहासनाश्रयः ॥ ३४॥


Names 136-138: Cintāmaṇi-dvīpapatiḥ, Kalpadruma-vanālayaḥ, Ratnamaṇḍapa-madhyasthaḥ, Ratnasiṃhāsanāśrayaḥ (चिन्तामणिर्द्वीपपतिः, कल्पद्रुमवनालयः, रत्नमण्डपमध्यस्थ:, रत्नसिंहासनाश्रयः)
चिंतामणिद्वीपपूर्व रत्नसिंहासनावधि ।
यस्योपभोग्यं संप्रोक्तश्चतुर्भिरिह नामभिः ॥ १३६ ॥
His enjoyable realm, described by four names here, extends from the "Isle of the Wish-Fulfilling Gem" in the east to the "Jeweled Throne." He is: Cintāmaṇi-dvīpapatiḥ (The Lord of the Isle of the Wish-Fulfilling Gem), Kalpadruma-vanālayaḥ (The One whose Grove is the Wish-Fulfilling Trees), Ratnamaṇḍapa-madhyasthaḥ (The One Seated in the Middle of the Jeweled Pavilion), and Ratnasiṃhāsanāśrayaḥ (The One Abiding on the Jeweled Throne).


तीव्राशिरोद्धृतपदो ज्वालिनीमौलिलालितः ।
नन्दानन्दितपीठश्रीर्भोगदो भूषितासनः ॥ ३५॥
सकामदायिनीपीठः स्फुरदुग्रासनाश्रयः ।
तेजोवतीशिरोरत्नं सत्यानित्यावतंसितः ॥ ३६॥


Tīvrāśiroddhṛtapadaḥ, Jvālinīmaulilālitaḥ, Nandānanditapīṭhaśrīḥ, Bhogadābhūṣitāsanaḥ, Sakāmadāyinīpīṭhaḥ, Sphuradugrāsanāśrayaḥ (तीव्राशिरोद्धृतपद:, ज्वालिनीमौलिलालित:, नन्दानन्दितपीठश्री:, भोगदाभूषितासन:, सकामदायिनीपीठः, स्फुरदुग्रासनाश्रय:)
तीव्रा च ज्वालिनी नंदा भोगदा कामदायिनी ।
उग्रा तेजोवती सत्या नवमी विघ्ननाशिनी ॥ १३७ ॥
पत्राष्टके कर्णिकायां संत्येताः पीठशक्तयः।
नवैताः पद्मसहिताः कथिता दशनामभिः ॥ १३८ ॥
Tīvrā, Jvālinī, Nandā, Bhogadā, Kāmadāyinī, Ugrā, Tejovatī, Satyā, and the ninth, Vighnanāśinī—these (nine) Śaktis reside on the eight petals and the pericarp of the (lotus) seat. These nine, along with the lotus itself, are described by ten names. These names are: Tīvrāśiroddhṛtapadaḥ (The One whose Seat is Elevated by Tīvrā), Jvālinīmaulilālitaḥ (The One Adorned by Jvālinī on His Head), Nandānanditapīṭhaśrīḥ (The One whose Seat is Delighted by Nandā), Bhogadābhūṣitāsanaḥ (The One whose Seat is Adorned by Bhogadā), Sakāmadāyinīpīṭhaḥ (The One whose Seat is Kāmadāyinī), and Sphuradugrāsanāśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Radiant and Terrible Seat). Here, with this last name, the second hundred is completed.


Conclusion of the Second Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ ॥
गणेशनामखद्योते द्वितीयमभवच्छतम् ॥ २०० ॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), composed by Bhāskara, 
also known as Agnicit, ends the second hundred of the Ganesha Thousand Names.


सविघ्ननाशिनीपीठः सर्वशक्त्यम्बुजाश्रयः ।
लिपिपद्मासनाधारो वह्निधामत्रयाश्रयः ॥ ३७॥






Shloka 139: Sarvaśakty-ambujāśrayaḥ (सर्वशक्त्यम्बुजाश्रयः)
सर्वशत्क्त्तयंबुजाश्रय इति ॥
अत्र पूर्वोक्तनवकपरं सर्वपद-मज्ञात्वा यत्प्राचोक्तं सर्वशक्तिर्नाम काचिदन्वर्थनामा दशमी शक्तिरेतादृशशक्तयो दशदिक्स्था इति, तदिदं मंत्रशास्त्र-ज्ञानाभावप्रयुक्तप्रलपनमित्युपेक्ष्यं ।
(The name is) Sarvaśakty-ambujāśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Lotus of All Powers). Here, not understanding that the word "Sarva" refers to the previously mentioned group of nine Śaktis, some previous commentators have said that "Sarvaśakti" is the name of a tenth Śakti... This is mere babbling born from a lack of knowledge of Mantra Śāstra and is to be disregarded.
Names 140-141: Lipipadmāsanādhāraḥ (लिपिपद्मासनाधार:) & Vahnidhāmatrayāśrayaḥ (वह्निधामत्रयाश्रयः)
द्विद्विस्वरककिंजल्कं पद्म-प्रासादकर्णिकं ।
कादिवर्गाष्टकदलं मातृकापद्ममुच्यते ॥१४०॥
तत्रस्थो लिपिपद्मासनाधार इति कथ्यते ।
कर्णिकोपर्युपर्यकैं-द्वन्याख्यं तेजसां त्रयं ॥ १४१ ॥
आस्तीर्ण तत्र निवसन् वह्निधामत्रयाश्रयः।
The "Mātṛkā Padma" (Lotus of the Letters) is described as having the vowels as its filaments, the palace (of consciousness) as its pericarp, and the eight groups of consonants as its eight petals. He, being situated there, is called Lipipadmāsanādhāraḥ (The Support of the Seat of the Lotus of Letters). Above the pericarp is the triad of lights known as Ka, E, and Dvanda. He, spread out and residing there, is the Vahnidhāmatrayāśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Three Dwellings of Fire).


यत्तु प्राचा मातृकाचक्रोपरि पद्मासनं वह्निसूर्यसोममया अंतरंतस्त्रयः प्राकारास्तदंतर्गणेशस्य गृह-मिति नामद्वयं व्याख्यातं, तदसांप्रदायिकत्वादुपेक्ष्यम् ।
"However, what has been explained by previous commentators—that the 'Lotus Seat' upon the matrix of letters (Mātṛkācakra), along with the three fortifications (Prākāra) within, made of fire, sun, and moon, constitutes the house of Ganesha, and they have interpreted the two names (Lipi-padmāsanādhāra and Vahnidhāmatrayāśraya) accordingly—that, due to its non-conformity with the established tradition (Asāmpradāyikatvāt), is to be disregarded."


उन्नतप्रपदो गूढगुल्फः संवृतपार्ष्णिकः ।
पीनजङ्घः श्लिष्टजानुः स्थूलोरुः प्रोन्नमत्कटिः ॥ ३८॥


Shloka 142: Unnataprapada (उन्नतप्रपद)
पादाग्रे उन्नते यस्य सोन्नतप्रपदो मतः ॥ १४२ ॥
कूर्मपृष्ठसमाकारभाव औन्नत्यमीरितम् ।
He whose forepart of the foot is raised is considered Unnataprapada (The One with Raised Forefeet). The raised part is said to be shaped like a tortoise's back.
Shloka 143: Gūḍhagulpha (गूढगुल्फ)
पादमूलगतावस्थि-ग्रंथी आच्छादितौ यदि ॥ १४३ ॥
नोन्नतत्वेन दृश्येते गूढ-गुल्फस्तदोच्यते ।
If the bony knots (the ankle bones) at the base of his feet are covered and 
not visible as protrusions, he is then called Gūḍhagulpha (The One with Concealed Ankles).


Shloka 144: Saṃvṛttapārṣṇika (संवृत्तपार्ष्णिक)
गुल्फाधोभागयोर्मासपूर्त्या संवृत्तपा-ष्णिकः ॥१४४॥
He whose heel-portion is rounded due to fullness of flesh below 
the ankles is Saṃvṛttapārṣṇika (The One with Rounded Heels).


Shloka 145: Pīnajaṅgha (पीनजङ्घ) & Śliṣṭajānuka (श्लिष्टजानुक)
पिंडिके मांसले यस्य पीनजङ्घः स कथ्यते ।
जंघोरुसंधियुग्मं चेदस्पष्टं श्लिष्टजानुकः ॥१४५॥
He whose calves (Piṇḍikā) are fleshy is called Pīnajaṅgha (The One with Fleshy Calves). If the pair of joints between his calves and thighs are indistinct, he is Śliṣṭajānuka (The One with Indistinct Knees).


Shloka 146: Sthūloru (स्थूलोरु) & Pronnamatkaṭi (प्रोन्नमत्कटि)
स्थूलोरु-रूरुयुगुलं यस्य स स्मृतः ।
आनघोन्नमत्कटिर्यस्य स प्रोक्तः प्रोन्नमत्कटिः ॥ १४६ ॥
He who has a pair of thick thighs is remembered as Sthūloru (The One with Thick Thighs). He whose hips are prominently raised is declared as Pronnamatkaṭi (The One with Protruding Hips).


निम्ननाभिः स्थूलकुक्षिः पीनवक्षा बृहद्भुजः ।
पीनस्कन्धः कम्बुकण्ठो लम्बोष्ठो लम्बनासिकः ॥ ३९॥


Shloka 147: Nimnanābhi (निम्ननाभि), Sthūlakukṣi (स्थूलकुक्षि), Pīnavakṣā (पीनवक्षा), Vṛhadbhuja (बृहद्भुज)
गांभीर्यतो निम्ननाभिः स्थूलकुक्षिः पिचंडिलः।
व्यूढो-रस्कः पीनवक्षा आजानुत्वाद्वृहद्भुजः ॥ १४७॥
Due to his profundity, he is Nimnanābhi (The One with a Deep Navel). He is Sthūlakukṣi (The Large-Bellied One). He is Pīnavakṣā (The Full-Breasted One). Because his arms reach his knees, he is Vṛhadbhuja (The Long-Armed One).






Shloka 148: Pīnaskandha (पीनस्कंध) & Kambukaṇṭha (कम्बुकण्ठ)
पीनस्कंधो मांसलांसः कम्बुकण्ठोऽनकंधरः ।
वलित्रितयसंयुक्तः कण्ठो यस्य स कीर्तितः ॥१४८॥
He is Pīnaskandha (The Broad-Shouldered One). He is Kambukaṇṭha (The One with a Conch-Neck), whose neck is adorned with three folds.


Shloka 149: Lamboṣṭha (लम्बोष्ठ) & Lambanāsika (लम्बनासिक)
लंबमानाधरोष्ठत्वाल्लं बोष्ठः स्याङ्गजा-ननः ।
शुण्डादण्डो लंबमानो यस्यासौ लम्बनासिकः ॥१४९॥
Because his lower lip is hanging down, the elephant-faced one (Aṅgajānana) is Lamboṣṭha (The Long-Lipped One). He whose trunk (Śuṇḍādaṇḍa) is hanging down is Lambanāsika (The Long-Nosed One).


भग्नवामरदस्तुङ्गसव्यदन्तो महाहनुः ।
ह्रस्वनेत्रत्रयः शूर्पकर्णो निबिडमस्तकः ॥ ४०॥


Shloka 150: Bhagnavāmarada (भग्नवामरद) & Tuṅgasavyadanta (तुङ्गसव्यदन्त)
भग्नवामरदो यस्य छिन्नाग्रो बामदन्तकः ।
दन्तोऽस्य दक्षिणस्तुंगः सव्यदन्तो यदुन्नतः ॥ १५० ॥
He whose left tusk is broken is Bhagnavāmarada (The One with a Broken Left Tusk). He whose right tusk is lofty and raised is Tuṅgasavyadanta (The One with a Lofty Right Tusk).


Shloka 151: Mahāhannu (महाहनु)
कपोलपरभा-गस्य महत्त्वेन महाहनुः ।
गजस्य यादृशं वक्रं तद्योग्यपरि-माणकम् ॥१५१॥
Due to the largeness of the posterior part of his cheeks, he is Mahāhannu (The Large-Jawed One). 
(His face is) curved like an elephant's and of a fitting proportion.


Shloka 152: Hrasvanetra (ह्रस्वनेत्र) & Śūrpakarṇa (शूर्पकर्ण)
न लोचनमनेनासौ ह्रस्वनेत्रत्रयः स्मृतः ।
यस्य शूर्पाकृती कर्णौ शूर्पकर्णः स उच्यते ॥ १५२ ॥
He is not (just) a being with (two) eyes; he is remembered as Hrasvanetra (The Three-Small-Eyed One). He whose ears are winnowing-basket-shaped (śūrpākṛtī) is called Śūrpakarṇa (The Winnowing-Basket-Eared One).


स्तबकाकारकुम्भाग्रो रत्नमौलिर्निरङ्कुशः ।
सर्पहारकटीसूत्रः सर्पयज्ञोपवीतवान् ॥ ४१॥


Shloka 153: Nibiḍamastaka (निबिडमस्तक) & Stabakākāra-kumbhāgra (स्तबकाकारकुम्भाग्र)
घन-त्वादतिकाठिन्यान्मूर्भो निबिडमस्तकः ।
स्तबकाकारकुंभाग्रो गुच्छोपमशिरोञ्चलः ॥ १५३ ॥
Due to its density and great hardness, his head is Nibiḍamastaka (The Dense-Headed One). The front of his temple is shaped like a flower-cluster, hence He is Stabakākāra-kumbhāgra (The One whose Temple-Front is like a Flower-Cluster).


Shloka 154: Ratnamaulī (रत्नमौलि) & Niraṅkuśa (निरंकुश)
रत्नोत्कीर्णकिरीटाढ्यो रत्नमौलिरुदीरितः ।
कुंभयोरंकुशा-स्पर्शात्स्वातंत्र्याद्वा निरंकुशः ॥ १५४ ॥
Adorned with a crown engraved with jewels, he is declared as Ratnamaulī (The Jewel-Crowned One). Because the goad (Aṅkuśa) touches his temples, or due to his absolute independence, he is Niraṅkuśa (The Unrestrained One).


सर्पकोटीरकटकः सर्पग्रैवेयकाङ्गदः ।
सर्पकक्षोदराबन्धः सर्पकक्ष्योदराबन्ध: ॥ ४२॥


Shloka 155: Sarpahāra-kaṭisūtra (सर्पहारकटिसूत्र), Sarpayajñopavītavān (सर्पयज्ञोपवीतवान्) & Sarpakoṭīra-kaṭaka (सर्पकोटीरकटक)
सर्पहारकटीसूत्रः सर्पयज्ञोपवीतवान् ।
सर्पकोटीरकटकः सर्पों यन्मौलिकंकणे ॥ १५५ ॥
He who wears serpents as his garland and his girdle is Sarpahāra-kaṭisūtra (The One with Serpents as His Garland and Girdle). He who has a serpent as his sacred thread is Sarpayajñopavītavān (The One with a Serpent Sacred Thread). He who wears serpents as his crown and his bracelets is Sarpakoṭīra-kaṭaka (The One with Serpents as His Diadem and Bracelets).


Shloka 156: Sarpagrāiveyakāṅgada (सर्पग्रैवेयकाङ्गद) & Sarpakakṣyodarābandha (सर्पकक्ष्योदराबन्ध)
सर्पात्मकण्ठदोर्भूषः सर्पग्रैवेयकांगदः ।
लक्ष्या च कटि-बंधाख्या कक्ष्याबंधश्च पन्नगौ ॥१५६॥
He who wears serpents as his necklace and his armlets is Sarpagrāiveyakāṅgada (The One with Serpents as His Necklace and Armlets). He for whom the two serpents known as the waist-girdle and the hip-girdle are visible is Sarpakakṣyodarābandha (The One with Serpents as His Girdle and Belly-Band).


Shloka 157: Sarpottarīyaka (सर्पोत्तरीयक)
यस्यासाते सर्पकक्ष्यो-दराबन्धः स कीर्तितः ।
'उदराबंध' इति दैर्ध्यमार्षमिति प्राञ्चः ।
सोत्तरीयो वासुकिना सर्पराजोत्तरीयकः ॥ १५७ ॥
He for whom these serpent ornaments are present is celebrated as such. (The commentator notes that previous scholars interpreted 'Udarābandha' based on its literal length). He who has the serpent-king Vāsuki as his upper garment is Sarpottarīyaka (The One with a Serpent-Shawl).


रक्तो रक्ताम्बरधरो रक्तमालाविभूषणः ।
रक्तेक्षणो रक्तकरो रक्तताल्वोष्ठपल्लवः ॥ ४३॥


Shloka 158: Raktaḥ (रक्तः), Raktāmbaradharaḥ (रक्ताम्बरधरः), Raktamālāvibhūṣaṇaḥ (रक्तमालाविभूषणः), Rakteṣaṇaḥ (रक्तेक्षणः), Raktakaraḥ (रक्तकरः) & Raktatālvoṣṭhapallavaḥ (रक्तताल्वोष्ठपल्लवः)
रक्तः कान्त्या वस्त्रमाल्य भूषादृक्करतालुना।
ओष्ठा-ग्रस्य च शोणत्वान्नामभिः पंचभिः स्तुतः ॥ १५८ ॥
He is praised by five names indicating a red hue: He is Raktaḥ (The Red One) due to his splendor, Raktāmbaradharaḥ (The Red-Robed One) due to his garments, Raktamālāvibhūṣaṇaḥ (The One Adorned with a Red Garland) due to his garland, Rakteṣaṇaḥ (The Red-Eyed One) due to his eyes, Raktakaraḥ (The Red-Handed One) due to the palms of his hands, and Raktatālvoṣṭhapallavaḥ (The One with a Red Palate and Lips) due to his palate and the tips of his lips.


श्वेतः श्वेताम्बरधरः श्वेतमालाविभूषणः ।
श्वेतातपत्ररुचिरः श्वेतचामरवीजितः ॥ ४४॥


Shloka 159: Śvetaḥ (श्वेतः), Śvetāmbaradharaḥ (श्वेताम्बरधरः), Śvetamālāvibhūṣaṇaḥ (श्वेतमालाविभूषणः), Śvetātapatraruciraḥ (श्वेतातपत्ररुचिरः) & Śvetacāmaravījitaḥ (श्वेतचामरवीजितः)
विद्याकामादिभिर्येयं रूपं बोधयितुं पुनः ।
प्रवृत्तं श्वेत इत्यादि स्पष्टार्थ नामपंचकम् ॥ १५९ ॥
In order to indicate again that form (which bestows) knowledge, desires, etc., the five names beginning with Śveta are employed; their meaning is clear. They are: Śvetaḥ (The White One), Śvetāmbaradharaḥ (The White-Robed One), Śvetamālāvibhūṣaṇaḥ (The One Adorned with a White Garland), Śvetātapatraruciraḥ (The One Resplendent with a White Canopy), and Śvetacāmaravījitaḥ (The One Fanned with a White Chowrie).


सर्वावयवसम्पूर्णसर्वलक्षणलक्षितः ।
सर्वाभरणशोभाढ्यः सर्वशोभासमन्वितः ॥ ४५॥


Shloka 160: Sarvāvayavasampūrṇa-sarvalakṣaṇalakṣitaḥ (सर्वावयवसम्पूर्णसर्वलक्षणलक्षितः)
सर्वागेषु समुद्रोक्तलक्षणैः पूरणादयम् ।
सर्वावयवसंपूर्ण-सर्वलक्षणलक्षितः ॥ १६० ॥
Because all his limbs are filled with all the characteristics mentioned in the scriptures, he is Sarvāvayavasampūrṇa-sarvalakṣaṇalakṣitaḥ (The One with All Limbs Complete and Endowed with All Auspicious Marks).


Shloka 161: Sarvābharaṇaśobhākhya (सर्वाभरणशोभाख्य) & Sarvaśobhā-samanvita (सर्वशोभासमन्वित)
सर्वाभरणशोभाख्योऽ-लंकारालंकृतत्वतः ।
लावण्याख्याङ्गकान्त्याढ्यः सर्वशोभा-समन्वितः ॥ १६१ ॥
He is called Sarvābharaṇaśobhākhya (The One whose Splendor is his Every Ornament) because he is adorned by ornaments. He is Sarvaśobhā-samanvita (The One United with All Splendor) because he is full of the beauty known as loveliness (Lāvaṇya) of limb.


सर्वमङ्गलमाङ्गल्यः सर्वकारणकारणम् ।
सर्वदैककरः शार्ङ्गी बीजपूरी गदाधरः ॥ ४६॥


Shloka 162: Sarvamaṅgalamāṅgalyaḥ (सर्वमङ्गलमाङ्गल्यः)
सर्वमंगलमांगल्यः शुभानां च शुभावहः ।
सर्वमंगला-ख्याया देव्या मंगलावह इति प्राञ्चः, तत्पक्षे आबन्तस्य पुंव-द्भावः केनेति विचार्यम् ।
सर्वस्य जगतो व्यक्तं परमाण्वादि-कारणम् ॥ १६२ ॥
He is the auspiciousness of all auspicious things and the bringer of all that is propitious. He is Sarvamaṅgalamāṅgalyaḥ (The Auspiciousness of All Auspiciousness). (The commentary discusses an alternate interpretation regarding the goddess Sarvamaṅgalā, concluding it is a subject for inquiry.)


Shloka 163: Sarvakāraṇakāraṇa (सर्वकारणकारण) & Sarvadaika-kara (सर्वदैककर)
सर्वदैककरः सर्व धत्ते मुख्यः करोऽस्य यत् ।
तेषामपि च हेतुत्वात् सर्वकारणकार-णम् ॥ १६३ ॥
He is Sarvadaika-kara — the one whose supreme, all-performing hand (or power) upholds and governs everything. Since he is the cause even of those causes, he is also Sarvakāraṇakāraṇa, the Cause of All causes.


Shloka 164: Śārṅgī (शार्ङ्गी)
शृंगोद्भवं धनुः शार्ङ्ग तद्वान् शाङ्गर्थथ नामभिः ।
दशभिदेश-हस्तस्यायुधान्यत्र गणेशितुः ॥ १६४ ॥
He is the one whose principal hand holds everything, always. The bow named Śārṅga, born from a horn, and he who holds it, is Śārṅgī (The Holder of the Śārṅga Bow). Here, the ten weapons in the ten directional hands of the Lord of Ganas are described by ten names.


इक्षुचापधरः शूली चक्रपाणिः सरोजभृत् ।
पाशी धृतोत्पलः शालिमञ्जरीभृत्स्वदन्तभृत् ॥ ४७॥


Shloka 165: Bījapūrī (बीजपूरी), Gadādharaḥ (गदाधरः), Ikṣucāpadharaḥ (इक्षुचापधरः), Śūlī (शूली), Cakrapāṇiḥ (चक्रपाणिः), Sarojabhṛt (सरोजभृत्), Pāśī (पाशी), Dhṛtotpalaḥ (धृतोत्पलः), Śālīmañjarībhṛt (शालीमञ्जरीभृत्) & Svadantabhṛt (स्वदन्तभृत्)
मातुलिंगं गदेक्षूत्थं धनुः शूलं सुदर्शनं ।
(शंख) पद्मप त्पलब्रीहिकणिशानि रदार्धकम् ॥ १६५ ॥
The ten weapons are: 1) Bījapūrī (The Holder of the Citron Fruit), 2) Gadādharaḥ (The Mace-Bearer), 3) Ikṣucāpadharaḥ (The Holder of the Sugarcane Bow), 4) Śūlī (The Trident-Bearer), 5) Cakrapāṇiḥ (The Discus-Bearer), 6) Sarojabhṛt (The Lotus-Bearer), 7) Pāśī (The Noose-Bearer), 8) Dhṛtotpalaḥ (The Blue Lotus-Bearer), 9) Śālīmañjarībhṛt (The Rice-Spike Bearer), and 10) Svadantabhṛt (The Holder of His Own Tusk).






A Scholarly Refutation
यत्तु प्राचा बीजा-पूरपदं दाडिमपरत्वेन व्याख्याय, इक्षुचापधरादि नामपंचकं मदनरुद्रविष्णुब्रह्मपरत्वेन व्याख्याय तदुत्तरनामद्वयं वर्षासु जलस्थलशोभाकरत्वाद्वरुणपरमेव व्याख्यातं, तदशभुजाया गणेशमूर्तेः 'बीजापूरगदेक्षुकार्मुकरुचा चक्राब्जपाशोत्पलव्रीह्य-ग्रस्वविषाणरत्न कलशप्रोद्यत्करांभोरुहः' इति ध्यानश्लोकस्थ-पदानां परशुरामकल्पसूत्रोक्तसांप्रदायिकार्थस्य स्वप्नेऽप्यश्रवणा-देवेत्युपेक्ष्यं ॥
However, what has been explained by previous commentators—interpreting 'Bījāpūra' as a pomegranate, and the five names beginning with 'Ikṣucāpadhara' (Holder of the Sugar-cane Bow) as referring to Madana, Rudra, Vishnu, and Brahma, and the next two names as referring to Varuṇa because he beautifies land and water in the rainy season—is to be disregarded. This is because they have never even heard in their dreams the traditional meaning found in the Paraśurāma-Kalpa-Sūtra for the words in the meditation verse describing the fourteen-armed Ganesha form: "He who holds in his lotus-hands the Bījāpūra (citron), mace, sugar-cane bow, discus, lotus, noose, blue-lotus, rice, a small tusk, a jewel, and a water-vessel..."


कल्पवल्लीधरो विश्वाभयदैककरो वशी ।
अक्षमालाधरो ज्ञानमुद्रावान् मुद्गरायुधः ॥ ४८॥


Shloka 166: 
अथ मंत्रांतरंगानां ध्याननामायुधान्यपि ।
सांकर्येण विनि-देंष्टुं नामान्यत्र त्रयोदश ॥ १६६ ॥
Now, in order to indicate collectively the names of the meditative forms, weapons, and other aspects intrinsic to the mantra, thirteen names are given here.


Shloka 167: Kalpavallīdharaḥ (कल्पवल्लीधरः) & Viśvābhayadaikakaraḥ (विश्वाभयदैककरः)
कल्पवल्लीधरः कल्प-लतां धत्ते करांबुजे ।
विश्वस्मादभयं धत्ते यस्य मुख्यः करः स तु ॥ १६७ ॥
महागणपतिर्विश्वाभयदैककरः स्मृतः ।
He holds the wish-fulfilling creeper in his lotus-hand and is Kalpavallīdharaḥ (The Holder of the Wish-fulfilling Creeper). He whose principal hand grants freedom from fear to the world is Viśvābhayadaikakaraḥ (The One whose Single Hand Gives Safety to the Universe).


Shloka 168: Vaśī (वशी)
वशेऽस्य विश्वं सर्वस्य वशीति श्रुतितो वशी ॥ १६८ ॥
The whole world is under his control; as the Śruti declares, he is Vaśī (The Supreme Controller) of all.
Shloka 169: Akṣamālādhara (अक्षमालाधर)
अकारादिक्षकारांतमातृकात्मकमालिका ।
उक्ताक्षमाला तद्धारी त्वक्षमालाधरो मतः ॥ १६९ ॥
The garland (Mālikā) consisting of the letters of the alphabet, from 'A' to 'Kṣa', is called the Akṣamālā (Rosary of Letters). He who bears that is considered Akṣamālādhara (The Bearer of the Rosary).


Shloka 170: Jñānamudrāvān (ज्ञानमुद्रावान्)
तर्जन्यंगुष्ठसंयोगो ज्ञान-मुद्रा हृदि स्थिताः ।
तादृशैककरो ज्ञानमुद्रावानिति कथ्यते ॥ १७० ॥
The joining of the index finger and the thumb is the Jñānamudrā (Gesture of Knowledge), and it is situated (symbolically) in the heart. He who has a single hand in such a gesture is called Jñānamudrāvān (The One Displaying the Gesture of Knowledge).


Shloka 171: Mudgarāyudha (मुद्गरायुध)
मुदं गिरंति यन्मत्रसाधनान्युरुबुन्नकं ।
मुसलं वायुधं यस्य स देवो मुद्गरायुधः ॥ १७१ ॥
He whose weapon (Āyudha) is a large, heavy club (Mudgara) that crushes (Giranti) the joy (Muda) of mantra-practices (of evil forces), is the Lord Mudgarāyudha (The One with the Club as his Weapon).


पूर्णपात्री कम्बुधरो विधृताङ्कुशमूलकः ।
मातुलिंगधरश्रूतकलिकाभृत् कुठारवान् ॥४९॥


Shloka 172: Pūrṇapātrī (पूर्णपात्री)
पूर्णपात्रं याज्ञिकेषु प्रसिद्धं तद्युतो मखः ।
यद्वा सुधा-घटयुतः पूर्णपात्रीति कीर्त्यते ॥ १७२ ॥
The Pūrṇapātra (Full Vessel) is well-known in Vedic rituals. He whose sacrifice is endowed with that, or he who holds a pot (Pātrī) full of nectar (Sudhā), is celebrated as Pūrṇapātrī (The One with the Full Vessel).


Shloka 173: Kambudhara (कंबुधर)
शंखस्य धारणा-द्धस्ते देवः कंबुधरः स्मृतः।
मद्यसंपुटकं धत्ते भृंगाणां संपुटायुते ॥ १७३ ॥
Because he holds a conch in his hand, the Lord is remembered as Kambudhara (The Conch-Bearer). He holds a casket of intoxicating perfume, which is a container for bees.
Shloka 174: Vidhṛtālisamudgakaḥ (विधृतालिसमुद्गकः), Mātuliṅgadharaḥ (मातुलिंगधरः) & Cūtakalikābhṛt (चूतकलिकाभृत्)
यो मदस्तं कटे धत्ते विधृतालिसमुद्ङ्गकः ।
बीजा-पूरफलं चाम्रमंजरीं च करे दधत् ॥ १७४ ॥
मातुलिंगधर-श्रुतकलिकाभृच्च कथ्यते ।
He who holds a casket of bees at his hip is Vidhṛtālisamudgakaḥ (The Bearer of the Bee-Casket). He who holds a citron fruit and a mango blossom in his hand is Mātuliṅgadharaḥ (The Holder of the Citron) and is also described as Cūtakalikābhṛt (The Holder of the Mango Blossom).


Shloka 175: Kuṭhāravān (कुठारवान्)
योगिज्ञानं केवलाख्यं कुठारं तस्य साक्ष्यसौ ।
ज्ञानार्थकात्तु शत्रंताद्धातोः सिद्धः कुठारवान् ।
'कुठारं केवले रत' इति हैमकोशः ॥ १७५ ॥
The knowledge of the Yogis, called "Kevala" (Absolute), is his axe (Kuṭhāra), and he is its witness. Alternatively, etymologically, from the root 'Śatṛ' (to know), the word 'Kuṭhāra' is derived, meaning "possessing an axe" (Kuṭhāravān). The Haima Kośa lexicon states, "Kuṭhāra is one who is devoted to the Absolute."


पुष्करस्थस्वर्णघटीपूर्णरत्नाभिवर्षकः ।
भारतीसुन्दरीनाथो विनायकरतिप्रियः ॥५०॥


Shloka 176: Puṣkarastha-svarṇaghaṭīpūrṇaratnābhivarṣakaḥ (पुष्करस्थस्वर्णघटीपूर्णरत्नाभिवर्षकः)
गुंडाग्रस्थ -स्वर्णकुंभपूर्णरत्नप्रदानतः ॥ १७६ ॥
पुष्कर स्थस्वर्णघटीपूर्णरत्नाभिवर्षकः ।
Because he gives from a golden pot full of jewels situated at the tip of his trunk, he is the one who showers jewels from a golden pot situated in Puṣkara (or from a lotus). Thus, He is Puṣkarastha-svarṇaghaṭīpūrṇaratnābhivarṣakaḥ (The One who Showers Jewels from a Golden Pot Situated in Puṣkara).


Shloka 177: Bhāratīsundarīnāthaḥ (भारतीसुंदरीनाथः)
भारतीसुंदरी-नाथो ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवात्मकः ॥ १७७ ॥
He is the Lord of Bhāratī-Sundarī (the goddess of speech and beauty) and is of the nature of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva. Thus, He is Bhāratīsundarīnāthaḥ (The Lord of Bhāratī-Sundarī).


Shloka 178: Vināyakaratipriya (विनायकरतिप्रियः)
लक्ष्मीवाचकमीकारं प्रश्लिष्यार्थोऽयमूह्यतां ।
विनायका ग्रहाः केचित्तैः सह क्रीडनं प्रियं ॥ १७८ ॥
पक्षिराजेन वाऽस्येति विनायकरतिप्रियः ।
The meaning of the word 'Lakṣmī' should be understood by joining it with the word 'Vācaka' (indicating). He finds delight (Rati) in playing with certain Vināyakas (Gana-deities) and Grahas (planetary deities), or with the king of birds (Garuḍa). Therefore, he is Vināyakaratipriya (The One who Finds Delight in the Vināyakas).


महालक्ष्मीप्रियतमः सिद्धलक्ष्मीमनोरमः ।
रमारमेशपूर्वाङ्गो दक्षिणोमामहेश्वरः ॥५१॥


Shloka 179: 
महालक्ष्मीसिद्धलक्ष्म्यावस्य द्वे वल्लभे इति ॥ १७९ ॥
For him, the two—Mahālakṣmī (the great goddess of prosperity) and Siddhalakṣmī (the goddess of spiritual accomplishment)—are his beloved (Vallabhe). Thus, he is Mahālakṣmīvallabha (The Beloved of Mahālakṣmī) and Siddhalakṣmīvallabha (The Beloved of Siddhalakṣmī).
Shloka 180: Mahālakṣmīpriyatama (महालक्ष्मीप्रियतम) & Siddhalakṣmīmanorama (सिद्धलक्ष्मीमनोरम)
महालक्ष्मीप्रियतमः सिद्धलक्ष्मीमनोरमः ।
अथ नामचतुष्केन देवस्यावरणात्मिकाः ॥ १८० ॥
He is the most beloved (Priyatama) of Mahālakṣmī and the delightful one (Manorama) to Siddhalakṣmī. Now, with the next four names, (are described) the deities constituting his protective enclosure (Āvaraṇa).


Shloka 181: Rāmārameśa-pūrvāṅgaḥ (रमारमेशपूर्वाङ्गः), Dakṣiṇomāmaheśvaraḥ (दक्षिणोमामहेश्वरः), Mahīvarāha-vāmāṅgaḥ (महीवराहवामाङ्गः) & Ratikandarpa-paścimaḥ (रतिकन्दर्पपश्चिमः)
प्राच्याम-वाच्यां चोदीच्यां प्रतीच्यां च स्थिताः क्रमात् ।
रमादामोदरौ गौरीशंकरौ भूमिसूकरौ ॥ १८१ ॥
रतिमाराविति द्वंद्वदेवताः कीर्तिताः स्फुटाः ।
Situated in the East, South, North, and West respectively are the divine pairs. 
* He who is the eastern pair, Rāma (Lakṣmī) and Rameśa (Viṣṇu), is Rāmārameśa-pūrvāṅgaḥ (The One whose Eastern Form is Lakṣmī and Viṣṇu). 
* He who is the southern pair, Umā and Maheśvara (Pārvatī and Śiva), is Dakṣiṇomāmaheśvaraḥ (The One whose Southern Form is Pārvatī and Śiva). 
* He who is the northern pair, Mahī (Earth) and Varāha, is Mahīvarāha-vāmāṅgaḥ (The One whose Northern Form is the Earth and Varāha). 
* He who is the western pair, Rati and Kandarpa (Kāma), is Ratikandarpa-paścimaḥ (The One whose Western Form is Rati and Kāma).


महीवराहवामाङ्गो रतिकन्दर्पपश्चिमः ।
आमोदमोदजननः सम्प्रमोदप्रमोदनः ॥५२॥
समेधितसमृद्धश्रीऋद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः ।
दत्तसौमुख्यसुमुखः कांतिकंदलिताश्रयः ॥५३॥


Shloka 183: Āmodamodajananah (आमोदमोदजननः), Sampramodapramodanaḥ (सम्प्रमोदप्रमोदनः), Samedhitasamṛddhiśrīḥ (समेधितसमृद्धिश्रीः) & Ṛddhisiddhipravartakaḥ (ऋद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः)
छंदोवशादक्रमेण प्रोक्ता द्वादशनामभिः ।
ऋद्ध्यामोदौ समृद्धि-प्रमोदौ च मिथुनी उभे ॥१८३॥
Through metrical arrangement, twelve names are presented. Ṛddhi and Āmoda form the first divine couple; Samṛddhi and Pramoda form the second. He who generates the delight of Āmoda is Āmodamodajananah (The Generator of Delight). He who causes great joy (Pramoda) is Sampramodapramodanaḥ (The Causer of Great Joy). He whose glory is increased by prosperity is Samedhitasamṛddhiśrīḥ (The One whose Splendor is Enhanced by Prosperity). He who sets in motion (bestows) Ṛddhi and Siddhi is Ṛddhisiddhipravartakaḥ (The Initiator of Prosperity and Accomplishment).


Shloka 184: Dattasaumukhyasumukhaḥ (दत्तसौमुख्यसुमुखः), Kāntikaṇḍalitāśrayaḥ (कांतिकंदलिताश्रयः), Madanāvatyāśritāṅghriḥ (मदनावत्याश्रिताङ्घ्रिः), Kṛtavaimukhyadurmukhaḥ (कृतवैमुख्यदुर्मुखः), Vighnasampallavopaghnaḥ (विघ्नसम्पल्लवोपघ्नः), Sarvonnatamadadravaḥ (सर्वोन्नतमदद्रवः), Vighnakṛnnimnacaraṇaḥ (विघ्नकृन्निम्नचरणः) & Drāviṇīśaktisatkṛtaḥ (द्राविणीशक्तिसत्कृतः)
सुमुखः कांतिरित्येकं दुर्मुखो मदनावती मदद्रवेत्येकं ।
विघ्नो विघ्नकृद्राविणीति च ॥१८४॥
Sumukha and Kānti constitute one pair. Durmukha and Madanāvatī form another. Madadravā is paired with Vighna; Vighnakṛt is joined with Drāviṇī. He who, being gracious (Sumukha), has bestowed benevolence is Dattasaumukhyasumukhaḥ (The Benevolent One who has Bestowed Grace). He who is the refuge of unfolding splendor (Kānti) is Kāntikaṇḍalitāśrayaḥ (The Abode of Unfolding Splendor). He at whose feet Madanāvatī has taken refuge is Madanāvatyāśritāṅghriḥ (The One at whose Feet Madanāvatī has Taken Refuge). He who has made Durmukha (The Ill-Faced One) turn away is Kṛtavaimukhyadurmukhaḥ (The One who Caused Durmukha to Turn Away). He who destroys the very sprout of obstacles is Vighnasampallavopaghnaḥ (The Destroyer of the Sprout of Obstacles). He whose intoxicating power flows forth, elevating all, is Sarvonnatamadadravaḥ (The One from whom the Intoxicating Power that Elevates All Flows). He whose feet are bowed to by Vighnakṛt (The Obstacle-Creator) is Vighnakṛnnimnacaraṇaḥ (The One whose Feet are Bowed to by the Obstacle-Creator). He who is honored by the power of Drāviṇī (The Melting One) is Drāviṇīśaktisatkṛtaḥ (The One Honored by the Power of Drāviṇī).


Verse 185 — The Role of Āmoda, Pramoda, and Samṛddhi
आमोदं मोदयत्येष प्रमोदस्य प्रमोदनैः ।
सहितश्च समृद्ध्या श्रीरनेनैवाभिवर्धिता ॥ १८५ ॥
He (Ganesha) brings forth joy through Āmoda, and delights Pramoda with his own delight-giving acts.
United with Samṛddhi, the goddess Śrī (Fortune) is enhanced and expanded by him alone.


Verse 186 — Siddhi’s Activity and the Grace of Sumukha
ऋद्धिदेव्यां स्थिता सिद्धिः प्रवर्तयति चाप्यसौ ।
सुमुखः स्वेषु सौमुख्यं यत्प्रसादात् प्रतिच्छति ॥ १८६॥
Siddhi, who dwells within the goddess Ṛddhi, is set into action by him. And Sumukha (the Auspicious-Faced One) receives his beauty and charm through the grace of Ganesha.


मदनावत्याश्रिताङ्घ्रिः कृतवैमुख्यदुर्मुखः ।
विघ्नसम्पल्लवः पद्मः सर्वोन्नतमदद्रवः ॥५४॥


Verse 187 — Kānti, Madanāvatī, and Durmukha’s Nature
यद्वशादाश्रयः कांतेर्देव्या अंकुरितोऽभवत् ।
धृतवान् मदनावत्या दौर्मुख्यं दुर्मुखे स्थितं ॥ १८७॥
By his power, the supporting essence of the goddess Kānti (Splendor) emerged into manifestation.
And through Madanāvatī, Durmukha sustains the harsh and fierce quality
that abides naturally within him.


Verse 188 — The Cutting of Obstacles and Protective Power
कृत्तं छिन्नमनेनैव सम्यग्विघ्नस्य पल्लवः ।
विस्तारस्तस्य चोपघ्न आश्रयो यस्य सेवने ॥१८८॥
By him alone, the tender shoots of obstacles are properly cut down and severed. For the one who takes refuge in his worship, the growth of opposing forces diminishes.


विघ्नकृन्निम्नचरणो द्राविणीशक्तिसत्कृतः ।
तीव्राप्रसन्ननयनो ज्वालिनीपालितैकदृक् ॥५५॥
मोहिनीमोहनो भोगदायिनीकान्तिमण्डनः ।
कामिनीकान्तवक्त्रश्रीरधिष्ठितवसुन्धरः ॥५६॥


Verse 189 — Madadravā and the Devotional Submission of Vighnakṛt
उन्निद्रानलसैवास्ते देवी नान्ना मदद्रवा ।
भक्त्या विघ्नकृतोऽधीने यस्य तञ्चरणांबुजे ॥ १८९॥
The goddess Madadravā remains ever-alert and never sluggish. And Vighnakṛt (the Remover of Obstacles) becomes submissive through devotion to the one devoted to his lotus-feet.




A Final Scholarly Refutation
यत्त्वत्र-प्राचां षोडशसु नामस्वर्थांतरवर्णनं पाठांतरावलंबनं, उपन्नपदे विसर्गापलापनेनोद्राविणीति पदकल्पनादिना च, कचिन्नामैक्य-करणं च, तत्सर्वमसांप्रदायिकत्वात् परशुरामकृत कल्पसूत्रा-दिविरोधाच्च मनसापि न स्मर्तव्यम् ।
However, whatever has been done by previous commentators here regarding these sixteen names—such as describing different meanings, relying on alternate readings, inventing the word 'Udrāviṇī' by dropping the Visarga in 'Upanṇa', and sometimes combining names into one—all of that, being non-traditional and contradicting texts like the Paraśurāma-Kalpa-Sūtra, should not be remembered even in the mind.


Shloka 190: Ṣaḍdiś (षड्दिश्)
अथ नामानि षट् प्राह षड्डिस्तीत्रादिशक्तिभिः ॥१९०॥
Now, he proclaims six names, (related to) the six directions, with the powers like Tīvrā, etc.


Shloka 191: Tīvrāprasannanayanaḥ (तीव्राप्रसन्ननयनः) & Jvālinīpālitāikadṛk (ज्वालिनीपालितैकदृक्)
तीव्रायां यस्य नयने प्रसाद-पिशुनेक्षणे ।
ज्वालिन्या रक्षणे मुख्या यदृष्टिर्मोहिनीमपि ॥ १९१ ॥
He on whom the gaze of Tīvrā, whose eyes are keen with grace, falls is Tīvrāprasannanayanaḥ (The One with the Graciously Keen Gaze of Tīvrā). He whose single gaze is protected by the principal gaze of Jvālinī is Jvālinīpālitāikadṛk (The One whose Gaze is Protected by Jvālinī).


Shloka 192: Mohinīmohanaḥ (मोहिनीमोहनः) & Bhogadāyinīkāntimaṇḍanaḥ (भोगदायिनीकान्तिमण्डनः)
यो मोहयति तस्मै श्रीगणाधिपतये नमः ।
त्वं भोगदायिनी शक्तेः कान्त्या मंडितपादुकः ॥ १९२ ॥
Salutations to that glorious Lord of Ganas who bewilders even Mohinī (the enchantress); He is Mohinīmohanaḥ (The Bewilderer of even Mohinī). "You are Bhogadāyinī (The Bestower of Enjoyment)," (saying this) the power of his splendor adorns his footwear; thus He is Bhogadāyinīkāntimaṇḍanaḥ (The One Adorned by the Splendor of Bhogadāyinī).


Conclusion of the Third Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ ॥
गणेशनामखद्योते तृतीयमभवत् शतम् ॥ ३००॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), composed by Bhāskara, 
also known as Agnicit, ends the third hundred of the Ganesha Sahasranama.


वसुधारामदोन्नादो महाशङ्खनिधिप्रियः ।
नमद्वसुमतीमाली महापद्मनिधिः प्रभुः ॥५७॥


Shloka 193: Kāminīkāntavaktraśriyaḥ (कामिनीकान्तवक्त्रश्रियः), Adhiṣṭhitavāsundharā (अधिष्ठितवासुन्धरा), Vasundharāmadonnamahāśaṅkhanidhiprabhave (वसुन्धरामदोन्नमहाशङ्खनिधिप्रभवे) & Namadvasumatīmaulimahāpadmanidhiprabhuḥ (नमद्वसुमतीमौलिमहापद्मनिधिप्रभुः)
कामिन्याः शोभने वक्रे या शोभातत्स्वरूपकः ।
वसुंधरा-भिधा देवी जाता त्वत्तः प्रतिष्ठिता ॥ १९३ ॥
अथ द्वे नामनी प्राह मिथुनद्वयबोधिके ।
महाशंखमहा-पद्माभिधे द्वे निधिदेवते ॥ १९४ ॥
वसुंधरा वसुमतीत्येते द्वे तत्तदंगने ।
He is the very form of the beauty which is in the lovely face of Kāminī; thus He is Kāminīkāntavaktraśriyaḥ (The One who is the Splendor of Kāminī's Lovely Face). The goddess named Vasundharā (The Earth) is born from you and is established (by you); thus She is Adhiṣṭhitavāsundharā (The Established Earth). He from whom the great treasure (Nidhi) named Mahāśaṅkha, belonging to the earth (Vasundharā), arises is Vasundharāmadonnamahāśaṅkhanidhiprabhave (The Source of the Great Śaṅkha Treasure of the Earth). He who is the lord (Prabhu) of the great treasure (Nidhi) named Mahāpadma, to which the bowing earth (Vasumatī) is the crest-jewel, is Namadvasumatīmaulimahāpadmanidhiprabhuḥ (The Lord of the Great Padma Treasure, the Crest-Jewel of the Bowing Earth).


सर्वसद्गुरुसंसेव्यः शोचिष्केशहृदाश्रयः ।
ईशानमूर्धा देवेन्द्रशिखः पवननन्दनः ॥५८॥


Shloka 195: Sarvasadgurusaṃsevya (सर्वसद्गुरुसंसेव्य)
गणेशादिस्वनाथान्तैः सम्यगाराधितो यतः ॥ १९५ ॥
सर्वसद्गुरुसंसेव्य इति तेन निगद्यसे ।
"Vasundharā" and "Vasumatī" are the two (consorts) in their respective courts. Because he is properly worshipped by (all teachers) from Gaṇeśa to one's own Guru (Svanātha), he is called Sarvasadgurusaṃsevya (The One Served by All True Gurus).

Shloka 196: Śociṣkeśa-hṛdāśraya (शोचिष्केशहृदाश्रय)
गार्हपत्यादयः पंच शोचिष्केशास्तदीयहृत् ।
आश्रयो यस्य तद्ध्येयः शोचिष्केशहृदाश्रयः ॥ १९६॥
The five fires beginning with the Gārhapatya are the "Śociṣkeśa" (Fire-haired ones). He who is the abode of their hearts (i.e., their inner essence) is to be meditated upon as Śociṣkeśa-hṛdāśraya (The Abode in the Heart of the Fires).


Shloka 197: Īśānamūrdhā (ईशानमूर्धा) & Devendraśikhaḥ (देवेन्द्रशिखः)
ईशानस्यापि मूर्धा त्वं देवेन्द्र-स्यापि वै शिखा ॥ १९७ ॥
शक्रशंकरयोर्मान्य इति नाम-द्वयाशयः ।
"You are the head of Īśāna (Śiva) and the crest-jewel of Devendra (Indra)." This is the intent of the two names. Thus, He is Īśānamūrdhā (The Head of Īśāna) and Devendraśikhaḥ (The Crest-Jewel of Indra).


Shloka 198: Pavananandanaḥ (पवननन्दनः)
जीवनान्नान्य आनंदस्तत्प्राणपवनात्मकः ॥१९८॥
प्राणस्यापि च यः प्राणः स स्यात्पवननंदनः ।
The bliss of life is none other than the vital air (Prāṇa). He whose nature is that vital air and breath, and he who is the very life of the life-force, is Pavananandanaḥ (The Son of the Wind).


अग्रप्रत्यग्रनयनो दिव्यास्त्राणां प्रयोगवित् । 
ऐरावतादिसर्वाशावारणावरणप्रियः ॥५९॥


Shloka 199: Agrapratyagranayana (अग्रप्रत्यग्रनयन)
अग्रं सूक्ष्मं चोत्तमं वा प्रत्यग्रं जीर्णतोज्झितम् ॥ १९९ ॥
तादृग्लोचनवानग्रप्रत्यग्रनयनो मतः ।
"Agra" means subtle or supreme; "Pratyagra" means fresh, cast off from decay. He who possesses such a vision is considered Agrapratyagranayana (The One with Fresh and Supreme Vision).


Shloka 200: Divyāstrāṇāṃ Prayogavit (दिव्यास्त्राणां प्रयोगवित्)
Sanskrit:
अस्त्रविद्याप्रवर्तृत्वा-द्दिव्यास्त्राणां प्रयोगवित् ॥ २०० ॥
Because he is the propounder of the science of weapons, 
he is Divyāstrāṇāṃ Prayogavit (The Knower of the Use of Divine Weapons).


Shloka 201: Airāvatādi-sarvāśā-vāraṇāvaraṇa-priya (ऐरावतादिसर्वाशावारणावरणप्रिय)
क्रीडयैवावृणोत्येष युगपद्दिग्गजानपि ।
ऐरावतादिसर्वाशावारणावरण-प्रियः ॥ २०१ ॥
Merely through play, he encompasses even the Diggajas (the elephants of the directions) simultaneously. He who takes delight in the enclosure formed by all the directional elephants like Airāvata is Airāvatādi-sarvāśā-vāraṇāvaraṇa-priya (The One who Delights in the Enclosure of All Directional Elephants like Airāvata).


वज्राद्यस्त्रपरीवारो गणचण्डसमाश्रयः ।
जयाजयापरिवार: विजयाविजयावहः ॥ ६०॥


Shloka 202: Vajrādyastra-parivāra (वज्राद्यस्त्रपरीवार)
वज्रादीनि यदस्त्राणि तैरिंद्रादिभिरावृतः ।
वज्राद्यस्त्र-परीवार आयुधावरणोऽपि वा ॥ २०२ ॥
He is surrounded by Indra and other deities who hold weapons (astras) starting with the Vajra. He whose entourage consists of weapons like the Vajra is Vajrādyastra-parivāra (The One whose Entourage Consists of Weapons like the Vajra).


Shloka 203: Gaṇacaṇḍa-samāśraya (गणचण्डसमाश्रय)
गणाश्चंडादयो यद्वा ये प्रचंडा गणेष्वपि ।
तेषां बलप्रदातृत्वाद्गणचंडसमाश्रयः ॥ २०३॥
Alternatively, the groups (Gaṇas) like Caṇḍa and others, or those who are the most fierce (Pracaṇḍa) even among the groups—because He is the bestower of strength to them, He is Gaṇacaṇḍa-samāśraya (The One who is the Refuge of Fierce Attendants like Caṇḍa).


अजयार्चितपादाब्जो नित्यानन्दवनस्थितः ।
विलासिनीकृतोल्लासः शौण्डीसौन्दर्यमण्डितः ॥ ६१॥
अनन्तानन्तसुखदः सुमङ्गलसुमङ्गलः ।
इच्छाशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिक्रियाशक्तिनिषेवितः ॥ ६२॥


Shloka 204-206: Jayājayāparivāraḥ (जयाजयापरिवारः), Vijayāvijayāvahaḥ (विजयाविजयावहः), Ajayārcitapādābjaḥ (अजयार्चितपादाब्जः), Nityānandavanasthitaḥ (नित्यानन्दवनस्थितः), Vilāsinīkṛtollāsaḥ (विलासिनीकृतोल्लासः) & Śauṇḍīsaundaryamaṇḍitaḥ (शौण्डीसौन्दर्यमण्डितः)
अथाष्टनामभिः प्राह प्राणशक्त्या अभिन्नतां ।
जया च विजया पश्चादजया चापराजिता ॥ २०४॥
नित्या विलासिनी शौंडी ततोऽनंताथ मंगला ।
प्राणशक्त्यादिदेवीनामेताः स्युः पीठशक्तयः ॥२०५॥
जया चाप्यजयेत्येतत्समाहारो जयाजयं ।
ते एवास्य परीवारो द्वितीयं नाम तु स्फुटं ॥ २०६ ॥
तृतीयनामन्यजितापदेनोक्ता पराजिता ।
Now, with eight names, He is declared to be non-different from His Prāṇa-Śakti. The combination of "Jayā" and "Ajayā" is "Jayājayam". They themselves are His attendants. Thus, He whose entourage consists of Jayā and Ajayā is Jayājayāparivāraḥ (The One Attended by Jayā and Ajayā). He who brings about both victory (Vijayā) and the absence of victory (Avijayā) is Vijayāvijayāvahaḥ (The Bringer of Victory and its Opposite). He whose lotus feet are worshipped by Ajayā is Ajayārcitapādābjaḥ (The One whose Lotus Feet are Worshipped by Ajayā). He who abides in the forest of eternal bliss is Nityānandavanasthitaḥ (The One Situated in the Forest of Eternal Bliss). He for whom Vilāsinī creates exuberance is Vilāsinīkṛtollāsaḥ (The One whose Exuberance is Caused by Vilāsinī). He who is adorned by the beauty of Śauṇḍī is Śauṇḍīsaundaryamaṇḍitaḥ (The One Adorned by Śauṇḍī's Beauty).




Shloka 207: Anantānantasukhadaḥ (अनन्तानन्तसुखदः)
सप्तमे नाम्यनंताया अनंतसुखदायकः ॥ २०७ ॥
In the seventh name, pertaining to Anantā (The Infinite One), He is the giver of infinite happiness. Thus, He is Anantānantasukhadaḥ (The Giver of Infinite Happiness to the Infinite One / The Infinite Giver of Happiness).


Shloka 208: Sumaṅgala-sumaṅgalaḥ (सुमङ्गलसुमङ्गलः)
शोभना मंगला यस्मिंस्तत्तु पीठं सुमंगलम् ।
तादृकू सुमंगलं यस्मात् सुमंगलसुमंगलः ॥ २०८ ॥
Because the auspicious Maṅgalā resides in Him, that seat (Pīṭha) is supremely auspicious (Sumaṅgala). Because He possesses such supreme auspiciousness, He is Sumaṅgala-sumaṅgalaḥ (The Supremely Auspicious One who is the very essence of Auspiciousness).


Commentary on the Names (209-210)
प्राचा त्वेतानि नामा-न्यन्यथा व्याख्यातानि ।
प्रथमनामनि जय इत्यस्य भिन्न-पदत्वं च स्वीकृतं, तदसांप्रदायिकत्वादुपेक्ष्यं ।
या ब्रह्मण्युगता वृत्तिः स्वर्गादावीक्षणात्मिका ।
ज्ञानेच्छाकृतिरूपा सेत्य-स्माभिः श्रुतियुक्तिभिः ॥ २०९ ॥
वामकेश्वरतंत्रस्य व्याख्यायां प्रतिपादितं ।
तादृवृत्तियुतं ब्रह्मनाम्नैकेनेह कथ्यते ॥ २१०॥
However, previous (commentators) have explained these names differently. In the first name, they have accepted "Jayā" and "Ajayā" as separate words. That is non-traditional and should be disregarded. As established by us through Vedic statements and reasoning, and as propounded in the commentary on the Vāmakeśvara-tantra, the disposition (Vṛtti) which is inherent in Brahman, which is of the nature of witnessing (enjoyment) in states like heaven, and which has the form of Knowledge, Will, and Action—He, who is endowed with such a disposition, is spoken of here by the single name "Brahma".


Shloka 211: Icchā-śakti-jñāna-śakti-kriyā-śakti-niṣevita (इच्छाशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिक्रियाशक्तिनिषेवित)
इच्छाशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिक्रियाशक्तिनिषेवितः ।
सैव वृत्तिर्भिद्यमाना तत्तद्धर्मैकयोगतः ॥ २११ ॥
He is constantly attended by the powers of Will (Icchā), Knowledge (Jñāna), and Action (Kriyā). That very (supreme) disposition (Vṛtti), when differentiated and connected with specific properties, becomes these (three) powers. He is Icchā-śakti-jñāna-śakti-kriyā-śakti-niṣevita (The One Served by the Powers of Will, Knowledge, and Action).


सुभगासंश्रितपदो ललिताललिताश्रयः ।
कामिनीपालनः कामकामिनीकेलिलालितः ॥ ६३॥


Shloka 212: Subhagā-saṃśrita-pada (सुभगासंश्रितपद)
सुभगा-दिकरौ ह्येते नामभागित्यपीरितं ।
तत्र या सुभगादेवी तया सेव्यांघ्रिरप्यसौ ॥ २१२॥
It is stated that these (names) are also parts of names like "Subhagādi-kara". He, whose feet are served by that very goddess Subhagā, is Subhagā-saṃśrita-pada (The One at whose Feet the Auspicious Goddess Subhagā Resides).


Shloka 213: Lalitā-lalitā-śrayaḥ, Kāminī-pālanaḥ, Kāma-kāminī-keli-lālitaḥ (ललिताललिताश्रयः, कामिनीपालनः, कामकामिनीकेलिलालितः)
गणेशसुंदरीमंत्राललिताललिता-श्रयः ।
कामिनी या कामकला कामेशी काममालिनी ॥ २१३ ॥
He is the abode of the goddesses Lalitā and Alalitā (Lalitā-lalitā-śrayaḥ). He is the protector of the goddesses Kāminī, Kāmakalā, Kāmeśī, and Kāmamālinī (Kāminī-pālanaḥ). He who is adorned by the playful sports with Kāma (desire) and the Kāminīs (desirous goddesses) is Kāma-kāminī-keli-lālitaḥ.


सरस्वत्याश्रयो गौरीनन्दनः श्रीनिकेतनः ।
गुरुगुप्तपदो वाचासिद्धो वागीश्वरीपतिः ॥ ६४ ॥


Shloka 214: Sarasvaty-āśrayaḥ, Gaurī-nandanaḥ, Śrī-niketanaḥ (सरस्वत्याश्रय:, गौरीनन्दनः, श्रीनिकेतनः)
सरस्वत्याश्रयादीनि त्रीणि स्पष्टार्थकान्यथ ।
गणक्रीडादिगुरुभिर्ग्रथादौ प्रतिपादितैः ॥ २१४ ॥
The next three names, starting with "Sarasvaty-āśraya", have clear meanings, as propounded by revered teachers like Gaṇakrīḍa. They are: Sarasvaty-āśrayaḥ (The Abode of Sarasvatī), Gaurī-nandanaḥ (The Son of Gaurī), and Śrī-niketanaḥ (The Abode of Śrī).


Shloka 215: Gurugupta-padaḥ, Vācā-siddha (गुरुगुप्तपद:, वाचासिद्ध)
गोपित-त्वात्पदस्यास्य गुरुगुप्तपदो मतः ।
वाचा सिद्ध्यति यद्भक्त्या स वाचासिद्ध इष्यते ॥ २१५ ॥
Because this word ("Vācāsiddha") is concealed (in meaning), He is known as Gurugupta-padaḥ (The One whose true nature is hidden even from the Guru). He who is attained (Siddha) through devotion accompanied by (recitation of) Vāk (speech/mantra) is Vācā-siddha.


नलिनीकामुको वामारामो ज्येष्ठामनोरमः ।
रौद्रीमुद्रितपादाब्जो हुम्बीजस्तुङ्गशक्तिकः ॥ ६५ ॥


Shloka 216: Vāgīśvarī-patiḥ, Nalinī-kāmukaḥ (वागीश्वरीपतिः, नलिनीकामुक:)
वागीश्वरी तु नकुली नलिनी तु सुरापगा ।
तयोः पतिः कामुकोऽथ वामा ज्येष्ठा च रौद्रिका ॥ २१६ ॥
Vāgīśvarī is (also called) Nakulī, and Nalinī is (another name for) Surāpagā (the celestial river, Gaṅgā). He is the master (Pati) of these two and the desirous lover (Kāmuka) of them. Thus, He is Vāgīśvarī-patiḥ (The Lord of Vāgīśvarī) and Nalinī-kāmukaḥ (The Lover of Nalinī/Gaṅgā).


Shloka 217: Vāmā-rāmaḥ, Jyeṣṭhā-manoramaḥ (वामारामः, ज्येष्ठामनोरमः)
ब्रह्मविष्णुहरा एव शक्तिरूपधरा यदि ।
वामैव यस्य रामा स ज्येष्ठा यस्य मनोरमा ॥ २१७॥
If Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Hara (Śiva) themselves assume the form of Śaktis, then He whose (Śakti) is Vāmā (who is also) Rāmā, is Vāmā-rāmaḥ (The One whose Vāmā is delightful). And He whose (Śakti) is Jyeṣṭhā (who is also) Manoramā, is Jyeṣṭhā-manoramaḥ (The One whose Jyeṣṭhā is enchanting).

Shloka 218: Raudrī-mudrita-pādābja (रौद्रीमुद्रितपादाब्ज)
रौद्रीमुद्रितपादाब्जस्तदंजलिधृतांत्रिकः ।
हुंकार एव चरमो वक्रतुंडषडक्षरे ॥ २१८ ॥
He whose lotus feet are sealed (worshipped) by Raudrī, and who holds the three (worlds) in his cupped hands. The final (syllable) is indeed the Huṃkāra in the Ṣaḍakṣara (six-syllabled) mantra of Vakratuṇḍa (Gaṇeśa). He is Raudrī-mudrita-pādābja (The One whose Lotus Feet are Sealed by Raudrī).


Shloka 219: Huṃ-bīja (हुंबीज)
बीजं सर्वपुमर्थानां हुंबीजस्तेन गीयसे ।
तत्रत्य एव तुंकारोऽष्टाविंशत्यर्णगं च कं ॥ २१९ ॥
The seed-syllable (Bīja) of all supreme goals is the Huṃ-bīja; thus, you are praised as Huṃ-bīja. The "Tuṃ" sound therein, and the "Ka" which resides in the twenty-eight letters (of the alphabet)... He is Huṃ-bīja (The Seed-Syllable 'Huṃ').
Shloka 220: Tuṅga-śaktika (तुङ्गशक्तिक)
शक्तीस्ताः सकलौन्नत्यशक्त्या वान् तुंगशक्तिकः ।
हिरण्यगर्भो विश्वादिस्तदुत्पादनपालने ॥ २२० ॥
He possesses (Vān) the power of complete elevation (Sakalaunnati-śakti) for those Śaktis; thus, He is Tuṅga-śaktika (The One with Lofty Powers). (He is) Hiraṇyagarbha (the cosmic womb), Viśva, etc., in the acts of their creation and preservation.


विश्वादिजननत्राणः स्वाहाशक्तिः सकीलकः ।
अमृताब्धिकृतावासो मदघूर्णितलोचनः ॥ ६६॥


Shloka 221: Viśvādi-janana-trāṇa (विश्वादिजननत्राण)
यस्मात् स्यातां स विश्वादिजननत्राण उच्यते ।
जननत्राणवच्छक्तो होमे कंबलने प्रियः ॥२२१॥
Because from Him, the creation and protection (Janana-trāṇa) of the universe, etc., occur, He is called Viśvādi-janana-trāṇa (The Source of Creation and Protection for the Universe, etc.). He is powerful, as implied by "Janana-trāṇa," and is fond of offerings in fire (Homa) and of blankets (Kambala).


Shloka 222: Svāhā-śakti (स्वाहाशक्ति)
स्वाहेति मंत्रशक्तिर्वा स स्वाहा-शक्तिरीरितः ।
मंत्रे मृत्युंजये सौरे स इत्यर्णः सकीलकः ॥ २२२ ॥
Or, the power of the mantra is "Svāhā"; thus, He is declared as Svāhā-śakti (The Power of Svāhā). In the Mṛtyuñjaya and Saura mantras, the letter "Sa" with its Kilaka (a grammatical marker) denotes Him.


Shloka 223: Sakīlaka (सकीलक), Amṛtābdhi-kṛtāvāsa (अमृताब्धिकृतावास) & Madaghūrṇita-locana (मदघूर्णितलोचन)
वाचको यस्य मंत्रांगसाहित्याद्वा सकीलकः ।
सुरासुधेक्षुसिंधुस्थो यस्तत्पानरतश्च सः ॥ २२३ ॥
अमृता-ब्धिकृतावासो मदघूर्णितलोचनः ।
He is called Sakīlaka either because His mantra includes the letter "Sa" with its Kilaka, or because He is situated in the nectar, sugarcane, and ocean (i.e., the essence of delights) and is devoted to drinking that (essence). He who has His abode in the ocean of nectar is Amṛtābdhi-kṛtāvāsa (The One who has Made the Ocean of Nectar His Abode). He whose eyes are rolling due to (divine) intoxication is Madaghūrṇita-locana (The One with Eyes Rolling in Divine Intoxication).


उच्छिष्टगण उच्छिष्टगणेशो गणनायकः । 
सार्वकालिकसंसिद्धिर्नित्यशैवो दिगंबरः ॥६७॥


Shloka 224: Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇa (उच्छिष्टगण)
उच्छिष्टगण उत्कृष्टा गणाः शिष्टाश्च यस्य सः ॥ २२४ ॥
He who has the Ucchiṣṭa Gaṇa (a group of beings associated with remnants) as well as the excellent and the righteous Gaṇas (hosts) as His own, is Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇa (The One with the Ucchiṣṭa Gaṇa as His Host).


Shloka 225: Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇeśa (उच्छिष्टगणेश)
उच्छिष्टं नामरूपं चेत्याद्युचः सप्तविंशतिः ।
आथर्वणो यं वदंति स गणेशो न चापरः ॥ २२५ ॥
मोदकं भक्षयन्देवो ध्येयो मंत्रो नवाक्षरैः ।
साधकेनेति वोच्छिष्टगणेश इति कथ्यसे ॥ २२६ ॥
The utterances beginning with "Ucchiṣṭa, Nāma, Rūpa, etc." are twenty-seven in number. The followers of the Atharva Veda proclaim Him (as the lord of these); He is that Gaṇeśa and no other. He is Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇeśa (The Lord of the Ucchiṣṭa Gaṇas).
The deity who is eating the Modaka sweet, who is to be meditated upon with a nine-syllabled mantra by the sādhaka—thus, you are called Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇeśa (The Lord of the Ucchiṣṭa Gaṇas).


Shloka 227: Gaṇanāyaka (गणनायक) and Sārvakālikasaṃsiddhi (सार्वकालिकसंसिद्धि)
गणनं गुणसंख्यानमयते गणनायकः ।
सार्वकालिकसंसिद्धिः शाश्वत्यो यस्य सिद्धयः ॥ २२७ ॥
He who seeks out (Ayate) the counting (Gaṇana) and enumeration of qualities is Gaṇanāyaka (The Lord of Reckoning). His perfections (Siddhis) are eternal and ever-accomplished.


Shloka 228: Nityaśaiva (नित्यशैव) and Digambara (दिगम्बर)
नित्यशैवः कदाप्यस्य शिवभावनया यतः ।
दिशमंबरयत्या-वृणोति स दिगंबरः कथितः ॥ २२८ ॥
He is eternally one with Śiva (Nityaśaiva); because His nature is always that of Śiva, and because He covers (Āvṛṇoti) the directions (Diś) as His garment (Ambara), He is declared as Digambara (The Sky-Clad One).




अनापायोऽनन्तदृष्टिरप्रमेयोऽजरामरः ।
अनाविलोऽप्रतिहतिरच्युतोऽमृतमक्षरः ॥ ६८॥
अप्रतर्क्योऽक्षयोऽजय्योऽनाधारोऽनामयोऽमलः ।
अमेयसिद्धिरद्वैतमघोरोऽग्निसमाननः ॥ ६९॥ 


Shloka 229: Anapāya (अनपाय) & Anantadṛṣṭi (अनन्तदृष्टि)
अनपगतशुभावहविधिरनपायो नाशविरहाद्वा ।
अगणित-चक्षुर्नाशविरहित ज्ञानोऽप्यनंतदृष्टिरिति ॥ २२९॥
His rule of bestowing auspiciousness never departs; He is without decline, hence He is Anapāya (The One Without Decline). His eyes are countless, and His knowledge is without destruction; thus, He is Anantadṛṣṭi (The One of Infinite Vision).


Shloka 230: Aprameya (अप्रमेय) & Ajara-amara (अजरामर)
ज्ञानेंद्रियवामनसावगम्यत्वादप्रमेय इति ।
विजेरो विमृत्युरित्याम्नानादजरामरो गदितः ॥ २३० ॥
Because He is beyond the grasp of the senses and the mind, He is Aprameya (The Immeasurable). Based on the scriptural declaration "Vijero Vimṛtyuḥ" (free from old age and death), He is proclaimed as Ajara-amara (The One Free from Old Age and Death).


Shloka 231: Anāvila (अनाविल) & Apratiratha (अप्रतिरथ)
अविघ्नकधर्मततिभिरकलुषि-तत्वादनाविलोऽपि भवान् ।
अप्रतिरथ इति गदितो नास्ति यतस्ते प्रतिद्वंद्वी ॥ २३१ ॥
O Lord, You are unstained by the multitude of obstructive qualities, and thus unpolluted; You are Anāvila (The Unpolluted One). You are called Apratiratha (The Unopposed Warrior) because You have no rival or opponent.


Shloka 233: Akṣara (अक्षर) & Apratarvya (अप्रतर्व्य)
अक्षरमश्नोतेर्व्याप्यर्थादथवा क्षयाभावात् ।
वेदाननुमततर्कागम्यत्वादप्रतर्व्यस्त्वम् ॥ २३३ ॥
You are Akṣara (The Imperishable) because You pervade all, or because You are without decay. You are Apratarvya (The Unassailable) because You are unattainable by logic that is not sanctioned by the Vedas.


Shloka 234: Akṣaya (अक्षय), Ajayya (अजय्य) & Anādhāra (अनाधार)
न क्षतिरपि न च वसतिर्जेतुमशक्योऽक्षयोऽजय्यः ।
जगदाधारस्य तवा-धारो नास्तीत्यनाधारः ॥ २३४ ॥
You are without loss and without a fixed abode; unable to be conquered, You are Akṣaya (The Indestructible) and Ajayya (The Unconquerable). For You, the support of the universe, there is no support; thus, You are Anādhāra (The Supportless One).


Shloka 235: Anāmaya (अनामय), Amala (अमल), Amoghasiddhi (अमोघसिद्धि) & Advaitam (अद्वैतम्)
आमयमालिन्याभ्यामगृहीतत्वादनामयोऽस्यमलः ।
सिद्धिर्भवत्यर्थवती नामोघा भक्तस्य तेन त्वममोघसिद्धिः ।
द्वैतप्रपञ्श्चोपशमाच्चतुर्थमद्वैतमित्युच्यस ईशरूपः ॥ २३५ ॥
You are untouched by disease and impurity, hence You are Anāmaya (The Diseaseless) and Amala (The Stainless). The fulfillment of Your devotee is meaningful and unfailing; therefore, You are Amoghasiddhi (The One of Unfailing Fulfillment). Duality is a mere expansion, and with its cessation, the fourth state is called Non-duality; You are that Advaitam (The Non-dual) form of the Lord.


Shloka 236: Aghora & Apramitānana (अघोर & अप्रमितानन)
अघोरमूर्तिः शिव इत्यघोरो न मज्जनानामभयंकरो वा ।
असंख्यवक्रोऽस्यमितानि यस्मात् संजीवनान्यप्रमिताननस्त्वम् ॥ २३६ ॥
Your form is non-terrifying (Aghora) and auspicious (Śiva), hence You are Aghora. You are not fearsome to those who take refuge in You. Because Your faces are innumerable and Your life-giving powers are immeasurable, You are Apramitānana (The One with Immeasurable Faces).


अनाकारोऽब्धिभूम्यग्निबलघ्नोऽव्यक्तलक्षणः ।
आधारपीठमाधार आधाराधेयवर्जितः ॥ ७०॥


Shloka 237: Anākāra (अनाकार)
भक्ततोषार्थमाकाराः सगुणाः संति यद्यपि ।
तथापि त्वमनाकारः परमार्थदृशा विभो ॥ २३७॥
O Lord, although You assume forms with qualities to please Your devotees, in reality, from the absolute point of view, You are Anākāra (The Formless One).






Shloka 238: Andhibhūmyagnibalamna (अन्धिभूम्यग्निबलम्न)
भूवारितेजोमरुतां बलानि संस्तंभनक्लेदनदाहशोषाः ।
त्वयि क्षमास्ते न भवंति तेन त्वमन्धिभूम्यग्निबलम्न उक्तः ॥ २३८ ॥
The powers of earth, water, fire, air, and ether—solidifying, liquefying, burning, and drying—do not exist in You as limitations. Therefore, You are called Andhibhūmyagnibalamna (The One Unaffected by the Powers of the Elements).


Shloka 239: Avyaktalakṣaṇa (अव्यक्तलक्षण)
सच्चित्सुखैकमयता तु तव स्वरूपलक्ष्मप्रपंचकलना तु तटस्थलक्ष्म ।
न व्यज्यते तदु-भयं हि बहिर्मुखानां अव्यक्तलक्षण इति प्रथितोऽसि तेन ॥ २३९ ॥
Your true nature is an indivisible mass of Existence, Consciousness, and Bliss. The manifestation of the universe is a mere external attribute. Both of these are not revealed to those whose minds are turned outward. Therefore, You are renowned as Avyaktalakṣaṇa (The One with an Unmanifest Nature).


Shloka 240: Ādhārapīṭha (आधारपीठ)
आङ् व्यापनं वक्ति धरैव धारं शिवावधि क्ष्माव-धितत्त्वपंक्तेः ।
षट्त्रिंशतः पीठ इवासनं त्वमाधारपीठोऽसि ततो नमस्ते ॥ २४० ॥
The prefix "Ā" indicates pervasion; "Dhāra" means support. You are the support (Ādhāra) for the entire series of principles, from earth (Pṛthvī) up to Śiva, numbering thirty-six. Like a base (Pīṭha) for them, You are the seat. Therefore, You are the Ādhārapīṭha (The Foundational Seat). Obeisance to You!


Shloka 241: Ādhāra (आधार)
अकारो वासुदेवः स्यादाकारस्तु पिता-महः ।
तावुभौ यो धारयति स आधारो गणाधिपः ॥ २४१ ॥
The letter "A" is Vāsudeva, and the letter "Ā" is the Grandfather (Brahmā). He who sustains both of them is the Ādhāra (The Support), the Lord of the Gaṇas.


Shloka 242: Ādhārādheya-varjita (आधाराधेयवर्जित)
सर्वाधारस्याधारांतरविरहादतात्त्विकत्वाच्च ।
एषामाधेयाना-माधाराधेयवर्जितोऽसि ततः ॥ २४२ ॥
Because You are the support of all, yet are without any other support for Yourself, and because You are not a material substance, You are therefore free from the relationship of being a support (Ādhāra) and that which is supported (Ādheya). Thus, You are Ādhārādheya-varjita (The One Devoid of the Support-Supported Duality).


आखुकेतन आशापूरक आखुमहारथः ।


Shloka 243: Ākhu-ketana, Āśāpūraka, Ākhu-mahāratha (आखुकेतन, आशापूरक, आखुमहारथ)
आखुवाहं ध्वजीकुर्वन् दिशस्तृष्णां च पूरयन् ।
आखु-केतन आशापूरक आखुमहारथः ॥ २४३ ॥
He who has the mouse as His banner, who fulfills the desires (thirst) of the directions, is Ākhu-ketana (The One with the Mouse as His Emblem), Āśāpūraka (The Fulfiller of Hopes), and Ākhu-mahāratha (The Great Charioteer with the Mouse).


इक्षुसागरमध्यस्थ इक्षुभक्षणलालसः ॥ ७१॥
इक्षुचापातिरेकश्रीरिक्षुचापनिषेवितः ।
इन्द्रगोपसमानश्रीरिन्द्रनीलसमद्युतिः ॥ ७२॥


Shloka 244 - 245: Ikṣusāgara-madhyastha (इक्षुसागरमध्यस्थ), Ikṣubhakṣaṇa-lālasaḥ (इक्षुभक्षणलालसः), Ikṣucāpātirekaśrī (इक्षुचापातिरेकश्री) & Ikṣucāpa-niṣevita (इक्षुचापनिषेवितः)
इक्षुशब्दा-दिमं नामयुगलं प्रकटार्थकं ।
इक्षुचापातिरेकश्रीर्मदनाधिककांतिमान् ॥२४४॥
चाप-देवतया मूर्तिमत्या पंचशरेण वा ।
नित्यं यः सेव्यते सोऽय-मिक्षुचापनिषेवितः ॥ २४५ ॥
एतस्यैवारक्तरूपं भास्वरा-भास्वरासिते ।
This pair of names, beginning with the word "Ikṣu" (sugarcane), has a clear meaning. He who is situated in the ocean of sugarcane is Ikṣusāgara-madhyastha (The One Standing in the Ocean of Sugarcane). He who is eager to eat sugarcane is Ikṣubhakṣaṇa-lālasaḥ (The One Eager to Eat Sugarcane). He whose sugarcane-bow is exceptionally splendid is Ikṣucāpātirekaśrī (The One with the Superbly Splendid Sugarcane Bow). He who is constantly attended by the deity of the bow or by Cupid is Ikṣucāpa-niṣevita (The One Served by the Sugarcane Bow). His form is red, brilliantly white, black...


इन्दीवरदलश्याम  इन्दुमण्डलनिर्मलः ।
इध्मप्रिय इडाभाग इडावानिन्दिराप्रियः ॥ ७३॥


Shloka 246-247: Indragopa-samāna-śrī (इन्द्रगोपसमानश्री), Indranīla-sama-dyuti (इन्द्रनीलसमद्युति), Indīvara-dala-śyāma (इन्दीवरदलश्याम) & Indumaṇḍala-nirmala (इन्दुमण्डलनिर्मल)
शुक्लं च भास्वरं ध्येयं कामनाभेदतो जनैः ॥ २४६ ॥
युगभेदेन भेदस्तत्पुराणेऽपि निरूपितः ।
इति ध्वनयितुं नाम-चतुष्कं प्रकटार्थकं ॥ २४७ ॥
His form is to be meditated upon by people according to their desires. This distinction based on the different Ages has also been described in the Purāṇas. To suggest this, the following four names are given: He who has the lustre of the Indragopa insect is Indragopa-samāna-śrī (The One with the Splendour of an Indragopa). He who has the radiance of a blue sapphire is Indranīla-sama-dyuti (The One with the Radiance of a Sapphire). He who is dark blue like an Indīvara (blue lotus) petal is Indīvara-dala-śyāma (The One Dark as a Blue Lotus Petal). He who is as pure as the orb of the moon is Indumaṇḍala-nirmala (The One as Spotless as the Moon's Disc).


Shloka 248: Idhma-priya (इध्मप्रिय)
श्रौतस्मार्ताग्निरूपत्वाद्भवा-निध्मप्रियो मतः।
इडा मही हविः शेषो गौश्च भागस्तवैव यत् ॥ २४८ ॥
Because You are of the nature of the Vedic (Śrauta) and traditional (Smārta) fires, You are considered Idhma-priya (The One Fond of Sacrificial Fuel). This is because the offering (Ilā), the clarified butter (Haviḥ), the oblation (Idhma), and the cow (Go) are all portions of You.


Shloka 249: Iḍā-bhāga (इडाभाग)
ऋत्विग्याज्यादिरूपत्वादिडाभाग इतीर्यसे ॥
इरेति पृथ्वी तद्धामा तदंतर्यमवस्थितः ॥२४९॥
Because You exist in the forms of the priest, the sacrificer, etc., You are proclaimed as Iḍā-bhāga (The Portion of the Oblation). "Ilā" means the Earth; You are its abode and the Inner Controller residing within it.


Shloka 250: Īradhāma (ईरधाम) & Indirā-priya (इन्दिराप्रिय)
यः पृथिव्यां तिष्ठतीति बृहदारण्यकश्श्रुतेः ।
लक्ष्मीपूज्योऽथवा विष्णुरूप-त्वादिंदिराप्रियः ॥ २५० ॥
According to the Śruti (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad), "He who dwells in the earth..." (from the root √īr, to possess), thus He is Īradhāma (The One whose Abode is the Earth). Alternatively, because You are worthy of being worshipped by Lakṣmī or because of Your form as Viṣṇu, You are Indirā-priya (The Beloved of Indirā/Lakṣmī).




इक्ष्वाकुविघ्नविध्वंसी इतिकर्तव्यतेप्सितः ।
ईशानमौलिरीशान ईशानसुत ईतिहा ॥ ७४॥


Shloka 251: Ikṣvāku-vighna-vidhvaṃsī (इक्ष्वाकुविघ्नविध्वंसी)
इक्ष्वाकुः कटुतुंबी तत्तुल्यप्रत्यूहनाशनात् ।
इक्ष्वाकुविघ्न-विध्वंसी राज्ञो वा विघ्ननाशनात् ॥ २५१॥
"Ikṣvāku" is the bitter Tumbī gourd; because He destroys obstacles just like it (i.e., effectively), He is Ikṣvāku-vighna-vidhvaṃsī (The Destroyer of Obstacles like the Ikṣvāku [gourd]). Alternatively, because He destroys the obstacles of a king (Ikṣvāku), He is so called.


Shloka 252: Itikartavyata-epṣita (इतिकर्तव्यतेप्सित)
इतिकर्तव्यताशब्दः क्रत्वंगस्तोमवाचकः ।
तामपेक्ष्य ददत्कामानितिकर्तव्यते-प्सितः ॥ २५२ ॥
The word "Itikartavyatā" refers to the parts (Aṅga) and praises (Stoma) of a ritual (Kratu). He who, being depended upon (for the ritual's success), grants desires, is Itikartavyata-epṣita (The One Sought After for the Performance of Duties/Rituals).


Shloka 253: Īśāna-mauli (ईशानमौलि)
नरभूतसुरेशाद्या ईशाना वहवोऽमिताः ।
तेषामेषोऽधिको मौलिरमितैश्वर्ययोगतः ॥ २५३॥
The lords (Īśāna) such as Nara, Bhūta, and Sureśa are many and boundless. He is the foremost (Mūli) among them, being endowed with immeasurable lordship. Thus, He is Īśāna-mauli (The Crest-Jewel among all Lords).


Shloka 254: Īśāna (ईशान) & Īśāna-suta (ईशानसुत)
अनयन् जीवयन्नीशानीशान इति कीर्त्यसे ।
ईशानेन सुतः सोमरूप-स्तस्य सुतोऽथवा ॥ २५४ ॥
You are called Īśāna (The Supreme Ruler) because You lead (beings in) and enliven (the universe). Alternatively, because You are the son of Īśāna (Śiva), You are Īśāna-suta (The Son of Īśāna).


Shloka 255: Ītihā (ईतिहा)
अतिवृष्टिमनावृष्टिं मूषकान् शल-भान् शुकान् ।
स्वचक्रं परचक्रं च विनिघ्नन्नीतिहा मतः ॥२५५॥
He who destroys calamities (Īti) such as excessive rain, drought, mice, locusts, parrots, internal revolt (one's own circle), and external invasion (enemy's circle) is considered Ītihā (The Destroyer of Calamities).


ईषणात्रयकल्पान्त ईहामात्रविवर्जितः । 
उपेन्द्र उडुभृन्मौलिरुडुनाथकरप्रियः ॥ ७५॥


Shloka 256: Īṣaṇātraya-kalpānta (ईषणात्रयकल्पान्त) & Īhāmātra-vivarjitaḥ (ईहामात्रविवर्जितः)
लोकपुत्रधनेच्छानां तिसृणां प्रलयात्मकः ।
ईषणात्रय-कल्पांतो नृणां वैराग्यदायकः ॥ २५६ ॥
निश्चेष्टचित्स्वरूपत्वादीहामात्रविवर्जितः ।
He who is the great dissolution (Pralaya) for the threefold desires (Īṣaṇā) for worldly pleasure, progeny, and wealth, and who is the final conflagration (Kalpānta) for this triad of desires, bestowing dispassion upon men, is Īṣaṇātraya-kalpānta (The Destructive End for the Triad of Desires). Because His essential nature is Consciousness without activity, He is devoid of even the slightest effort (Īhā); thus He is Īhāmātra-vivarjitaḥ (The One Devoid of Mere Effort).


Shloka 257: Upendra (उपेन्द्र)
वामनेन सहाभेदादुपेंद्र इति कीर्तितः ॥ २५७ ॥
Due to His non-difference from Vāmana (the dwarf incarnation), He is proclaimed as Upendra (The Younger Brother of Indra).


Conclusion of the Fourth Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ ॥
गणेशनामखद्योते चतुर्थमभवच्छतम् ॥ ४०० ॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), composed by Bhāskara,
also known as Agnicit, ends the fourth hundred of the Ganesha Sahasranama.


Shloka 258: Uḍubhṛn-mauliḥ (उडुभृन्मौलिः)
बिभ्रत्युडूनि या द्यौः सा यस्य विश्वात्मनः शिरः । सत्त्व-मेवोडुभृन्मौलिर्धा मूर्धानमिति श्रुतेः ॥ २५८ ॥ यद्वा चंद्रा-वतंसत्वादुड्डुभृन्मौलिरुच्यसे ।
The firmament (Dyauḥ) which bears the stars (Uḍu) is His head, since He is the Soul of the Universe. According to the Śruti, "The essence itself is the head-bearer of stars." 
Or, because He wears the moon as His crest-jewel, You are proclaimed as Uḍubhṛn-mauliḥ (The One who has the Moon, the Bearer of Stars, as His Crest-Jewel).


Shloka 259: Uṇḍeraka-bali-priyaḥ (उण्डेरकबलिप्रियः)
उंडेरकाः पूषभेदा वर्तुला-कृतयोऽल्पकाः ॥ २५९ ॥ उपहारास्तवेष्टा इत्युंडेरकबलि-प्रियः ।
Uṇḍerakās are a type of small, round-shaped cake (Puṣpa-bheda, a kind of offering). They are offerings dear to You. Hence, He is Uṇḍeraka-bali-priyaḥ (The One Fond of Uṇḍeraka Offerings). Previous commentators, accepting a variant reading with the letter 'ra', have explained it as "He who is the mover and lord of insentient cosmic eggs (Brahmāṇḍa)" and "He who is dear to the collective life-force." However, since that interpretation is incongruent with the series of names beginning with 'U', it is to be disregarded.


उन्नतानन उत्तुंग उदारत्रिदशाग्रणीः ॥ 
ऊर्जस्वानूष्मलमद ऊहापोहदुरासदः ॥ ७६ ॥


Shloka 260: Unnatānana (उन्नतानन)
उत्कृष्टानामजादीनां प्राणनादुन्नताननः ॥ २६० ॥
He is Unnatānana (The Lofty-Faced One) because he is the vital breath (Prāṇa) and the source of the call (Nāda) of the foremost beings like Brahmā (Aja).


Shloka 261: Uttuṅga (उत्तुंग)
तुंगा नाम नदी काचित् वराहवपुषस्तव । दंष्ट्राया उद्गता तस्मा-द्भवानुत्तुंग ईरितः ॥ २६१॥
There is a certain river named Tuṅgā which originated from the tusk of your Varāha (boar) form. From that (Tuṅgā), you are called Uttuṅga (The Elevated One / One who Lifted [the Earth]).


Shloka 262: Udāra-tridaśāgraṇī (उदारत्रिदशाग्रणी)
उदारो दातृमहतोस्त्रिदशो देव उच्यते । महादेवादपि श्रेष्ठ उदारत्रिदशाग्रणीः ॥२६२॥
"Udāra" means great giver or magnificent. "Tridaśa" means god (deva). Being superior even to Maheśvara (Śiva), He is Udāra-tridaśāgraṇī (The Magnificent Leader of the Gods).


Shloka 263: Ūrjasvān (ऊर्जस्वान्) & Uṣmalamada (ऊष्मलमद)
ऊर्जस्वानपि तेजोवानत एव मदोदकं । ऊष्मं स्रवति गंडाभ्यां तेनोष्मलमदो भवान् ॥ २६३ ॥
He is Ūrjasvān (The Energetic / Vigorous One), full of splendor. From that very (vigor), the intoxicating fluid (Mada) flows with warmth from his temples; therefore, you are Uṣmalamada (The One with Warm Intoxicating Fluid).


Shloka 264: Ūhāpoha-durāsada (ऊहापोहदुरासद)
ऊहो वितर्कस्तत्त्वस्यापोह-स्तात्त्विकबाधनम् । ताभ्यां दुरासदोऽप्राप्य ऊहापोहदुरासदः ॥ २६४ ॥
Ūha (hypothetical reasoning) is conjecture about the Truth; Apoha (exclusion) is the refutation of such speculative truth. Unattainable by both (reasoning and refutation), He is Ūhāpoha-durāsada (The Unapproachable One, Beyond Conjecture and Refutation).


ऋग्यजुः सामसं भूतिऋद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः ॥ 
ऋजुचित्तैकसुलभ ऋणत्रयविमोचकः ॥ ७७ ॥


Shloka 265: Ṛgyajuḥsāmasaṁbhūti (ऋग्यजुःसामसंभूति) & Ṛddhisiddhipravartakaḥ (ऋद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः)
ऋग्यजुःसामसंभूतिर्यस्य निःश्वसितं त्रयी । राज्याणि-मादिदातृत्वादृद्धिसिद्धिप्रवर्तकः ॥ २६५॥
He whose exhalation (Nissvasita) is the three Vedas (Ṛg, Yajus, Sāma) is Ṛgyajuḥsāmasaṁbhūti (The Source of the Ṛg, Yajus, and Sāma Vedas). Because he is the bestower of sovereignty (Rājya) and other powers from the very beginning, He is Ṛddhisiddhipravartakaḥ (The Initiator of Prosperity and Accomplishment).


Shloka 266: Ṛjucittaikasulabha (ऋजुचित्तैकसुलभ)
दृश्यते त्वग्र्यया बुद्ध्येत्युक्तेर्यद्विमलं मनः । तद्ब्राह्यऋजुचित्तैकसुल भस्तेन गीयसे ॥२६६॥
That pure mind is attained through the highest intellect, as stated. Since that (mind) is to be attained, you are praised as Ṛjucittaikasulabha (The One Easily Attained by a Straightforward Mind Alone).


Shloka 267: Ṛṇatrayavimocakaḥ (ऋणत्रयविमोचकः)
पुत्रीयंति यियक्षंति वेदानिच्छंति ये द्विजाः । तत्कामना पूरकत्वादृणत्रयविमोचकः ॥ २६७ ॥
Because he fulfills the desires of those brahmins who wish for progeny (Putrīyanti), who wish to perform sacrifices (Yiyakṣanti), and who wish to study the Vedas (Vedānicchanti), He is Ṛṇatrayavimocakaḥ (The Liberator from the Three Debts).






लुप्तविघ्नः स्वभक्तानां लुप्तशक्तिः सुरद्विषाम् । 
लुप्तश्रीर्विमुखार्चानां लूताविस्फोटनाशनः ॥ ७८ ॥


Shloka 268: Svabhaktānāṁ Luptavighnaḥ (स्वभक्तानां लुप्तविघ्नः), Suradviṣāṁ Luptaśaktiḥ (सुरद्विषां लुप्तशक्तिः), Vimukhārcānāṁ Luptaśrīḥ (विमुखार्चानां लुप्तश्रीः) & Lūtā-Visphoṭanāśanaḥ (लूता-विस्फोटनाशनः)
लुप्तशब्दादिकं नामत्रितयं प्रकटार्थकं । दंतलूतादयो रोगा आंतरा बहिरामयाः ॥ २६८ ॥ स्फोटाद्यास्तान्निहंतीति लूताविस्फोटनाशनः ।
The first three names, beginning with the word 'Lupta' (destroyed), have a clear meaning. He for whom obstacles are destroyed for his own devotees is Svabhaktānāṁ Luptavighnaḥ (The One who Destroys Obstacles for His Devotees). He who destroys the power of the enemies of the gods is Suradviṣāṁ Luptaśaktiḥ (The One who Destroys the Power of the Enemies of the Gods). He who destroys the prosperity of those who worship him insincerely is Vimukhārcānāṁ Luptaśrīḥ (The One who Destroys the Prosperity of Insincere Worshippers). Internal and external diseases, such as tooth-ache (Dantalūtā) and eruptions (Sphoṭa), are destroyed by him; therefore, He is Lūtā-Visphoṭanāśanaḥ (The Destroyer of Diseases like Lūtā and Eruptions).


एकारपीठमध्यस्थ एकपादकृतासनः ॥  
एजिताखिलदैत्यश्रीरेधिताखिलसंश्रयः ॥७९॥ 
ऐश्वर्यनिधिरैश्वर्यमैहिकामुष्मिकप्रदः ॥ 
ऐरंमदसमोन्मेष ऐरावतनिभाननः ॥ ८० ॥


Shloka 269: Ēkārapīṭhamadhyasthaḥ (एकारपीठमध्यस्थ)
एकारपीठमध्यस्थस्त्रिकोणांतःस्थबिंदुगः ॥ २६९ ॥
He who is situated in the middle of the single seat (of the monosyllable oṁ), within the triangle, and is the possessor of the Bindu (dot) is Ēkārapīṭhamadhyasthaḥ (The One Seated in the Middle of the Syllabic Seat 'E').




Shloka 270: Ēkapādakṛtāsanaḥ (एकपादकृतासनः) & Ējitākhiladaityaśrīḥ (एजिताखिलदैत्यश्रीः)
काश्यामेकपदा तिष्ठन्नेकपादकृतासनः । एजिताखिल-दैत्यश्रीः कंपितासुरसंषदः ॥ २७० ॥
He who stands on a single foot in Kāśī, having made a single foot his seat, is Ēkapādakṛtāsanaḥ (The One who has Made a Single Foot His Seat). He whose entire assembly of demons is made to tremble and whose glory of demons is agitated is Ējitākhiladaityaśrīḥ (The One who Agitates the Entire Glory of Demons).


Shloka 271: Ēdhitākhilasaṁśrayaḥ (एधिताखिलसंश्रयः)
स्वाश्रिता वर्धिता ये-नैधिता चाखिलसंश्रयः । ऐश्वर्यनिधिरैश्वर्य भक्तेषु निदधाति यः ॥ २७१ ॥
He by whom all his dependents are increased and nourished is Ēdhitākhilasaṁśrayaḥ (The One who Nourishes All who Seek Refuge). He who places lordship (Aiśvarya) in his devotees (is the treasure of sovereignty).


Shloka 271-272: Aiśvaryanidhiḥ (ऐश्वर्यनिधिः) & Aiśvaryam (ऐश्वर्यम्)
ऐश्वर्यनिधिरैश्वर्य भक्तेषु निदधाति यः ॥ २७१ ॥ ईश्वरेषु यदैश्वर्य संपत्तिः सा त्वमेव हि । एषाऽस्य परमा संपदिति बोधयति श्रुतिः ॥ २७२ ॥
He who places the treasure of sovereignty and lordship in his devotees is Aiśvaryanidhiḥ (The Treasure of Sovereignty). That supreme prosperity and sovereignty which is in all lords (Īśvaras) is indeed you. As the Śruti indicates, "This is his supreme wealth."


Shloka 273: Aihikāmuṣmikapradaḥ (ऐहिकामुष्मिकप्रदः)
दत्से सुतादीन्स्वर्गे चेत्यैहिकामुष्मिकप्रदः । विद्युत्तुल्यस्त-वोन्मेषः क्षणाद्भासितभासि च ॥ २७३ ॥
You grant sons, etc., in this world and heaven in the next; thus you are Aihikāmuṣmikapradaḥ (The Bestower of this-Worldly and Other-Worldly Rewards). Your manifestation is like lightning—in an instant you illuminate the illuminator.


Shloka 273: Airamadasamonmeṣaḥ (ऐरंमदसमोन्मेषः)
विद्युत्तुल्यस्त-वोन्मेषः क्षणाद्भासितभासि च ॥ २७३ ॥ ऐरंमदसमोन्मेषः स्वार्थे ज्ञेयोऽणिरंमदात् ।
Your manifestation is like lightning. Therefore, you are to be understood in its own meaning (as the syllable ai) from 'Aṇiramada'. Thus, He is Airamadasamonmeṣaḥ (The One whose Flashing Forth is Equal to the Splendor of 'Airamada' / Lightning).


Shloka 274: Airāvatanibhānanaḥ (ऐरावतनिभाननः)
ऐरावतसमास्यत्वादैरावतनिभा-ननः ॥ २७४ ॥
Because his face is equal to Airāvata (the divine elephant), He is Airāvatanibhānanaḥ (The One whose Face is Like Airāvata).


ॐकारवाच्य ॐकार ओजस्वानोषधीपतिः ॥ 
औदार्यनिधिरौद्धत्यधुर्य औन्नत्यनिस्वनः॥ ८१ ॥


Shloka 275: Oṁkāravācyaḥ (ॐकारवाच्य)
क्लेशादिरहितमीश्वरमुक्तत्वाग्रे तस्य वाचकः प्रणवः । इति योगशास्त्रसूत्रे कथनादोंकारवाच्यस्त्वम् ॥ २७५ ॥ इति शब्दोऽपि त्वंभेदाभावेन वाच्यवाच्यवाचकयोः ।
According to the statement in the Yoga Śāstra Sūtra that "the sacred syllable Praṇava (Oṁ) denotes the Lord who is free from afflictions, etc.," you are denoted by Oṁ. Therefore, you are Oṁkāravācyaḥ (The One Signified by the Syllable Oṁ).


Shloka 276: Oṁkāraḥ (ॐकार)
अत एव त्वयि वाक्यैराकारोऽपि प्रत्ययो युक्तः ॥ २७६ ॥
For this very reason, through scriptural statements, the word itself (Oṁ) is also a valid cognition for you. Thus, He is Oṁkāraḥ (The Sacred Syllable Oṁ).


Shloka 277: Ojasvān (ओजस्वान्)
ओजोऽष्टम-धातुरिति प्रोक्तं यद्वेदभाष्यकृता । शौर्योत्कर्षनिदानं तेज-स्तद्वांस्त्वमोजस्वान् ॥ २७७ ॥
It is stated by the commentator of the Vedas that "Ojas is the eighth dhātu (constituent element)." That which is the source of the excellence of valor and is splendor—you possess that. Therefore, you are Ojasvān (The Vigorous / Powerful One).


Shloka 277: Oṣadhīpatiḥ (ओषधीपतिः)
ओषधीपतिरौदार्यनिधि-रित्याह्वयौ स्फुटौ ॥
The names Oṣadhīpati (Lord of Herbs) and Audāryanidhi (Treasure of Magnanimity) are clearly two appellations.


Shloka 277: Oṣadhīpatiḥ (ओषधीपतिः)
Thus, He is Oṣadhīpatiḥ (The Lord of Herbs).


Shloka 278: Audāryanidhiḥ (औदार्यनिधिः) & Auddhatyadhuryakaḥ (औद्धत्यधुर्यकः)
औद्धत्यमुद्धतत्वं यत् स्वभक्तानुजिघृ-क्षया ॥ २७८ ॥ स्वोत्कर्षद्योतनं तत्र श्रेष्ठ औद्धत्यधुर्यकः ।
Thus, He is Audāryanidhiḥ (The Treasure of Magnanimity). That which is haughtiness (Uddhatatva) for the sake of wishing to protect his own devotees, and which manifests his own superiority, is supreme in that. Therefore, He is Auddhatyadhuryakaḥ (The Supreme in Divine Haughtiness).
Shloka 279: Aunnatyanisvanaḥ (औन्नत्यनिस्वनः)
बृंहितं यस्य सर्वोच्चं सस्यादौन्नत्यनिस्वनः ॥ २७९ ॥
He whose roar (Bṛṁhita) is the highest of all, is Aunnatyanisvanaḥ (The One whose Sound is Supreme Elevation).


अङ्कुशः सुरनागानामङ्कुशः सुरविद्विषाम्। 
समस्तविसर्गान्तपदेषु परिकीर्तितः ॥ ८२ ॥


Shloka 280: Aṅkuśaḥ Suranāgānām (अंकुशः सुरनागानाम्)
अंकुशः सुरनागानां त्रैलोक्यस्य नियामकः । ऊर्ध्व सुरा अधो नागा मर्त्यलोकोपलक्षणं ॥ २८० ॥
He is the controller (Aṅkuśa) of the gods (Sura) and serpents (Nāga) and the regulator of the three worlds. The gods are above, the serpents below, with the mortal world in between. Thus, He is Aṅkuśaḥ Suranāgānām (The Goad for the Gods and Serpents).


Shloka 281: Aṅkuśaḥ Suravidviṣām (अंकुशः सुरविद्विषाम्)
द्विषः सुराणां च विदां सुष्ठु सम्यग्रविद्विषां । निग्राहकत्वान्निर्दिष्टोऽस्यं-कुशः सुरविद्विषाम् ॥ २८१ ॥
Because he restrains the enemies (Vidviṣ) of the gods, who know how to oppose properly, He is designated as Aṅkuśaḥ Suravidviṣām (The Goad for the Enemies of the Gods).


Shloka 282: Samastavisargāntapadeṣu Parikīrtitaḥ (समस्तविसर्गातपदेषु परिकीर्तितः)
अकाराद्येकपंचाशद्विसर्गा-तार्णबोधितः । अःसमस्तविसर्गातपदेषु परिकीर्तितः ॥ २८२ ॥ प्राचा-त्वसमस्तेति विसर्गनिर्मुक्तमाद्यक्षरं पठित्वा केवलविसर्गातप्रथमैकवचनपदैः कीर्तित इति व्याख्यातं, -तन्मातृकाक्रमाननुगणत्वादचिंत्यम् ।
He is known through all words ending in Visarga (the sound 'ḥ'), from the letter 'A' to the fifty-first (the Visarga). Therefore, He is Samastavisargāntapadeṣu Parikīrtitaḥ (The One Proclaimed in All Words Ending in Visarga). Some earlier commentators have interpreted this by reading the first letter without the Visarga, explaining it as "He is proclaimed by words in the singular form ending in Visarga alone." However, as this does not follow the sequence of the alphabet (Mātṛkā), it is not to be considered.


कमंडलुधरः कल्पः कपर्दी कलभाननः ॥ 
कर्मसाक्षी कर्मकर्ता कर्माकर्मफलप्रदः ॥ ८३ ॥




Shloka 283: Kamaṇḍaludharaḥ (कमंडलुधरः) & Kalpaḥ (कल्पः)
कमंडलुधरः शृंगेनामृतकुंभधृकू । कल्पः प्रलयकाला-त्मा समर्थः कल्पनेऽपि वा ॥ २८३ ॥
He who holds the water pot (Kamaṇḍalu) with his tusk is Kamaṇḍaludharaḥ (The Bearer of the Water Pot). He who is the very essence of the time of dissolution (Kalpa), or who is capable in creation (Kalpanā), is Kalpaḥ (The Aeon / The Creator).


Shloka 284: Kapardī (कपर्दी)
वराटधारी मल्लारिस्त्वं कपर्यथवा जटी ।
You wear the sacred skull-ornament (Varāṭa) or have matted locks. Thus, He is Kapardī (The One with Matted Hair / Skull-Ornament).


Shloka 284: Kalabhānanaḥ (कलभाननः)
कलो नादो भा तु दीप्तिरननं प्राणनं मतं ॥२८४॥ नादकांत्युज्जीवकत्वात्कथ्यते कलभाननः ।
'Kala' is sound (Nāda); 'Bhā' is light or splendor (Dīpti); 'Anana' is considered to be breathing (Prāṇana). Because he is the animator (Ujjīvakatva) of sound and splendor, He is called Kalabhānanaḥ (The One whose Face is Sound and Splendor).


Shloka 285: Karmasākṣī (कर्मसाक्षी)
कर्म-साक्षी त्वदृष्टानामपि द्रष्टासि कर्मणां ॥ २८५॥
You are the witness of the actions of even the unseen beings. Therefore, He is Karmasākṣī (The Witness of Actions).


Shloka 286: Karmakartā (कर्मकर्ता) & Karmākarmaphalapradaḥ (कर्माकर्मफलप्रदः)
कर्मठप्रेरणा-दन्तः कर्मकर्ता भवानपि । स्वर्गापवर्गदातृत्वात् कर्माकर्म-फलप्रदः ॥ २८६ ॥
You are also the inner instigator of activity, thus you are Karmakartā (The Doer of Actions). Because you bestow the fruits (heaven and liberation) for both action (Karma) and inaction (Akarma), you are Karmākarmaphalapradaḥ (The Bestower of the Fruits of Action and Inaction).


कदंबगोलकाकारः कूष्मांडगणनायकः ॥ 
कारुण्यदेहः कपिलः कथकः कटिसूत्रभृत् ॥  ८४ ॥


Shloka 287: Kadambagolakākāraḥ (कदंबगोलकाकारः)
सर्वनाड्युद्गमस्थानं कदंबकुसुमाकृतिः । परितः संवृतात्मा-भिर्हदि काप्यस्ति देवता ॥ २८७ ॥ 
कदंबगोलकाकार इति तद्रूप उच्यसे ।
There is a deity in the heart from which all the subtle channels (Nāḍīs) originate, having the shape of a Kadamba flower-bud. Since you are that form, you are called Kadambagolakākāraḥ (The One with the Form of a Kadamba Bud).


Shloka 288: Kūṣmāṇḍagaṇanāyakaḥ (कूष्मांडगणनायकः)
दुष्टग्रहाणां नेता त्वं कूष्मांडगण-नायकः ॥ २८८ ॥
You are the leader of the host of malignant planets (Kūṣmāṇḍa Gaṇa). Thus, He is Kūṣmāṇḍagaṇanāyakaḥ (The Leader of the Kūṣmāṇḍa Host).


Shloka 289: Kāruṇyadehaḥ (कारुण्यदेहः), Kapilaḥ (कपिलः), Kathakaḥ (कथकः) & Kaṭisūtrabhṛt (कटिसूत्रभृत्)
कारुण्यदेहः करुणामूर्तित्वात्कपिलो मुनिः । कर्णतो वाऽसि कथकः 
संप्रदायान्प्रवर्तयन् ॥२८९॥ रत्नप्रोतस्वर्णकांची धारणात्कटिसूत्रभृत् ।
Because your body is compassion itself, and because you are the sage Kapila (the embodiment of compassion), you are Kāruṇyadehaḥ (The One whose Body is Compassion). Thus, He is Kapilaḥ (The Sage Kapila / The Tawny-Colored One). Or, you are Kathakaḥ (The Narrator / Preacher) as you propagate traditions from ear to ear. Because you wear a golden girdle (Kañcī) strung with gems, you are Kaṭisūtrabhṛt (The Wearer of the Sacred Girdle).


खर्वः खङ्गप्रियः खङ्गखांतान्तस्थः खनिर्मलः ॥ 
खल्वाटशृंगनिलयः खड्यांगी खदुरासदः ॥८५॥


Shloka 290: Kharvaḥ (खर्वः) & Khaṅgapriyaḥ (खङ्गप्रियः)
खर्वो वामनरूपत्वात्खङ्गो गंडकसंज्ञकः ॥ २९०॥ मृगोऽ-सिर्वा प्रियो यस्य स तु खङ्गप्रियो मतः ॥
Because you are of the form of the dwarf (Vāmana), you are Kharvaḥ (The Dwarf / Short One). 'Khaṅga' is the name of a musk-deer or a sword (Asi). He to whom that is dear is considered Khaṅgapriyaḥ (The Lover of the Sword / Musk-Deer).


Shloka 291: Khaṅgakhāntāntasthaḥ (खङ्गखांतान्तस्थः)
खङ्गशब्दे खात्परो डस्तदंते गाक्षरे तव ॥ २९१ ॥ बीजे तिष्ठस्यतः खङ्गखांतां-तस्थ इतीर्यसे ।
In the word 'Khaṅga', the letter 'Ga' comes after 'Kha'. You abide in that Bīja (seed-syllable). Therefore, you are proclaimed as Khaṅgakhāntāntasthaḥ (The One Abiding at the End of the Letter 'Kha' in 'Khaṅga').


Shloka 292: Khanirmalaḥ (खनिर्मलः)
आकाशवत्सर्वगोऽपिनिर्लेपोऽतः खनिर्मलः ॥ २९२ ॥
Like space (Ākāśa), you are all-pervading and unsullied. Therefore, you are Khanirmalaḥ (The One Pure as Space).


Shloka 293: Khalvāṭaśṛṅganilayaḥ (खल्वाटशृंगनिलयः)
वृक्षा एव गिरेः केशाः खल्वाटस्तैर्विवर्जितः । खल्वाटशृंग निलयस्तच्छृंगेऽपि वसन् मतः ॥२९३॥
Trees are the hair of the mountain. Khalvāṭa (bald) is one devoid of them. He who resides on the bald peak (of the mountain) and dwells even on that peak is Khalvāṭaśṛṅganilayaḥ (The Abode on the Bald Peak).


Shloka 294: Khaḍyāṅgī (खड्यांगी) & Khadurāsadaḥ (खदुरासदः)
खङ्घां-गीति भवान् ख्यातः खङ्गांगाख्यायुधं दधत् । अमूर्तो व्योम-वद्धर्तुं अशक्यः खदुरासदः ॥ २९४ ॥
You are famed as Khaḍyāṅgī (The One with Limbs of Space / Wielding the Sword-Khaḍga) as you bear the weapon called Khaḍgāṅga. Being formless like the sky (Vyoma), you are impossible to grasp. Therefore, you are Khadurāsadaḥ (The Unassailable One).


गुणाढ्यो गहनो गस्थो गद्यपद्यसुधार्णवः ॥ 
गद्यगानप्रियो गर्जो गीतगीर्वाणपूर्वजः ॥८६॥


Shloka 295: Guṇāḍhyaḥ (गुणाढ्यः), Gahanaḥ (गहनः), Gasthaḥ (गस्थः) & Gadyapadyasudhārṇavaḥ (गद्यपद्यसुधार्णवः)
अनंतकल्याणगुणो गुणाढ्यो गंतुं न शक्यो गहनोऽसि गस्थः । बीजे निजे तिष्ठसि गद्यपद्यसुधार्णवः काव्यरसा-करत्वात् ॥ २९५॥
Endowed with infinite auspicious qualities, He is Guṇāḍhyaḥ (The Abundant in Virtues). He cannot be reached; He is impenetrable, thus He is Gahanaḥ (The Impenetrable / Profound). He abides in his own seed (syllable 'Ga'), thus He is Gasthaḥ (The Abider in 'Ga'). He is the ocean of the nectar of prose and poetry because He is the source of poetic sentiment; thus He is Gadyapadyasudhārṇavaḥ (The Ocean of the Nectar of Prose and Verse).


Shloka 296: Gadyagānapriyaḥ (गद्यगानप्रियः) & Garjaḥ (गर्जः)
गदितुं योग्यं गद्यं न निषिद्धं साम ते प्रियं गानं । तेनासि गद्यगानप्रियोऽथ गर्जोऽसि मेघनादात्मा ॥ २९६ ॥
Prose (Gadya) is that which is fit to be spoken; the Sāman (chant) is not forbidden. Song (Gāna) is dear to you. Therefore, you are Gadyagānapriyaḥ (The Lover of Prose and Song). 
Moreover, you are of the nature of the thunder of clouds, thus you are Garjaḥ (The Thundering One).


Shloka 297: Gītagīrvāṇapūrvajaḥ (गीतगीर्वाणपूर्वजः)
नादात् गीतादयः शब्दा नादार्थादमरादयः । जातास्तद्व्यरूपत्वाङ्गीतगीर्वाणपूर्वजः ॥ २९७ ॥
From sound (Nāda), words like 'Gīta' (song) arise; from the meaning of sound, the gods (Amara) and others arise. Since He is the very form of that, He is Gītagīrvāṇapūrvajaḥ (The Forefather of Song and Speech).


गुह्याचाररतो गुह्यो गुह्यागमनिरूपितः ॥ 
गुहाशयो गुहाब्धिस्थो गुरुगम्यो गुरोर्गुरुः ॥ ८७ ॥


Shloka 298: Guhyācārarataḥ (गुह्याचाररत)
गुहाप्रविष्टावात्मानौ गुह्यौ तौ मनसा चरन् । अंतर्मुखस्तत्र तुष्टो गुह्याचाररतो मतः ॥ २९८ ॥
The two selves (individual and supreme) entered into the cave (of the heart) are secret (Guhya). Dwelling on them with the mind, turned inward, and content therein, He is considered Guhyācārarataḥ (The One Delighting in Secret Practice).


Shloka 299: Guhyaḥ (गुह्यः) & Guhyāgamanirūpitaḥ (गुह्यागमनिरूपितः)
गुह्य एकांतवेद्यत्वा-द्धितकारी गुहाय वा । रहस्यतंत्रवेद्यत्वाद्गुह्यागमनिरूपितः ॥ २९९ ॥
He is secret (Guhya) because He is to be known in solitude or because He is beneficial to the cave (heart). He is Guhyāgamanirūpitaḥ (The One Defined by the Secret Scriptures) because He is to be known through the esoteric Tantras (Rahasyatantra).


Shloka 300: Guhāśayaḥ (गुहाशयः) & Guhābdhisthaḥ (गुहाब्धिस्थः)
गुहायां हृदयाकाशे शेते यः स गुहाशयः । अव्याकृतं नभोगूढमगाधं च गुहाब्धिवत् ॥ ३०० ॥
He who lies in the cave, the sky of the heart, is Guhāśayaḥ (The One who Dwells in the Cave). It is unmanifest, concealed by space, unfathomable like the cave-ocean.
अधि-तिष्ठसि तत्तेन गुहाब्धिस्थ इतीर्यसे ॥ ३०० ॥
You preside over that. Therefore, you are proclaimed as Guhābdhisthaḥ (The One Abiding in the Ocean-Cave).


Shloka 301: Gurugamyaḥ (गुरुगम्यः)
गुरुगम्यो गुरुप्रोक्त-योगोपायेन लभ्यसे ॥ ३०१ ॥
He is to be approached (Gamya) through the Guru; He is attainable only by the means of Yoga taught by the Guru. Thus, He is Gurugamyaḥ (The One Attainable through the Guru).


Shloka 302: Gurorguruḥ (गुरोर्गुरुः)
वेदा अध्यापिता येन ब्रह्मणे स गुरोर्गुरुः । शिवसूत्रे गुरुरूपाय इत्येवं हि वर्णितं ॥३०२॥
He who taught the Vedas to Brahmā is the Guru of the Guru (Brahmā). Thus, He is Gurorguruḥ (The Guru of the Guru). As described in the Śivasūtra, "To Him in the form of the Guru..."


घंटाघर्घरिकामाली घटकुंभो घटोदरः ॥ 
चंडचंडेश्वरसुहृच्चंडीशचंडविक्रमः ॥ ८८ ॥


Shloka 303: Ghaṇṭāghargharikāmālī (घंटाघर्घरिकामाली)
घंटेव मंजुनादा घर्घरिकाः किंकिणीभेदाः । तद्धारी घंटा-घर्घरिकामालीति बाललीला ते ॥ ३०३ ॥
Bells (Ghaṇṭā) are those with a sweet sound; Ghargharikās are a type of small tinkling bells (Kiṅkiṇī). He who wears a garland (Mālī) of such bells and ghargharikās, such is your childhood play. Thus, He is Ghaṇṭāghargharikāmālī (The One Wearing a Garland of Bells and Tinkling Ornaments).


Shloka 304: Ghaṭakumbhaḥ (घटकुंभः), Caṇḍaḥ (चंडः) & Ghaṭodaraḥ (घटोदरः)
कुंभौ न्युजाम्बु-घटाकारौ घटकुंभस्ततो मतः । घटोदरो बृहत्कुक्षिश्चंडो भूरिपराक्रमः ॥ ३०४ ॥
His two breasts are shaped like water-pots (Ghaṭā). Therefore, He is Ghaṭakumbhaḥ (The One whose Breasts are like Pots). He is large-bellied, thus He is Ghaṭodaraḥ (The Pot-Bellied One). He is fierce (Caṇḍa) with immense valor. Thus, He is Caṇḍaḥ (The Fierce One).


Shloka 305: Caṇḍeśvarasuhṛt (चंडेश्वरसुहृत्), Caṇḍīśaḥ (चंडीशः) & Caṇḍavikramaḥ (चंडविक्रमः)
चंडेश्वरः सुहृद्यस्य शैवश्चंडेश्वरः सखा । चंडीराश्चंडिकानाथश्चंडा 
अत्यंतकोपनाः ॥ ३०५ ॥ तानाक्रम्य वशे कुर्वन्नाख्यातश्चंडविक्रमः ।
He whose friend is Caṇḍeśvara (the fierce lord, a form of Śiva), the Śaiva deity Caṇḍeśvara is his companion. Thus, He is Caṇḍeśvarasuhṛt (The Friend of Caṇḍeśvara). He who is the lord (Īśa) of Caṇḍikā, thus He is Caṇḍīśaḥ (The Lord of Caṇḍikā). The Caṇḍās are those of extreme wrath. He who overpowers them and brings them under control is proclaimed as Caṇḍavikramaḥ (The One with Fierce Prowess).






चराचरपतिचिंतामणिचर्वणलालसः ॥ 
छंदरछंदोवपुश्छंदोदुर्लक्ष्यश्छंदविग्रहः ॥ ८९ ॥


Shloka 306: Carācarapatiḥ (चराचरपतिः)
चराचरपतिः स्थास्तुश्चरिष्णुर्जगदीश्वरः ॥ ३०६ ॥
He is the lord of all that moves and does not move, of the stationary and the mobile, the Lord of the universe. Thus, He is Carācarapatiḥ (The Lord of the Moving and the Non-Moving).


Shloka 307: Cintāmaṇicarvaṇalālasaḥ (चिंतामणिचर्वणलालसः)
चिंतामणिकामदुघाकल्पद्रुमगर्वचर्वणतः । चिंतामणिचर्वण-लालस इति कथितोऽस्यचिन्त्यदानेन ॥ ३०७ ॥
He who is eager to chew (i.e., enjoy) the Cintāmaṇi (wish-fulfilling gem) and the Kalpadruma (wish-fulfilling tree) which yield all desires and thus crush their pride. Therefore, he is called Cintāmaṇicarvaṇalālasaḥ (The One Eager to Savour the Cintāmaṇi), due to his granting of inconceivable boons.


Shloka 308: Chandaraḥ (छंदरः), Chandovapuḥ (छंदोवपुः) & Chandodurlakṣyaḥ (छंदोदुर्लक्ष्यः)
गायत्र्या-द्यात्मना छन्दो भवान् वेदमयात्मना । छन्दो वपुस्तथा छन्दो दुर्लक्ष्यो वेददुर्ग्रहः ॥ ३०८ ॥
In the form of Gāyatrī and other metres (Chanda), you are of the nature of the Veda. Your body is Vedic metre (Chanda) and thus you are Chandovapuḥ (The One whose Body is Vedic Metre). You are difficult to perceive as the Veda is difficult to grasp; thus you are Chandodurlakṣyaḥ (The Inscrutable One of the Veda). (Chandaraḥ is implied as the enjoyer of the metres/forms).


Shloka 309: Chandavigrahaḥ (छंदविग्रहः)
स्वाभिप्रायानुसारीणि भक्तेः परवशानि वा । अवतारशरीराणि यस्य स च्छंद-विग्रहः ॥ ३०९ ॥
He whose incarnated bodies are either in accordance with his own will or subject to the will of his devotees is Chandavigrahaḥ (The One of Willful Incarnations).


जगद्योनिर्जगत्साक्षी जगदीशो जगन्मयः ॥ 
जपो जपपरो जप्यो जिह्वासिंहासनप्रभुः ॥ ९० ॥








Shloka 310: Jagadyoniḥ (जगद्योनिः), Jagatsākṣī (जगत्साक्षी), Jagadīśaḥ (जगदीशः) & Jaganmayaḥ (जगन्मयः)
जगद्योनिर्जगत्साक्षी जगदीशो जगन्मयः । विश्वस्य कारणं द्रष्टा नाथोऽधिष्ठानमेव च ॥ ३१० ॥
He is the womb (source) of the universe, the witness of the universe, the lord of the universe, and pervaded by the universe. He is the cause of the universe, its seer, its master, and its very substratum. Thus, He is Jagadyoniḥ (The Source of the Universe), Jagatsākṣī (The Witness of the Universe), Jagadīśaḥ (The Lord of the Universe), and Jaganmayaḥ (The One who Pervades the Universe).


Shloka 311: Japaḥ (जपः), Japaparaḥ (जपपरः), Japyaḥ (जप्यः) & Jihvāsiṃhāsanaprabhuḥ (जिह्वासिंहासनप्रभुः)
जपो जपपरो जप्यः कर्मकर्तृक्रियात्मकः । कीर्त्यमानं यस्य नाम जिह्वा-सिंहासनस्थितं ॥ ३११ ॥ ददाति पुरुषार्थान् स जिह्वा-सिंहासनप्रभुः ।
He is the act of muttering (Japa), devoted to muttering, and the object of muttering, being of the nature of action, the doer, and the act itself. He whose name, when recited, resides on the throne of the tongue and bestows the supreme goals of life is Jihvāsiṃhāsanaprabhuḥ (The Lord Seated on the Throne of the Tongue). Thus, He is also Japaḥ (The Japa), Japaparaḥ (The One Devoted to Japa), and Japyaḥ (The Object of Japa).


झलज्झल्लोल्लसद्दानझंकारिभ्रमराकुलः ॥ 
टंकारस्फारसंरावष्टंकारिमणिनूपुरः ॥ ९१ ॥


Shloka 312: Jhalajjhallollasadāna-jhaṅkāri-bhramarākulaḥ (झलज्झलोल्लसद्दानझङ्कारिभ्रमराकुलः)
झलज्झल्लोल्लस हान झंकारिभ्रमराकुलः ॥३१२॥ नदंति गंडयो भृंगात्स्फुरन्मदपिपांसवः ।
The intoxicated bees buzz with a jhalajjhal sound around the streaming ichor (Dāna). Thus, He whose temples resound with the buzzing of bees drunk on the flowing ichor is Jhalajjhallollasadāna-jhaṅkāri-bhramarākulaḥ (The One whose Streaming Ichor is Loud with the Buzzing of Drunken Bees).


Shloka 313: Ṭaṅkāra-sphāra-saṁrāvaḥ (टंकारस्फारसंरावः)
कांस्यटंकारवत्स्फारो यस्य मंजुतरो रखः ॥ ३१३ ॥ टंकारस्फारसंराव इति लोके स गीयते ।
He whose beautiful sound (Rava) is more pervasive and resonant than the clang of bronze is celebrated in the world as Ṭaṅkāra-sphāra-saṁrāvaḥ (The One with a Sound Pervasive as the Clang of Bronze).


Shloka 314: Ṭaṅkāri-maṇi-nūpuraḥ (टंकारिमणिनूपुरः)
नदद्रलांघिकटकष्टकारिमणिनूपुरः ॥ ३१४ ॥
He whose anklets (Nūpura), studded with tinkling gems, make a ṭaṅkāra sound is Ṭaṅkāri-maṇi-nūpuraḥ (The One with Gem-Anklets that Tinkle).


ठद्वयीपल्लवान्तः स्थसर्वमंत्रैकसिद्धिदः ॥ 
डिंडिगुंडो डाकिनीशो डामरो डिण्डिमप्रियः ॥ ९२ ॥


Shloka 315: Ṭhadvayī-pallavāntaḥstha-sarvamantraika-siddhidaḥ (ठद्वयीपल्लवान्तः स्थसर्वमंत्रैकसिद्धिदः)
ठद्वयीपल्लवांतःस्थसर्वमंत्रैकसिद्धिदः । स्वाहान्ता-खिलमंत्रोत्थमुख्यसिद्धिप्रदो यतः ॥ ३१५॥
He who abides within the tip of the two-leafed sprout (of the heart) is the bestower of all perfections (Siddhi) through all mantras. Since He grants the principal perfections arising from all mantras ending in svāhā, He is Ṭhadvayī-pallavāntaḥstha-sarvamantraika-siddhidaḥ (The One Residing in the Two-Leafed Sprout, Bestower of All Siddhis through Every Mantra).


Shloka 316: Ḍiṇḍimuṇḍaḥ (डिंडिमुंडः)
डिंडीनामैकदेशेन डिंडिमौ न्युब्जदुंदुभी । तावेव कुंभौ यन्मुण्डे डिंडिमुंडः स उच्यते ॥ ३१६ ॥
By a part of the word ḍiṇḍī, ḍiṇḍima refers to the two kettle-drums (Dundubhi). Those very two (drums) are the breasts on his head; therefore, he is called Ḍiṇḍimuṇḍaḥ (The One with the Drums [Breasts] on His Head).


Shloka 317: Ḍākinīśaḥ (डाकिनीशः)
डाकिन्यो नाम योगिन्यः काश्चित्सत्य-गणादिमाः । षोढा न्यासादिषु स्पष्टा डाकिनीशस्तदीश्वरः ॥ ३१७॥
The Ḍākinīs are certain yoginīs, like Satyā, Gaṇādi, etc., clearly known in the sixfold placement (Nyāsa) and other practices. He is their lord; thus He is Ḍākinīśaḥ (The Lord of the Ḍākinīs).


Shloka 318: Ḍāmaraḥ (डामरः) & Ḍiṇḍimapriyaḥ (डिण्डिमप्रियः)
डामरस्तु महांस्तन्त्रविशेषो वा तदात्मकः । दुंदुभौ पेटहध्वानेनानंदी डिण्डिमप्रियः ॥ ३१८ ॥
Ḍāmara is a great, special Tantra, or He is of that nature. He delights in the sound of the kettle-drum (Dundubhi) and the war-drum (Peṭaha); therefore, He is Ḍiṇḍimapriyaḥ (The Lover of the Drum-Sound).


ढक्कानिनादमुदितो ढौको ढुंढिविनायकः ॥ 
तत्त्वानां परमं तत्त्वं तत्त्वंपदनिरूपितः ॥ ९३ ॥




Shloka 319: Ḍhakkāninādamuditaḥ (ढक्कानिनादमुदितः)
ढक्कानिनादमुदित इति नामद्वयाशयः । गत्यर्थात् ढौकतेढौंकः सर्वगोवासिसर्ववित् ॥ ३१९ ॥
The intent is expressed by two names: delighted by the sound of the Ḍhakkā drum. He goes everywhere (from the root √ḍhauk, to move), thus He is Ḍhakkāninādamuditaḥ (The One Delighted by the Sound of the Ḍhakkā Drum).


Shloka 319: Ḍhaukaḥ (ढौकः)
Thus, He is Ḍhaukaḥ (The Pervader / Mover).


Conclusion of the Fifth Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ । 
गणेशनामसाहस्रखद्योते पंचमं शतम् ॥ ५०० ॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), composed by Bhāskara,
also known as Agnicit, ends the fifth hundred of the Ganesha Sahasranama.


Shloka 320: Ḍhuṇḍhivināyakaḥ (ढुंढिविनायकः)
काशीखंडे ढुंढिधातुः प्रथितोऽन्वेषणार्थकः । विशिष्टो नायकोऽन्वेष्य इति ढुंढिविनायकः ॥ ३२०॥
In the Kāśīkhaṇḍa, the root ḍhuṇḍh is famous in the sense of 'seeking'. He is the distinguished leader who is to be sought; therefore, He is Ḍhuṇḍhivināyakaḥ (The Leader who is Sought / The Sought-After Lord).


Shloka 321: Tattvānāṁ Paramam Tattvam (तत्त्वानां परमं तत्त्वं)
तत्त्वानां तत्त्वं पंचविंशतितः परम् । त्रयं सृष्ट्यादि स्वप्नादि वाच्यं धर्मत्वमा-सदा ॥३२१॥
He is the supreme reality beyond the twenty-five principles. The triad of creation, etc., and dream, etc., are to be spoken of as having the nature of Dharma, and so on.


Shloka 321: Tattvampadanirūpitaḥ (तत्त्वंपदनिरूपितः)
त्यत्क्त्वा धमीणि भक्त्यैव तत्त्वंपदनिरूपितः ।
Having abandoned all that, He is defined by the word 'Tat Tvam' (That Thou Art) through devotion alone. Thus, He is Tattvampadanirūpitaḥ (The One Defined by the Phrase 'That Thou Art').










तारकान्तरसंस्थानस्तारकस्तारकान्तकः स्थाणुः ॥ 
स्थाणुप्रियः स्थाता स्थावरं जङ्गमं जगत् ॥ ९४ ॥


Shloka 322: Tārakāntarasaṁsthānaḥ (तारकान्तरसंस्थानः)
तारकान्तर संस्थानस्तारकाक्ष्णः कनीनिका ॥ ३२२ ॥ तस्यां चिन्त्यो य एषोऽन्तरक्षिणीत्यादिकश्रुतेः ।
He resides within the pupil of the eye of the one looking at the stars. As the Śruti says, "He is to be meditated upon within the eye." Thus, He is Tārakāntarasaṁsthānaḥ (The One Dwelling Within the Star of the Eye).


Shloka 323: Tārakaḥ (तारकः)
तारको भव-पाथोधेस्त्वमेव प्रणवो यथा ॥ ३२३ ॥
You are the one who ferries across the ocean of existence, like the sacred syllable Praṇava. Thus, He is Tārakaḥ (The Ferryman / Deliverer).


Shloka 323: Tārakāntakaḥ (तारकान्तकः)
तारकासुरहंत्रात्मा कथितस्तारकान्तकः ।
He is the one whose soul is the slayer of the demon Tārakāsura. Therefore, He is proclaimed as Tārakāntakaḥ (The Destroyer of Tārakāsura).


Shloka 324: Sthāṇuḥ (स्थाणुः)
स्थाणुः कल्पान्तवाताग्निसलिलैरप्य-कंपितः ॥ ३२४ ॥
He is the immovable one (Sthāṇuḥ), unshaken even by the wind, fire, and water at the end of the cosmic age.


Shloka 324: Sthāṇupriyaḥ (स्थाणुप्रियः)
स्थाणोः शिवस्य पुत्रत्वात्स्थाणुप्रिय इतीर्यसे ।
Because you are the son of the immovable one (Sthāṇu, Śiva), you are proclaimed as Sthāṇupriyaḥ (The Beloved of the Immovable One).


Shloka 325: Sthātā (स्थाता)
स्थाता युद्धेऽपि कल्पेऽपि निष्कम्पो गगनादिवत् ॥ ३२५ ॥
He remains steady, even in battle and even during cosmic dissolution, unshakable like the sky. Thus, He is Sthātā (The Abiding / Steady One).


Shloka 325: SthāvaraṂ JaṅgamaṂ Jagat (स्थावरं जङ्गमं जगत्)
चराचरात्मकत्वेन स्थावरं जङ्गमं जगत् ।
Since He is the soul of all that moves and does not move, He is SthāvaraṂ JaṅgamaṂ Jagat (The Universe of Moveable and Immoveable Beings).


दन्तप्रभिन्नाभ्रमालो दैत्यवारणदारणः ॥
दंष्ट्रालग्नद्विपघटो देवार्थनृगजाकृतिः ॥ ९५॥


Shloka 326: Dakṣayajñapramathanaḥ (दक्षयज्ञप्रमथनः)
दक्षयज्ञप्रमथनो भवानेव शिवात्मना ॥ ३२६ ॥
You yourself, in the form of Śiva, are the destroyer (Pramathana) of Dakṣa's sacrifice. Thus, He is Dakṣayajñapramathanaḥ (The One who Destroyed Dakṣa's Sacrifice).


Shloka 327: Dātā (दाता), Deyaḥ (देयः) & Dānavamohanaḥ (दानवमोहनः)
दाता देयः शोधनार्थाद्भवान् पतितपावनः । दानवांस्तत्त्वविमुखान् कुर्वन् दानवमोहनः ॥ ३२७ ॥
He is the giver (Dātā) and the worthy oblation (Deyaḥ). He is the purifier of the fallen. He deludes the demons (Dānava) who are averse to the truth; thus He is Dānavamohanaḥ (The Deluder of Demons).


Shloka 328: Divyavibhavaḥ (दिव्यविभवः)
दद्यावान् परदुःखानि प्रहारयितुमिच्छसि । प्राप्त्यर्थाद्दीव्यतेर्दिव्यविभवः प्रापकः श्रियाम् ॥३२८॥
You desire to strike down the sorrows of others. From the root 'div' (to shine, to obtain), you are the divine splendor (Divyavibhavaḥ) and the bestower of prosperity.


Shloka 329: Daṇḍabhṛt (दण्डभृत्) & Daṇḍanāyakaḥ (दण्डनायकः)
दण्डभृत् कथितो दण्डनीतेर परिलोपतः । यमेन्द्रादिषु ये दण्डास्तन्नेता दण्डनायकः ॥ ३२९ ॥
He is called Daṇḍabhṛt (The Bearer of the Rod) because he never fails in the administration of justice. He is the leader (Netā) of the rods of punishment held by Yama, Indra, and others; thus He is Daṇḍanāyakaḥ (The Leader of Divine Punishment).










दंतप्रभिन्नाभ्रमालो दैत्यवारणदारणः ॥
दंष्ट्रालमद्विपघटो देवार्थनृगजाकृतिः ॥ ९६ ॥


Shloka 330: Dantaprabhinnābhramālaḥ (दंतप्रभिन्नाभ्रमालः)
यच्छिरःकंपमात्रेण मेघपंक्तिः प्रभिद्यते । दंतप्रभिन्ना-भ्रमाल इति स त्वं निगद्यसे ॥ ३३० ॥
By the mere shaking of your head, the row of clouds is split. Therefore, you are proclaimed as Dantaprabhinnābhramālaḥ (The One whose Tusk Splits the Row of Clouds).


Shloka 331: Daityavāraṇadāraṇaḥ (दैत्यवारणदारणः)
वारयन् दारयन् दैत्यान् दैत्यवारणदारणः । यस्य दंष्ट्रैकदेशेऽपि लग्ना रिपुगजच्छटाः ॥ ३३१ ॥
He who restrains (Vārayan) and tears apart (Dārayan) the demons is Daityavāraṇadāraṇaḥ (The Restrainer and Destroyer of Demons). Even on one part of his tusk, the multitudes of enemy elephants are impaled.


Shloka 331: Daṃṣṭrālagnadvipaghaṭaḥ (दंष्ट्रालग्नद्विपघटः)
दंष्ट्रालग्नद्विपघट इति नाम्ना स गीयते ॥ ३३१ ॥
He is sung by the name Daṃṣṭrālagnadvipaghaṭaḥ (The One on whose Tusk is Attached a Group of Elephants).


Shloka 332: Devārthanṛgajākṛtiḥ (देवार्थनृगजाकृतिः)
देवानां कार्यसिद्धय॑र्थ येन मर्त्यद्विपाकृतिः ॥ ३३२॥ स्वीकृता स स्मृतो नाम्ना देवार्थनृगजाकृतिः ।
He who assumed the form of a human-elephant (Nṛgaja, i.e., the elephant-headed form) for the sake of accomplishing the work of the gods is remembered by the name Devārthanṛgajākṛtiḥ (The One who Took the Human-Elephant Form for the Gods' Purpose).


धनधान्यपतिर्धन्यो धनदो धरणीधरः ॥ 
ध्यानैकप्रकटो ध्येयो ध्यानं ध्यानपरायणः ॥९७॥


Shloka 333: Dhanadhānyapatiḥ (धनधान्यपतिः)
धनधान्यप्रदत्वेन धनधान्यपतिर्भवान् ॥३३३॥
Because you are the bestower of wealth and grain, you are Dhanadhānyapatiḥ (The Lord of Wealth and Grain).


Shloka 334: Dhanyaḥ (धन्यः)
धन्य-स्त्वं धनर्लब्धृत्वात् पुण्यवान्वापि गीयसे ॥ ३३४ ॥
You are Dhanyaḥ (The Fortunate / Auspicious One) because you are the obtainer of wealth, or you are praised as the virtuous one.


Shloka 334: Dhanadaḥ (धनदः)
धनदो धनदानेन कुबेरात्मतयापि वा ॥
You are the bestower of wealth (Dhanadaḥ), either by giving riches or because you are of the nature of Kubera himself.


Shloka 334: Dharaṇīdharaḥ (धरणीधरः)
शेषेणादिद्वराहेणाप्यभिन्नो धरणीधरः ।
Being non-different from Śeṣa and from the Primeval Boar (Varāha), you are Dharaṇīdharaḥ (The Supporter of the Earth).


Shloka 335: Dhyānaikaprakaṭaḥ (ध्यानैकप्रकटः)
मनसैवानुद्रष्टव्यो ध्यानैकप्रकटो भवान् ॥ ३३५ ॥
You are to be perceived only by the mind; you are Dhyānaikaprakaṭaḥ (The One who is Revealed Only through Meditation).


Shloka 335: Dhyeyaḥ (ध्येयः), Dhyānam (ध्यानम्) & Dhyānaparāyaṇaḥ (ध्यानपरायणः)
त्वमेव त्रिपुटी ध्येयो ध्यानं ध्यानपरायणः ॥
You yourself are the triad: the object of meditation (Dhyeyaḥ), the act of meditation (Dhyānam), and the one devoted to meditation (Dhyānaparāyaṇaḥ).


नन्दो नन्दिप्रियो नादो नादमध्यप्रतिष्ठितः ॥ 
निष्कलो निर्मलो नित्यो नित्यानित्यो निरामयः ॥ ९८ ॥


Shloka 336: Nandaḥ (नन्दः) & Nandipriyaḥ (नन्दिप्रियः)
नंद आनंदनीयोऽसि नंदिकेश्वरवल्लभः ॥ ३३६ ॥ नंदि-प्रियोऽसि
You are adorable and blissful (Nandaḥ). You are the beloved of Nandikeśvara. Thus, you are Nandaḥ (The Blissful One) and Nandipriyaḥ (The Beloved of Nandi).




Shloka 336: Nādaḥ (नादः)
नादोऽसि योऽन्तर्दशविधध्वनिः
You are the primordial sound (Nāda) which is the tenfold inner vibration. Thus, He is Nādaḥ (The Primordial Sound).


Shloka 337: Nādamadhyapratiṣṭhitaḥ (नादमध्यप्रतिष्ठितः)
गम्यो नादानु-संधानान्नादमध्यप्रतिष्ठितः ॥ ३३७॥
He is attained through the contemplation of sound, and is established in the midst of that sound. Thus, He is Nādamadhyapratiṣṭhitaḥ (The One Established in the Center of Sound).


Shloka 338: Niṣkalaḥ (निष्कलः)
निष्कलोऽवयवैहींनो
He is without parts, devoid of any components. Thus, He is Niṣkalaḥ (The Partless One).


Shloka 338: Nirmalaḥ (निर्मलः)
निर्मलो दूषणोज्झितः
He is pure, free from all impurities. Thus, He is Nirmalaḥ (The Stainless One).


Shloka 338: Nityaḥ (नित्यः)
नित्यो नाशोज्झितो
He is eternal, free from destruction. Thus, He is Nityaḥ (The Eternal One).


Shloka 338: Nityānityaḥ (नित्यानित्यः)
नित्यानित्यो खोर्यादिरूपधृकू ॥ ३३८ ॥
He is both eternal and non-eternal (Nityānityaḥ), assuming forms such as the sky, etc.


Shloka 338: Nirāmayaḥ (निरामयः)
अविद्येव महारोगस्तदस्पृष्टो निरामयः ।
He is untouched by the great disease of ignorance. Thus, He is Nirāmayaḥ (The Diseaseless One).












परंव्योम परन्धाम परमात्मा परं पदम् ॥
परात्परः पशुपतिः पशुपाशविमोचकः ॥ ९९ ॥


Shloka 339: Paraṁ Vyoma (परं व्योम)
अव्याकृतं यदाकाशं परंव्योम तदात्मकः ॥ ३३९ ॥
He is the unmanifest ether (Ākāśa), whose nature is the supreme void. Thus, He is Paraṁ Vyoma (The Supreme Ether).


Shloka 339: Paraṁ Dhāma (परं धाम)
ज्योतिषामपि यज्ज्योतिस्तत्परन्धाम कथ्यते ।
He is the light of even all other lights; that is called the supreme abode. Thus, He is Paraṁ Dhāma (The Supreme Abode).


Shloka 340: Paramātmā (परमात्मा)
परमः सर्व-जीवेभ्यः परमात्मेति गद्यते ॥ ३४०॥
He is the highest of all living beings; therefore, He is declared as Paramātmā (The Supreme Self).


Shloka 340: Paraṁ Padam (परं पदम्)
कैलासादिपदेभ्योऽपि पैरमत्वात्परं पदम् ।
Because He is higher than even the state of Kailāsa and other realms, He is Paraṁ Padam (The Supreme State/Vishnu's Abode).


Shloka 341: Parātparaḥ (परात्परः)
ब्रह्मविष्णुमहेशादप्युत्तमत्वात् परात्परः ॥ ३४१ ॥
Because He is superior even to Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa (Śiva), He is Parātparaḥ (The One Greater than the Greatest).


Shloka 341: Paśupatiḥ (पशुपतिः)
ब्रह्मादिकीटकान्तानां पाता पशुपतिर्मतः ।
He is the protector (Pātā) of all beings from Brahmā down to the smallest insect; therefore, He is considered Paśupatiḥ (The Lord of Beings).


Shloka 342: Paśupāśavimocakaḥ (पशुपाशविमोचकः)
द्विपंचाशद्विधाः पाशाः सांख्यतंत्रादिषु स्फुटाः ॥ ३४२ ॥ ब्रह्मादीन्मोचयंस्तेभ्यः पशुपाशविमोचकः ।
The fifty-two types of bonds (Paśa) are clearly described in the Sāṅkhya, Tantra, and other scriptures. He who liberates even Brahmā and others from these bonds is Paśupāśavimocakaḥ (The Liberator from the Bonds of Fetters).


पूर्णानन्दः परानन्दः पुराणपुरुषोत्तमः ॥ 
पद्मप्रसन्ननयनः प्रणताज्ञानमोचनः ॥ १०० ॥


Shloka 343: Pūrṇānandaḥ (पूर्णानन्दः)
पूर्णानन्दः क्रियाकर्तृकर्मभेदोज्झितं सुखं ॥ ३४३ ॥
He is the bliss that is devoid of the distinctions of action, doer, and instrument. Thus, He is Pūrṇānandaḥ (The Complete / Perfect Bliss).


Shloka 344: Parānandaḥ (परानन्दः)
भूम्यादिब्रह्मपर्यन्तानन्दान् शतगुणोत्तरान् । सर्वानप्यधरी-कुर्वन् परानंदो महासुखम् ॥ ३४४ ॥
He surpasses all pleasures, from those of the earth up to those of Brahmā, each a hundred times greater than the previous. Therefore, He is Parānandaḥ (The Supreme Bliss).


Shloka 345: Purāṇapuruṣottamaḥ (पुराणपुरुषोत्तमः)
क्षरेभ्यः सर्वभूतेभ्यः कूटस्थादक्षरादपि । उत्तमत्वादनादित्वात् पुराणपुरुषोत्तमः ॥ ३४५ ॥
Because He is superior to all perishable beings, and also superior to the imperishable, changeless Self (Kūṭastha), and because He is without beginning, He is Purāṇapuruṣottamaḥ (The Ancient Supreme Person).


Shloka 346: Padmaprasannanayanaḥ (पद्मप्रसन्ननयनः)
पद्मप्रसन्ननयनो विकसत्कमलेक्षणः ।
He has eyes as gracious (Prasanna) and beautiful as the lotus; He is Padmaprasannanayanaḥ (The One whose Eyes are Gracious as Lotuses).


Shloka 346: Praṇatājñānamocanaḥ (प्रणताज्ञानमोचनः)
नमतां तत्त्वबोधेन प्रणताज्ञानमोचनः ॥ ३४६ ॥
He who liberates the ignorance (Ajñāna) of those who bow down (Praṇata) to Him, through the knowledge of the Truth, is Praṇatājñānamocanaḥ (The Liberator of the Ignorance of the Devout).




प्रमाणप्रत्ययातीतः प्रणतार्तिनिवारणः ॥ 
फलहस्तः फणिपतिः फेत्कारः फाणितप्रियः ॥ १०१ ॥


Shloka 347: Pramāṇapratyayātītaḥ (प्रमाणप्रत्ययातीतः)
प्रमाणप्रत्ययातीतो नित्यज्ञानैकविग्रहः । प्रमाकरण-जानां हि प्रमितीनामनित्यता ॥ ३४७॥
He transcends all proofs (Pramāṇa) and cognitions (Pratyaya), for He is the sole embodiment of eternal knowledge. Indeed, the cognitions (Pramiti) arising from instruments of knowledge are impermanent. Thus, He is Pramāṇapratyayātītaḥ (The One Beyond All Proofs and Cognitions).


Shloka 347: Praṇatārtinivāraṇaḥ (प्रणतार्तिनिवारणः)
नमतां नाशयन् पीडां प्रणतार्तिनिवारणः ।
He who destroys the afflictions of those who bow to Him is Praṇatārtinivāraṇaḥ (The Remover of the Afflictions of the Devout).


Shloka 348: Phalahastaḥ (फलहस्तः)
फलहस्तः स्वभक्तानामविलंबात्फलं ददत् ॥ ३४८ ॥
He who holds the fruit in His hand and bestows the results (of actions) upon His devotees without delay is Phalahastaḥ (The One with a Fruit in His Hand).


Shloka 348: Phaṇipatiḥ (फणिपतिः)
वासुकेरपि शेषस्य स्वामी फणिपतिर्मतः ।
He is the lord of Vāsuki and Śeṣa; thus He is considered Phaṇipatiḥ (The Lord of Serpents).


Shloka 349: Phetkāraḥ (फेत्कारः)
फेत्कार इति तन्नाम्ना तन्त्रं तत्र निरूप्यसे ॥ ३४९ ॥
You are described in the Tantra by the name Phetkāraḥ (The Exclamation Pheṭ).


Shloka 349: Phāṇitapriyaḥ (फाणितप्रियः)
खण्डाह्वयेक्षुविकृतौ प्रीतिमान् फाणितप्रियः ॥
He who delights in Phāṇita (sugarcane juice concentrate) – which is a preparation made from earth-colored sugar lumps – is Phāṇitapriyaḥ (The One Fond of Sugarcane Juice).






बाणार्चिताङ्ङ्गियुगलो बालकेलिकुतूहली ॥ 
ब्रह्म ब्रह्मार्चितपदो ब्रह्मचारी बृहस्पतिः ॥ १०२ ॥


Shloka 350: Bāṇārcitāṅghriyugalaḥ (बाणार्चिताङ्घ्रियुगलः) & Bālakelikutūhalī (बालकेलिकुतूहली)
बाणासुरेण पूज्यत्वाद्बाललीलासु कौतुकात् ॥ ३५० ॥ बाणार्चितांत्रियुगलो बालकेलिकुतूहली ।
Because He is worshipped by the demon Bāṇa, He is Bāṇārcitāṅghriyugalaḥ (The One whose Pair of Feet is Worshipped by Bāṇa). Due to His curiosity in child-like playful sports, He is Bālakelikutūhalī (The One Eager in Child-like Play).


Shloka 351: Brahma (ब्रह्म)
ब्रह्म त्वमेव वेदान्तवेद्यतत्त्वात्मकत्वतः ॥ ३५१ ॥
You are indeed Brahman (the Supreme Reality), being the essence of the Truth known through the Vedānta. Thus, He is Brahma (The Absolute).


Shloka 351: Brahmārcitapadaḥ (ब्रह्मार्चितपदः)
ब्रह्मार्चितपदो वेदैः श्लाघनीयं हि ते पदम् । प्राचा तु विष्णुविधिभ्यामर्चिते पदे यस्येत्य॑र्थकमेकमेवेदं 'ब्रह्मब्रह्मार्चितपदम्' इति नामेत्युक्तं, -तत्पक्षे सरूपैकशेषो दुर्वारः ।
He whose feet (or state) are worshipped by Brahmā (or the Vedas) is Brahmārcitapadaḥ (The One whose Feet are Worshipped by Brahmā). (The commentary notes an alternative interpretation from previous commentators, considering 'Brahma Brahmārcitapadam' as a single name, but then argues it leads to grammatical difficulty.)


Shloka 352: Brahmacārī (ब्रह्मचारी)
ब्रह्मचारी भवान् येनाकृतदार-परिग्रहः ॥ ३५२ ॥
He is Brahmacārī (The Celibate Student) because He has not accepted a wife.


Shloka 352: Bṛhaspatiḥ (बृहस्पतिः)
वाचस्पतिस्वरूपेण देवार्च्यत्वाद्वृहस्पतिः ।
Because He is worshipped by the gods in the form of Vācaspati (Bṛhaspati, the Lord of Speech), He is Bṛhaspatiḥ (The Lord of Prayer/Strength).








बृहत्तमो ब्रह्मपरो ब्रह्मण्यो ब्रह्मवित्प्रियः ॥ 
बृहन्नादाग्यचीत्कारो ब्रह्माण्डावलिमेखलः ॥ १०३ ॥


Shloka 353: Bṛhattamaḥ (बृहत्तमः)
बृहतो ब्रह्मविष्ण्वादीनतिशेषो बृहत्तमः ॥ ३५३ ॥
He who is greater than the great ones like Brahmā and Viṣṇu is Bṛhattamaḥ (The Greatest of the Great).


Shloka 353: Brahmaparaḥ (ब्रह्मपरः)
वेदैकतत्परो धातुः श्रेष्ठो ब्रह्मपरो मतः ।
He who is solely devoted to the Vedas, the creator (Dhātuḥ), the supreme, is considered Brahmaparaḥ (The One Whose Supreme Goal is Brahman / Devoted to Brahman).


Shloka 354: Brahmaṇyaḥ (ब्रह्मण्यः)
ब्रह्मण्य इति विख्यातो ब्राह्मणान् मानयन् स्वयम् ॥ ३५४ ॥
He who honors Brahmins is renowned as Brahmaṇyaḥ (The Favorable to Brahmins).


Shloka 354: Brahmavidpriyaḥ (ब्रह्मवित्प्रियः)
प्रिया ब्रह्म-विदो यस्य स मतो ब्रह्मवित्प्रियः ।
He to whom the knowers of Brahman (Brahmavit) are dear is considered Brahmavidpriyaḥ (The Beloved of the Knowers of Brahman).


Shloka 355: Bṛhannādāgyacītkāraḥ (बृहन्नादाग्यचीत्कारः)
चीत्कारो गजशब्दः स मेघाशन्यादितो महान् ॥ ३५५॥ तवास्तीति बृहन्नादाग्य-चीत्कार इति स्मृतः ।
The 'Cītkāra' is the great sound of the elephant, which is mightier than the sound of thunder and lightning. Because you possess that, you are remembered as Bṛhannādāgyacītkāraḥ (The One with the Great Sound and the Elephant's Trumpet).


Shloka 356: Brahmāṇḍāvalimekhalaḥ (ब्रह्माण्डावलिमेखलः)
कटिसूत्रे किंकिणीव ब्रह्माण्डान्येव गुंफ-यन् ॥ ३५६ ॥ तादृग्दधद्विश्वरूपं ब्रह्माण्डावलिमेखलः ।
He who strings together the multitude of cosmic eggs (Brahmāṇḍas) like tinkling bells (Kiṅkiṇī) on his girdle, thus bearing the universal form, is Brahmāṇḍāvalimekhalaḥ (The One Whose Girdle is a String of Cosmic Eggs).




भ्रूक्षेपदत्तलक्ष्मीको भर्गो भद्रो भयापहः ॥ 
भगवान् भक्तिसुलभो भूतिदो भूतिभूषणः ॥ १०४ ॥


Shloka 357: Bhrūkṣepadattalakṣmīkaḥ (भ्रूक्षेपदत्तलक्ष्मीकः)
भ्रूक्षेपद‌त्तलक्ष्मीको भक्तेभ्यः संपदो ददत् ॥ ३५७ ॥
He who bestows prosperity (Lakṣmī) upon His devotees merely by the movement (Kṣepa) of His eyebrow is Bhrūkṣepadattalakṣmīkaḥ (The One who Bestows Prosperity by a Glance of His Brow).


Shloka 357: Bhargaḥ (भर्गः)
भर्गो गायत्र्युदीरितः ।
He is the one praised as Bharga (the Radiant) in the Gāyatrī mantra. Thus, He is Bhargaḥ (The Effulgent Destroyer of Sins).


Shloka 358: Bhadraḥ (भद्रः)
भद्रा मन्द्रा मृगाश्चेति सन्ति द्विरदजातयः ॥ ३५८ ॥ तेषूत्तमा भद्रजाति-र्भद्रस्त्वं तादृशाननः ।
Among the three classes of elephants – Bhadra, Mandra, and Mṛga – the Bhadra class is the best. You, whose face is like that, are Bhadraḥ (The Auspicious/Excellent One).


Shloka 359: Bhayāpahaḥ (भयापहः)
द्वितीयाद्वै भयं यत्तदपन्नंस्त्वं भयापहः ॥ ३५९ ॥
The fear that arises from duality (Dvaita) – You remove that. Thus, You are Bhayāpahaḥ (The Remover of Fear).


Shloka 360: Bhagavān (भगवान्)
उत्पत्तिं च विनाशं च भूतानामगतिं गतिम् । वेत्सि विद्यामविद्यां चेत्युच्यसे भगवानिति ॥ ३६० ॥
You know the origin, destruction, the path and the wrong path of beings, as well as knowledge and ignorance. Therefore, You are called Bhagavān (The Lord possessing Supreme Opulences).


Shloka 361: Bhaktisulabhaḥ (भक्तिसुलभः)
भक्त्यैव लब्धुं यः शक्यः स भक्तिसुलभो महान् ।
He who is attainable only through devotion (Bhakti) is the great Bhaktisulabhaḥ (The Easily Attainable through Devotion).




Shloka 361: Bhūtidaḥ (भूतिदः) & Bhūtibhūṣaṇaḥ (भूतिभूषणः)
सिद्धीर्दत्से भस्म धत्से भूतिदो भूतिभूषणः ॥ ३६१ ॥
You bestow all powers (Siddhis) and you wear sacred ashes (Bhasma). Thus, You are Bhūtidaḥ (The Bestower of Prosperity/Powers) and Bhūtibhūṣaṇaḥ (The One Adorned with Sacred Ashes).


भव्यो भूतालयो भोगदाता भ्रूमध्यगोचरः ॥ 
मन्त्रो मन्त्रपतिर्मन्त्री मदमत्तमनोरमः ॥ १०५ ॥


Shloka 362: Bhavyaḥ (भव्यः)
भव्यो भावुकरूपत्वाद्भाविविश्वात्मकत्वतः ॥ ३६२ ॥
He is Bhavyaḥ (The Auspicious/Gracious One) because He is of the nature of benevolence and because He is the soul of the future universe.


Shloka 362: Bhūtālayaḥ (भूतालयः)
भूतानां भूजलादीनां पिशाचानां च देहिनाम् ॥ अतीतानाम-धिष्ठानमतो भूतालयो भवान् ॥
You are the substratum for beings such as the earth, water, etc., as well as for ghosts (Piśācas) and embodied beings, including those who have passed away. Therefore, You are Bhūtālayaḥ (The Abode of All Beings).


Shloka 363: Bhogadātā (भोगदाता)
भोगदाता दुःखसुखसाक्षा-त्कारप्रदत्वतः ॥ ३६३ ॥
He is Bhogadātā (The Bestower of Experience) because He grants the direct experience of both pleasure and pain.


Shloka 363: Bhrūmadhyagocaraḥ (भ्रूमध्यगोचरः)
अविभक्ते ध्रुवोर्मध्ये ध्येयो घूम-ध्यगो चरः ।
He is to be meditated upon in the indivisible, steady center between the eyebrows. Thus, He is Bhrūmadhyagocaraḥ (The One within the Range of the Mid-Brow).


Shloka 364-365: Mantraḥ (मन्त्रः), Mantrapatiḥ (मन्त्रपतिः) & Mantrī (मन्त्री)
मंत्राः सामर्थजूरूपा षडणैकाक्षरादयः ॥३६४॥ रहोविचाररूपाश्च राज्यभारोपयोगिनः । तद्रूपस्तदभिमानी देवता तस्य कारकः ॥ ३६५ ॥ तेन मन्त्रो मन्त्रपतिर्मन्त्री-त्यपि च गीयसे ।
Mantras are forms of power, such as six-syllabled or single-syllabled ones, or those useful for royal duties and consisting of secret deliberations. You are the very form of that, the deity who presides over and activates it. Therefore, You are sung as Mantraḥ (The Mantra Itself), Mantrapatiḥ (The Lord of Mantras), and Mantrī (The Possessor of Mantras).


Shloka 366: Madamattamanoramaḥ (मदमत्तमनोरमः)
मदः समाधिसंभूतध्येयोऽन्यविषयाग्रहः ॥ ३६६ ॥ रमसे तद्युते चित्ते मदमत्तमनोरमः ।
The divine intoxication (Mada) is born of deep meditation (Samādhi), is the object of contemplation, and is exclusive of other objects. You delight in a mind possessed by that intoxication. Thus, You are Madamattamanoramaḥ (Delighting in the Intoxicated Mind).


मेखलावान् मन्दगतिर्मतिमत्कमलेक्षणः ॥
महाबलो महावीर्यो महाप्राणो महामनाः ॥ १०६ ॥


Shloka 367: Mekhalāvān (मेखलावान्)
मेखलावान् रशनया मौञ्ज्या वा विलसत्कटिः ॥ ३६७॥
He whose waist shines with a girdle (Mekhalā) or a sacred Muñja-grass belt is Mekhalāvān (The One with a Girdle).


Shloka 368: Mandagatiḥ (मन्दगतिः)
येषां कापि गतिर्नास्ति मन्दानां ज्ञानकर्मणोः । अभावेन गतिस्तेषामपि मन्दगतिस्ततः ॥ ३६८ ॥
For those who are dull (Manda) and devoid of both knowledge and action, there is no progress. He becomes their progress (Gati); therefore, He is Mandagatiḥ (The Refuge of the Slow / The One with Slow Movement).


Shloka 369: Matimatkamaleksaṇaḥ (मतिमत्कमलेक्षणः)
यस्माज्ज्ञानयुता संप-त्तादृग् यस्य निरीक्षणम् । दृशैव दत्तधीश्रीको मतिमत्कम ले-क्षणः ॥ ३६९ ॥ प्राचा तु मतिमानिति भिन्ननामत्वेन पठितं, तत्कमलेक्षणनाम्न्नो मकारप्राये पठितुमयुक्तत्वादुपेक्ष्यम् ।
He whose mere glance bestows intelligence and prosperity is Matimatkamaleksaṇaḥ (The One with the Lotus-Eye of Intelligence). (The commentary notes that previous commentators read "Matimān" as a separate name, but disregards this as unsuitable.)








Shloka 370: Mahābalaḥ (महाबलः), Mahāvīryaḥ (महावीर्यः), Mahāprāṇaḥ (महाप्राणः) & Mahāmanāḥ (महामनाः)
बलवीर्यप्राणमनःसमष्ट्येकतनुर्भवान् । महाबलो महावीर्यो महाप्राणो महामनाः ॥ ३७० ॥
You are the collective embodiment of all strength, valor, life-force, and mind. Therefore, You are Mahābalaḥ (The Great in Strength), Mahāvīryaḥ (The Great in Valor), Mahāprāṇaḥ (The Great Life-Force), and Mahāmanāḥ (The Great of Mind).


Shloka 371: Yajñaḥ (यज्ञः) etc.
यज्ञ इत्यादिकं नामाष्टकं तु प्रकटार्थकं । रसः परम आनंदो रैसो वै स इति श्रुतेः ॥३७१॥
The eight names beginning with Yajña, etc., have clear meanings. He is the supreme essence (Rasa), the supreme Bliss, as stated in the Śruti: "He is indeed Rasa."


Conclusion of the Sixth Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ । 
गणेशनामखद्योते षष्ठं शतमबीभवत् ॥ ६०० ॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), composed by Bhāskara, 
also known as Agnicit, ends the sixth hundred of the Ganesha Sahasranama.


यज्ञो यज्ञपतिर्यज्ञगोप्ता यज्ञफलप्रदः ॥ 
यशस्करो योगगम्यो याज्ञिको याजकप्रियः ॥ १०७ ॥ 
रसो रसप्रियो रस्यो रञ्जको रावणार्चितः ॥ 
रक्षोरक्षाकरो रत्नगर्भो राज्यसुखप्रदः ॥ १०८ ॥ 


Shloka 372: Yajñaḥ (यज्ञः), Yajñapatiḥ (यज्ञपतिः), Yajñagoptā (यज्ञगोप्ता) & Yajñaphalapradaḥ (यज्ञफलप्रदः)
(From the context of verse 107, these names are clear. He is the sacrifice itself, the Lord of sacrifice, the protector of sacrifice, and the bestower of the fruits of sacrifice.)


Shloka 372: Yaśaskaraḥ (यशस्करः)
(He is the bestower of fame.)


Shloka 372: Yogagamyaḥ (योगगम्यः)
(He who is attainable through Yoga.)


Shloka 372: Yājñikaḥ (याज्ञिकः) & Yājakapriyaḥ (याजकप्रियः)
(He is the one devoted to sacrifice and is dear to the sacrificer.)


Shloka 372: Rasaḥ (रसः)
शांतादौ मधुरादौ वा रसे प्रीत्या रसप्रियः। रस्यते चर्व्यते प्राज्ञैर्भूयो भूयोऽनुभूयते ॥ ३७२ ॥ स रस्यस्तन्मनो-वृत्तिरञ्जनेनासि रञ्जकः ।
He is the essence (Rasa) itself, in peaceful or sweet forms. Thus, He is Rasaḥ (The Essence).


Shloka 372: Rasapriyaḥ (रसप्रियः)
He is dear to the essence, or He delights in the essence. Thus, He is Rasapriyaḥ (The Lover of Essence).


Shloka 372: Rasyaḥ (रस्यः)
He is relished and tasted again and again by the wise. Thus, He is Rasyaḥ (The One who is Relished).


Shloka 372: Rañjakaḥ (रञ्जकः)
You are the colorer (delighter) of the mind's modifications. Thus, He is Rañjakaḥ (The Delighter / One who Colors).


Shloka 373: Rāvaṇārcitaḥ (रावणार्चितः)
रावणैः शब्दनैर्वेदशास्त्रगीतादिपा-ठिभिः ॥ ३७३ ॥ दशास्येनापि सिद्धयर्थ पूजितो रावणार्चितः ।
He is worshipped by the roaring reciters of the Vedas, scriptures, songs, etc., and also by the ten-faced Rāvaṇa for attaining success. Thus, He is Rāvaṇārcitaḥ (The One Worshipped by Rāvaṇa).


Shloka 374: Rakṣorakṣākaraḥ (रक्षोरक्षाकरः)
रक्षांसि भस्मसात्कुर्वन् रक्षोरक्षाकरः स्मृतः ॥ ३७४॥
He who reduces the Rākṣasas (demons) to ashes is remembered as Rakṣorakṣākaraḥ (The Destroyer of Demons).


Shloka 375: Ratnagarbhaḥ (रत्नगर्भः)
रल-गर्भा मही तद्वान् रत्नगर्भस्तदाश्रये ।
The earth (Mahī) contains the womb of gems. He who possesses that (or is the support of that) is Ratnagarbhaḥ (The Womb of Jewels / One with Gems within).






Shloka 375: Rājyasukhapradaḥ (राज्यसुखप्रदः)
राज्यं तज्जन्मसौख्यं च ददद्राज्यसुखप्रदः ॥ ३७५ ॥
He who bestows kingdom and the happiness arising from it is Rājyasukhapradaḥ (The Bestower of Kingdom and Happiness).


लक्ष्यं लक्ष्यप्रदो लक्ष्यो लयस्थो लड्डुकप्रियः ॥ 
लानप्रियो लास्यपरो लोभकृल्लोकविश्रुतः ॥ १०९ ॥


Shloka 376: Lakṣyam (लक्ष्यम्)
तारेण धनुषा चित्तशरेण ब्रह्म वेधयेत् । इति श्रुत्या शरव्य-स्त्वं तल्लक्ष्यमसि योगिनाम् ॥ ३७६ ॥
You are the target (Lakṣya) of the Yogis, as stated in the Śruti: "One should pierce Brahman with the arrow of the mind, using the bow of the syllable Oṁ." Thus, He is Lakṣyam (The Target).


Shloka 377: Lakṣyapradaḥ (लक्ष्यप्रदः)
लक्ष्याणि चित्तस्थैर्या-र्थ लक्षसंख्यान्यदीदृशन् । ऋषयस्तानि निर्विघ्नं ददलक्ष्यप्रदो भवान् ॥ ३७७ ॥
You bestow upon the sages the various targets (spiritual goals), numbering in the hundreds of thousands, which are situated in the mind and are to be seen. Thus, You are Lakṣyapradaḥ (The Bestower of the Spiritual Target).


Shloka 377: Lakṣyaḥ (लक्ष्यः)
लक्ष्यो लक्षणया गम्यो महावाक्यगतैः पदैः ।
He is to be known (Lakṣyaḥ) through implication and through the words of the great Upaniṣadic statements (Mahāvākyas).


Shloka 378: Layasthaḥ (लयस्थः)
लयस्थः कल्पकालेऽपि तिष्ठंश्चित्तलयेऽपि वा ॥ ३७८ ॥
He remains existing even during the dissolution of the cosmos (Kalpa), or even when the mind is dissolved in deep meditation. Thus, He is Layasthaḥ (The One Abiding in Dissolution).


Shloka 379: Laḍḍukapriyaḥ (लड्डुकप्रियः)
लड्डुका वर्तुलाकाराः प्रियालतिलखाखसैः । रचिताः शर्करा-पक्कास्तत्प्रियो लड्डुकप्रियः ॥ ३७९ ॥
Laḍḍukas are round-shaped sweets made from Priyāla seeds, sesame seeds, and khakhasa (poppy seeds), cooked with sugar. He who is fond of them is Laḍḍukapriyaḥ (The Lover of Laḍḍukas).


Shloka 380: Lānapriyaḥ (लानप्रियः)
लानप्रियो गजावास-शालायां प्रीतिसंयुतः ।
He who is affectionate in the elephant stable (Lāna is a stable or a lion's lair) is Lānapriyaḥ (The One Fond of the Stable).


Shloka 380: Lāsyaparaḥ (लास्यपरः)
विलासार्हपरं धाम यस्य लास्यपरो हि सः ॥३८०॥
He whose supreme abode is worthy of divine play or dance is Lāsyaparaḥ (The One Devoted to Dance/Play).


Shloka 381: Lobhakṛt (लोभकृत्) & Lokaviśrutaḥ (लोकविश्रुतः)
ये लाभकारिणो लोकाः शीघ्रभक्तवरप्रदाः । तेषु श्रेष्ठतया ख्यातो लाभकृल्लोकविश्रुतः ॥ ३८१ ॥
He who is renowned (Viśruta) in the worlds (Loka) as the best among those who bestow benefits (Lābha) and quickly grant boons to devotees is Lobhakṛt (The Bestower of Gains) and Lokaviśrutaḥ (The One Renowned in the Worlds).


वरेण्यो वह्निवदनो वन्द्यो वेदान्तगोचरः ॥ 
विकर्ता विश्वतश्चक्षुर्विधाता विश्वतोमुखः ॥ ११० ॥


Shloka 382: Vareṇyaḥ (वरेण्यः)
वरेण्याख्यो गणपतेरद्वैतभजने रतः । कश्चिद्राजा तद-द्वैताद्वरेण्योऽस्युत्तमोऽपि वा ॥ ३८२ ॥
He is called Vareṇyaḥ (The Most Excellent / Worthy to be Chosen) – either as a king devoted to the non-dual worship of Gaṇapati, or as the supreme one due to his non-duality.


Shloka 383: Vahnivadanaḥ (वह्निवदनः)
यद्यद्भवन्तमुद्दिश्य स्रमिद्धेऽग्नौ हुतं हविः । तेनैव तृप्यसीत्यर्थात्त्वं वह्निवदनो मतः ॥३८३॥
Whatever oblation is offered into the blazing fire with you as its object, you are satisfied by that very act. Therefore, you are considered Vahnivadanaḥ (The One with Fire as His Face).


Shloka 384: Vandyaḥ (वन्द्यः)
वन्द्यो नम्योऽस्युपनिषद्गम्यो वेदान्तगोचरः ॥ ३८४ ॥
He is to be saluted (Vandyaḥ), bowed to, reached through the Upaniṣads, and is the object of Vedānta.




Shloka 384: Vedāntagocaraḥ (वेदान्तगोचरः)
Thus, He is Vedāntagocaraḥ (The One within the Range of Vedānta).


Shloka 384: Vikartā (विकर्ता)
विकर्ता त्वं हि षड्‌भावविकाराणां प्रवर्तकः ॥
You are the Vikartā (The Modifier / Separator / Creator) because you are the instigator of the six modifications of being (birth, existence, growth, change, decay, death).


Shloka 385: Viśvataścakṣuḥ (विश्वतश्चक्षुः)
यत्र क्वचन भक्तेन पत्रं पुष्पं फलं जलम् । दत्तं तत्रैव तत्पश्यन् धारयन् भक्षयन्नपि ॥ ३८५ ॥ कीर्त्यसे विश्वतश्चक्षुर्विधाता विश्वतोमुखः ।
You see everywhere, holding and even consuming whatever leaf, flower, fruit, or water is offered by a devotee, wherever it is offered. Therefore, you are proclaimed as Viśvataścakṣuḥ (The One with Eyes Everywhere).


Shloka 385: Vidhātā (विधाता)
Thus, He is Vidhātā (The Ordainer / Creator).


Shloka 385: Viśvatomukhaḥ (विश्वतोमुखः)
Thus, He is Viśvatomukhaḥ (The One with Faces Everywhere).


वामदेवो विश्वनेता वज्रिवज्रनिवारणः ॥ 
विश्वबन्धनविष्कम्भाधारो विश्वेश्वरप्रभुः ॥ १११ ॥


Shloka 386: Vāmadevaḥ (वामदेवः)
वामदेवो वल्गुतरं दीव्यसि द्योतसे यतः ॥ ३८६ ॥
You are called Vāmadeva (The Pleasant / Left-side Lord) because you shine most beautifully and radiate delight.


Shloka 386: Viśvanetā (विश्वनेता)
विश्वनेतासि जगतो विष्णोर्वा नायके यतः ।
You are the leader of the universe (Viśvanetā), or because you are the leader of Viṣṇu.




Shloka 387: Vajrivajranivāraṇaḥ (वज्रिवज्रनिवारणः)
इन्द्रवज्रस्तंभ-नेन वज्रिवज्रनिवारणः ॥३८७॥
He who stops (Nivāraṇa) the thunderbolt (Vajra) of Indra (Vajrin) is Vajrivajranivāraṇaḥ (The Checker of Indra's Thunderbolt).


Shloka 388: Viśvabandhanaviṣkambhādhāraḥ (विश्वबन्धनविष्कम्भाधारः)
विश्वनिर्मार्णपर्याप्तो देशो विष्कंभ उच्यते । विश्वबन्धनविष्कंभाधारस्तस्यापि धारणात् ॥ ३८८ ॥
The state (place) of universal projection (creation) is called Viṣkambha (the prop). He who is the support (Ādhāra) of that prop which binds the universe is Viśvabandhanaviṣkambhādhāraḥ (The Support of the Prop that Binds the Universe).


Shloka 388: Viśveśvaraprabhuḥ (विश्वेश्वरप्रभुः)
ब्रह्माण्डानां तदीशानांचेशो विश्वेश्वरप्रभुः ।
He is the lord (Prabhu) of the lord of the universe (Viśveśvara). Thus, He is Viśveśvaraprabhuḥ (The Lord of the Lord of the Universe).


शब्दब्रह्म शमप्राप्यः शंभुभक्तिगणेश्वरः ॥ 
शास्ता शिखाग्रनिलयः शरण्यः शिखरीश्वरः ॥ ११२ ॥


Shloka 389: Śabdabrahman (शब्दब्रह्म)
शब्दब्रह्म परां वाचमतीतो नादरूपधृक् ॥ ३८९॥
You are Śabdabrahman (The Absolute as Sound) because you transcend the supreme speech and assume the form of the primal sound (Nāda).


Shloka 389: Śamaprāpyaḥ (शमप्राप्यः)
शम-प्राप्यः शान्तिदान्ती जितैचित्तेन लभ्यसे ।
You are attainable (Prāpya) through the calmness (Śama) of a peaceful and self-controlled mind. Thus, He is Śamaprāpyaḥ (The One Attained through Inner Calm).


Shloka 390: Śambhvaṣṭagaṇeśvaraḥ (शंभ्वष्टगणेश्वरः)
शैवान् शाक्तान् गणांश्चेष्टे शंभुशक्तिगणेश्वरः ॥ ३९० ॥
He who rules over the Śaivas, Śāktas, and Gaṇas is Śambhvaṣṭagaṇeśvaraḥ (The Lord of Śambhu's Hosts).
(Commentary: Previous commentators read "Śambhuśaktir" as separate names, but this is rejected as inappropriate.)


Shloka 392: Śāstā (शास्ता)
शास्ता केरलदेशीया देवताऽस्ति तदात्मकः ॥ ३९२ ॥
You are of the nature of Śāstā, a deity of the Kerala region. Thus, He is Śāstā (The Ruler/Teacher).


Shloka 392: Śikhāgranilayaḥ (शिखाग्रनिलयः)
तस्याः शिखायामध्येयः परमात्मा व्यवस्थितः ॥ श्रुतिसिद्धोऽस्ति तद्रूपः शिखाग्रनिलयो भवान् ।
The Supreme Self is to be meditated upon at the tip of the crown (Śikhāgra). You exist in that very form revealed by the Śruti. Thus, You are Śikhāgranilayaḥ (The One Dwelling at the Crown's Tip).


Shloka 393: Śaraṇyaḥ (शरण्यः)
त्राता शरण्यः
You are the protector, the giver of refuge (Śaraṇyaḥ).


Shloka 393: Śikharīśvaraḥ (शिखरीश्वरः)
प्रालेयाचलात्मा शिखरीश्वरः ॥ ३९३ ॥
You are the snowy mountain (Śikhari) itself, or its lord (Īśvara). Thus, He is Śikharīśvaraḥ (The Lord of the Mountain Peak).


षड्ऋतुकुसुमस्रग्वी षडाधारः षडक्षरः ॥  
संसारवैद्यः सर्वज्ञः सर्वभेषजभेषजम् ॥ ११३ ॥


Shloka 394: Ṣaḍṛtukusumasragvī (षड्ऋतुकुसुमस्रग्वी)
जातीचम्पककुन्दादीन्येकै कर्तुभवान्यपि । षङ्गतुकुसुम-स्रग्वी सर्वदा युगपद्दधत् ॥ ३९४ ॥
He who wears a garland (Sragvī) of the flowers of all six seasons (Ṣaḍṛtu) – such as jasmine, champaka, kunda, and others – simultaneously and eternally, is Ṣaḍṛtukusumasragvī (The One with a Garland of Flowers of All Six Seasons).


Shloka 395: Ṣaḍādhāraḥ (षडाधारः)
मूलाधारे गणेशोऽस्ति चक्रषट्‌कं तदूर्ध्वतः । षण्णामाधारभूतोऽयं षडाधार इति स्मृतः ॥३९५॥
Gaṇeśa exists in the Mūlādhāra, and the six cakras are above that. He who is the support of these six is remembered as Ṣaḍādhāraḥ (The Support of the Six Cakras).
Shloka 395: Ṣaḍakṣaraḥ (षडक्षरः)
ङेवर्मयुग्वक्रतुण्डमत्ररूपः षडक्षरः ।
He who is of the nature of the six-syllabled Vakratuṇḍa mantra ("Gaṅ Gaṇapataye Namaḥ") is Ṣaḍakṣaraḥ (The Six-Syllabled One).
(Commentary: Previous explanations of these names are disregarded as unsupported by Tantra and Purāṇa.)


Shloka 396: Saṃsāravaidyaḥ (संसारवैद्यः)
संसारवैद्य इत्युक्तो भवरोगविनाशकः ॥३९६॥
He who is declared as Saṃsāravaidyaḥ (The Physician of the World) is the destroyer of the disease of worldly existence (Bhava).


Shloka 396: Sarvajñaḥ (सर्वज्ञः)
सर्वज्ञः सकलज्ञाता सुगतात्मा विनायकः ।
He is Sarvajñaḥ (The Omniscient) – the knower of all, the soul of the blessed, Vinaayaka.


Shloka 397: Sarvabheṣajabheṣajam (सर्वभेषजभेषजम्)
सर्वेषा-मपि रोगाणां दिव्यं पीयूषमौषधम् ॥ ३९७ ॥ तस्यापि नाशयन् दोषान् सर्वभेषजभेषजम् ॥
He is the divine nectar-like medicine for all diseases. And He destroys the defects of even that medicine. Therefore, He is Sarvabheṣajabheṣajam (The Medicine for All Medicines).


सृष्टिस्थितिलयक्रीडः सुरकुञ्जरभेदनः ॥ 
सिन्दूरितमहाकुम्भः सदसद्यक्तिदायकः ॥ ११४ ॥


Shloka 398: Sṛṣṭisthitilayakrīḍaḥ (सृष्टिस्थितिलयक्रीडः)
लीलया सर्वजगतां निर्मिति-स्थिति-संहृतीः ॥ ३९८ ॥ सृष्टि-स्थिति-लयक्रीडः कथ्यसे रचयन् क्षणात् ।
You create, maintain, and destroy the entire universe in a single moment, merely as play. Therefore, You are declared as Sṛṣṭisthitilayakrīḍaḥ (The One Whose Play is Creation, Preservation, and Dissolution).


Shloka 399: Surakuñjarabhedanaḥ (सुरकुञ्जरभेदनः)
दानवैरर्चि-तश्च त्वं सुरकुञ्जरभेदनः ॥ ३९९ ॥
You are worshipped by the demons (Dānavas), and you are the splitter of the divine elephant (of Indra). Thus, He is Surakuñjarabhedanaḥ (The Destroyer of the Divine Elephant).


Shloka 399: Sindūritamahākumbhaḥ (सिन्दूरितमहाकुम्भः)
सिन्दूरितमहाकुंभः सिन्दूरारुणमस्तकः ।
He whose great head (forehead) is adorned with red vermilion (Sindūra) is Sindūritamahākumbhaḥ (The One whose Great Forehead is Colored with Vermilion).


Shloka 400: Sadasadyaktidāyakaḥ (सदसद्यक्तिदायकः)
सद्ब्रह्मैव न सद्विश्वं तयोर्व्यक्तिः प्रकाश-नम् ॥४००॥ स्वभक्तेभ्यो ददासीति सदसयक्तिदायकः । साक्षी पश्यसि साक्षात्त्वं विश्वं चित्तानपेक्षया ॥ ४०१ ॥
You bestow upon Your devotees the faculty of discrimination between the Real (Sat – Brahman, which truly exists) and the Unreal (Asat – the universe, which does not ultimately exist). Thus, You are Sadasadyaktidāyakaḥ (The Bestower of the Knowledge of the Real and the Unreal). You are the witness who directly perceives the universe without depending on the mind.


साक्षी समुद्रमथनः स्वसंवेद्यः स्वदक्षिणः ॥ 
स्वतन्त्रः सत्यसङ्कल्पः सामगानरतः सुखी ॥ ११५ ॥


Shloka 402: Sākṣī (साक्षी) & Samudramathanaḥ (समुद्रमथनः)
समुद्रमथने देवैर्मन्थनारंभणेऽर्चितः । स्वसंवेद्यः स्वयं-ज्योतिः स्वयंशक्तः स्वदक्षिणः ॥४०२॥
He is the witness (Sākṣī) of everything. He was worshipped by the gods at the beginning of the churning of the ocean. Thus, He is Samudramathanaḥ (The Churner of the Ocean).


Shloka 402: Svasaṃvedyaḥ (स्वसंवेद्यः)
He is self-revealed (Svasaṃvedyaḥ), self-luminous (Svayaṃjyotiḥ).


Shloka 402: Svadakṣiṇaḥ (स्वदक्षिणः)
He is self-capable and also means "His own right" or "skilful" (Svadakṣiṇaḥ).


Shloka 403: Svatantraḥ (स्वतन्त्रः)
खतन्त्रः स्वयमेवासि नानातन्त्रात्मना यतः ।
You are indeed independent (Svatantraḥ), assuming the form of many Tantras.


Shloka 403: Satyasaṅkalpaḥ (सत्यसङ्कल्पः)
अमोघकल्पनात् सत्यसंकल्प इति गीयसे ॥४०३॥
Because your resolve never fails, you are praised as Satyasaṅkalpaḥ (The One of True Resolve).
Shloka 403: Sāmagānarataḥ (सामगानरतः)
सामप्रीतेः सदानंदात् सामगानरतः सुखी ।
He delights in the chanting of the Sāma Veda (Sāmagāna). Thus, He is Sāmagānarataḥ (The One Devoted to Chanting the Sāma Veda).


Shloka 403: Sukhī (सुखी)
He is ever-blissful (Sukhī).


हंसो हस्तिपिशाचीशो हवनं हव्यकव्यभुक् ॥ 
हव्यो हुतप्रियो हर्षो हृलेखामन्त्रमध्यगः ॥ ११६ ॥


Shloka 404: Haṁsaḥ (हंसः)
हंसो यतिविशेषात्मा यद्वा भास्करमूर्तिकः ॥ ४०४ ॥
He is Haṁsaḥ (The Swan) – either as the embodied soul of a particular sage (Yati) or as the one who has the form of the sun (Bhāskara).


Shloka 404-405: Hastipiśācīśaḥ (हस्तिपिशाचीशः)
एतत्पञ्चाक्षरस्यान्ते लिखेच्छब्दाद्विठो मनुः । तत्प्रतीकमुपादाय तस्येशो देवतोदिता ॥ ४०५ ॥ सोऽयं हस्तिपिशाचीशो नवा-र्णमनुदेवता।
He is the lord (Īśa) of the Hastipiśācī. This deity is the presiding deity of the nine-syllabled mantra, being the lord of that symbol.
(Commentary: Previous interpretations reading "Hastī" as a separate name are disregarded as ignorance of special Ganesha mantras.)


Shloka 406: Havanaṁ (हवनम्)
यागः प्रक्षेपयुग्हो-मस्तद्रूपो हवनं भवान् ॥४०६॥
The sacrifice (Yāga) endowed with offerings is of the nature of Homa. You, being that very form, are Havanaṁ (The Oblation/Sacrifice).


Shloka 406: Havyakavyabhuk (हव्यकव्यभुक्)
देवताः पितरश्चेति द्विरूपो हव्यकव्यभुक् ।
He who enjoys (Bhuk) both the offerings to the gods (Havya) and the offerings to the ancestors (Kavya) is Havyakavyabhuk (The Partaker of Both Divine and Ancestral Offerings).


Shloka 407: Havyaḥ (हव्यः)
हव्यो हविःस्वरूपत्वाद्धविर्ब्रह्मेति हि स्मृतेः ॥ ४०७ ॥
He is Havyaḥ (The Worthy Oblation) because He is of the nature of the oblation itself, as it is remembered: "The oblation is Brahman."


Shloka 408: Hutapriyaḥ (हुतप्रियः)
हुतं द्रव्यं प्रियं यस्या देवतायाः सवैभवान् । हवि-र्भक्षणजो मोदो हर्षः सोऽपि त्वदात्मकः ॥ ४०८ ॥
The offered material (Huta) is dear to the deity. The delight arising from consuming the oblation is joy (Harṣa), and that too is of your nature. Thus, He is Hutapriyaḥ (The One Fond of Offerings).


Shloka 408: Harṣaḥ (हर्षः)
He is Harṣaḥ (Joy) itself.


Shloka 410: Hṛllekhāmantramadhyagaḥ (हृलेखामन्त्रमध्यगः)
हृल्लेखार्थ-स्तन्त्रराजे वर्णितोव्याकुलाक्षरैः । व्योम्ना प्रकाशमानस्त्वं ग्रसमानस्त्वमग्निना ॥ ४०९ ॥ तयोर्विमर्श ईकारो बिन्दुना तन्निफालनम् । इति ह्रींकारवाच्योऽसि हृल्लेखामन्त्र-मध्यगः ॥ ४१० ॥
He is described in the Tantrarāja by the letters that are the meaning of Hṛllekhā. You shine with the sky (the vowel 'a') and consume with the fire (the vowel 'i'), their union is the 'Ī' vowel, and the Bindu (dot) is the removal of that. Thus, you are signified by the syllable 'Hrīṁ'. Therefore, He is Hṛllekhāmantramadhyagaḥ (The One Abiding within the Hṛllekhā Mantra).


क्षेत्राधिपः क्षमाभर्ता क्षमापरपरायणः ॥ 
क्षिप्रक्षेमकरः क्षेमानन्दः क्षोणीसुरद्रुमः ॥११७॥


Shloka 411: Kṣetrādhipaḥ (क्षेत्राधिपः)
प्रयागादेः शरीरादेर्वेशः क्षेत्राधिपो मतः ॥ ४११ ॥
He who is the lord of sacred places (Kṣetra) such as Prayāga, and also of the physical body, is considered Kṣetrādhipaḥ (The Lord of the Field).


Shloka 411: Kṣamābhartā (क्षमाभर्ता)
क्षमाभर्ता क्षितिं क्षान्तिमपि वा यो बिभर्ति सः ॥
He who supports (Bhartā) the earth (Kṣamā) or who embodies forbearance (Kṣamā) is Kṣamābhartā (The Supporter of the Earth / The Lord of Forbearance).


Shloka 411: Kṣamāparaparāyaṇaḥ (क्षमापरपरायणः)
क्षान्तिशील-मुनिप्राप्यः क्षमापरपरायणः ।
He who is devoted (Parāyaṇa) to forbearance (Kṣamā) and is attainable by sages of patient disposition is Kṣamāparaparāyaṇaḥ (The One Utterly Devoted to Forbearance).


Shloka 412: Kṣiprakṣemakaraḥ (क्षिप्रक्षेमकरः)
शीघ्रं सिद्धिं ददासीति क्षिप्रक्षेमकरो भवान् ॥ ४१२ ॥
You grant success quickly; therefore, You are Kṣiprakṣemakaraḥ (The One Who Swiftly Bestows Well-being).


Shloka 413: Kṣemānandaḥ (क्षेमानन्दः)
क्षेमं सांसारिकं सौख्य-मानन्दः पारमार्थिकः । उभयात्मा त्वमेवेति क्षेमानन्द इती-र्यसे ॥ ४१३ ॥
Kṣema is worldly happiness, and Ānanda is transcendental bliss. You possess both natures; therefore, You are proclaimed as Kṣemānandaḥ (The One Who is Both Worldly Well-being and Supreme Bliss).


Shloka 414: Kṣoṇīsuradrumaḥ (क्षोणीसुरद्रुमः)
कल्पवृक्ष इव क्षोण्यामिष्टान्सर्वान्प्रयच्छसि । धर्मादिदुःखभोगान्तानतः क्षोणीसुरद्रुमः ॥ ४१४ ॥
Like a wish-fulfilling tree (Kalpavṛkṣa) on earth (Kṣoṇī), you bestow all desirable things – from virtue (Dharma) to the end of suffering and enjoyment. Therefore, He is Kṣoṇīsuradrumaḥ (The Divine Tree on Earth).


धर्मप्रदोऽर्थदः कामदाता सौभाग्यवर्धनः ॥ 
विद्याप्रदो विभवदो भुक्तिमुक्तिफलप्रदः ॥११८॥


Shloka 415: Dharmapradaḥ (धर्मप्रदः), Arthadaḥ (अर्थदः) & Kāmadātā (कामदाता)
कल्पद्रुमत्वं विविनक्त्येकविंशतिनामभिः । धर्मप्रदोऽर्थदः कामदातेत्युक्तस्त्रिवर्गदः ॥४१५॥
The aspect of being a wish-fulfilling tree (Kalpadruma) is elaborately described through twenty-one names. He is called Dharmapradaḥ (The Bestower of Righteousness), Arthadaḥ (The Bestower of Wealth), and Kāmadātā (The Giver of Desires). Thus, He is the giver of the three goals of life (Trivarga – Dharma, Artha, Kāma).








Shloka 415: Saubhāgyavardhanaḥ (सौभाग्यवर्धनः)
स्त्रीणां जीवत्पतित्वादि दद-त्सौभाग्यवर्धनः ॥
He who bestows upon women the state of having a living husband, etc., and increases good fortune (Saubhāgya) is Saubhāgyavardhanaḥ (The Increaser of Good Fortune).


Shloka 416: Vidyāpradaḥ (विद्याप्रदः) & Vibhavadaḥ (विभवदः)
विद्याप्रदो विभवदो ज्ञानसंपत्तिदा-यकः ॥४१६॥
He is Vidyāpradaḥ (The Bestower of Knowledge) and Vibhavadaḥ (The Bestower of Prosperity/Opulence) – the giver of wisdom and wealth.


Shloka 416: Bhuktimuktiphala-pradaḥ (भुक्तिमुक्तिफलप्रदः)
भोगजीवन्मुक्तिदानाद्भुक्तिमुक्तिफलप्रदः ॥
He who grants enjoyment (Bhukti - worldly pleasure) and liberation (Mukti) gives the fruits of both. Thus, He is Bhuktimuktiphala-pradaḥ (The Bestower of the Fruits of both Enjoyment and Liberation).


अभिरूप्यकरो वीरश्रीप्रदो विजयप्रदः ॥ 
सर्ववश्यकरो गर्भदोषहा पुत्रपौत्रदः ॥ ११९ ॥


Shloka 417: Abhirūpyakaraḥ (अभिरूप्यकरः)
आढचैः सह दरिद्राणां मूर्खाणां पण्डितैः सह । साम्यं प्रदर्शयन् सभ्येष्वाभिरूप्यकरो मतः ॥ ४१७॥
He who brings about equality between the rich and the poor, and between the foolish and the wise, in the assemblies of the learned, is considered Abhirūpyakaraḥ (The One Who Bestows Elegance / Equality of Presence).


Shloka 418: Vīraśrīpradaḥ (वीरश्रीप्रदः)
समरे कान्दिशीकानां अपि वीरश्रियं ददत् । नामस्मृतवतां बीर-श्रीप्रदः कीर्त्यसे बुधैः ॥ ४१८ ॥
Even to those who are fleeing in battle, He bestows the glory of valor (Vīraśrī). Therefore, He is praised by the wise as Vīraśrīpradaḥ (The Bestower of the Glory of Valor). (Commentary: An alternative reading as separate name "Vīra" is disregarded as inconsistent with the context.)


Shloka 419: Vijayapradaḥ (विजयप्रदः)
वीर-श्रियं जयफलां ददानो विजयप्रदः ।
He who bestows the glory of valor, which is the fruit of victory, is Vijayapradaḥ (The Bestower of Victory).
Shloka 419: Sarvavaśyakaraḥ (सर्ववश्यकरः)
सर्व भक्तवशे कुर्वन् सर्ववश्यकरो भवान् ॥ ४१९ ॥
He who brings everything under the control of His devotees is Sarvavaśyakaraḥ (The One Who Brings Everything Under Control).


Shloka 419: Garbhadoṣahā (गर्भदोषहा)
बीजदोषान् स्रावपातौ नाशयन् गर्भदोषहा ॥
He who destroys defects of the seed (semen/ovum) and the miscarriage of the fetus is Garbhadoṣahā (The Remover of Womb Defects).


Shloka 420: Putrapautradaḥ (पुत्रपौत्रदः)
पुत्रः सूनुश्च दुहितातत्पौत्रान् दुहितुः सुतान् ॥ ४२० ॥ नप्तृन्प्रणप्तृन् दौहित्रान् ददानः पुत्रपौत्रदः ॥
He who bestows sons, grandsons (by sons), nephews (sons of daughter), great-grandsons, and further descendants is Putrapautradaḥ (The Bestower of Sons and Grandsons).


मेधादः कीर्तिदः शोकहारी दौर्भाग्यनाशनः ॥ 
प्रतिवादिमुखस्तम्भो रुष्टचित्तप्रसादनः ॥ १२० ॥


Shloka 421: Medhādaḥ (मेधादः)
धीर्धारणावती मेधा मेधादस्तत्प्रदायकः ॥ ४२१ ॥
The power of retention is Medhā (retentive memory). Medhādaḥ (The Bestower of Retentive Memory) is He who grants that.


Shloka 421: Kīrtidaḥ (कीर्तिदः)
लोके या सगुणख्यातिस्तत्प्रदानेन कीर्तिदः ।
Whatever reputation (Kīrti) or fame based on virtues exists in the world, He bestows it. Thus, He is Kīrtidaḥ (The Bestower of Fame).


Shloka 422: Śokahārī (शोकहारी)
शोकहारी ज्ञान-दानात्तरति शोकमात्मवत् ॥ ४२२ ॥
He is Śokahārī (The Remover of Sorrow) because through the gift of knowledge, one crosses beyond sorrow like the Self.




Shloka 422: Daurbhāgyanāśanaḥ (दौर्भाग्यनाशनः)
दुर्भगत्वापहारेण स्त्रीणां दौर्भाग्यनाशनः ।
By removing the state of misfortune (Durbhagatva), He is Daurbhāgyanāśanaḥ (The Destroyer of Ill-Fortune).


Shloka 423: Prativādimukhastambhaḥ (प्रतिवादिमुखस्तम्भः)
वाचं स्तभ्नासि दुष्टानां प्रतिकूलं प्रजल्प-ताम् ॥४२३॥ प्रतिवादिमुखस्तम्भः कथ्यसे स्मृतिमात्रतः ।
You paralyze the speech of the wicked who speak against You. He is called Prativādimukhastambhaḥ (The One Who Silences the Mouths of Opponents) simply by being remembered.


Shloka 424: Ruṣṭacittaprasādanaḥ (रुष्टचित्तप्रसादनः)
सेवकेषु क्रोधजुषां राज्ञां चित्तानि शोधयेत् ॥ ४२४ ॥ स्नेह-शालीनि कुर्वाणो रुष्टचित्तप्रसादनः ॥
He purifies the minds of angry kings towards their servants, making them affectionate. Thus, He is Ruṣṭacittaprasādanaḥ (The One Who Calms the Angry Mind).


पराभिचारशमनो दुःखभञ्जनकारकः ॥ 
लवस्तुटिः कला काष्ठा निमेषस्तत्परः क्षणः ॥ १२१ ॥


Shloka 425: Parābhicāraśamanaḥ (पराभिचारशमनः)
पराभिचारशमनो मारणाख्यस्य कर्मणः ॥ ४२५ ॥ स्वशत्रुभिः प्रणीतस्य निष्फलीकरणान्मतः ।
He is Parābhicāraśamanaḥ (The Appeaser of Enemy Sorcery) because He renders fruitless the killing rites performed by one's own enemies.


Shloka 426: Duḥkhabhañjanakārakaḥ (दुःखभञ्जनकारकः)
भञ्जयन् सर्व-दुःखानि दुःखभञ्जनकारकः ॥ ४२६ ॥
He who shatters (Bhañjan) all sorrows (Duḥkha) is Duḥkhabhañjanakārakaḥ (The Shatterer of Sorrows).


Shloka 427-429: Lavaḥ (लवः), Truṭiḥ (त्रुटिः), Kalā (कला), Kāṣṭhā (काष्ठा), Nimeṣaḥ (निमेषः), Tatparaḥ (तत्परः), Kṣaṇaḥ (क्षणः)
अथ कालस्वरूप-त्वमुक्तं विंशतिनामभिः । पद्मपत्रसहस्रस्य सूक्ष्मसूच्या भिवेधने ॥४२७॥ दले दले लवः कालसहस्रेण लवैस्रुटिः ॥४२८॥ त्रुटेः शतं तत्परस्तैर्निमेषस्त्रिशता भवेत् । अष्टादशनिमेषैः स्यात्काष्ठा तत्रिंशता कला ॥ ४२९ ॥
Now, the nature of Time is described through these names. When a fine needle pierces the thousand leaves of a lotus, the time taken to pierce each leaf is one Lava. One thousand Lavas make one Truṭi. One hundred Truṭis make one Tatpara. Thirty Tatparas make one Nimeṣa (blink of an eye). Eighteen Nimeṣas make one Kāṣṭhā. Thirty Kāṣṭhās make one Kalā.
Thus, He is Lavaḥ (The Instant), Truṭiḥ (The Fragment), Kalā (The Small Unit of Time), Kāṣṭhā (The Division of Time), Nimeṣaḥ (The Blink), Tatparaḥ (That Which is Beyond), and Kṣaṇaḥ (The Moment) – as the embodiment of these subtle units of time, or as their controller.


घटी मुहूर्त प्रहरो दिवानक्तमहर्निशम् ॥ 
पक्षो मासोऽयनं वर्ष युगं कल्पो महालयः ॥ १२२ ॥


Shloka 430: Ghaṭī (घटी), Muhūrtaḥ (मुहूर्तः), Praharaḥ (प्रहरः), Divā (दिवा), Nakta (नक्तम्), Ahar (अहः), Niśa (निशा), Ahar-niśam (अहर्निशम्)
तत्रिंशता क्षणस्ते षडू घटी ताभ्यां मुहूर्तकम् । प्रहर-स्तच्चतुष्कं तच्चतुष्कं नक्तकं दिवा ॥ ४३० ॥ अहर्निशं त्वहोरात्रः प्रहरैरष्टभिर्भवेत् ।
One Kṣaṇa (moment) consists of as many (atomic instants)… Thirty Kṣaṇas make one Ghaṭī. Two Ghaṭīs make one Muhūrta. Four Muhūrtas make one Prahara. Four Praharas make the night (Nakta) and four make the day (Divā). Eight Praharas make the full day-night cycle called Ahorātra (Ahar-niśam). Thus, He is Ghaṭī (The Time-Measure), Muhūrtaḥ (The Hour), Praharaḥ (The Watch), Divā (The Day), Nakta (The Night), Ahar (The Daytime), Niśa (The Nighttime), and Ahar-niśam (The Full Day).


Conclusion of the Seventh Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ । 
गणेशनामसाहने समाप्तं सप्तमं शतम् ॥ ७०० ॥
Thus, in the work (named "Sahana" or "Khadyota") composed by Bhāskara, also known as Agnicit (the son of or one who has kindled the fire), the seventh hundred of the Ganesha Sahasranama is completed.


Shloka 431: Pakṣaḥ (पक्षः), Māsaḥ (मासः), Ayanaṁ (अयनम्)
ते पञ्चदश पक्षस्तौ मासः षडयनं तु ते ॥ ४३१ ॥
Fifteen Ahar-niśas make one Pakṣa (fortnight). Two Pakṣas (thirty days) make one Māsa (month). Six months make one Ayana. Thus, He is Pakṣaḥ (The Fortnight), Māsaḥ (The Month), and Ayanaṁ (The Solstice/Half-Year).


Shloka 431: Varṣaṁ (वर्षम्)
ताभ्यां तु मानुषं वर्षम् ।
Two Ayanas make one human Varṣa (year). Thus, He is Varṣaṁ (The Year).
Shloka 432: Yugaṁ (युगम्)
तैः षष्ट्या त्रिशतीयुजा । दिव्यं द्वादशसाहस्रैर्दिव्यवषैश्चतुर्युगम् ॥ ४३२ ॥
That (human year) multiplied by 360 (or as described) makes one divine year. Twelve thousand divine years make one Catur-yuga (four ages). Thus, He is Yugaṁ (The Cosmic Age).


Shloka 432: Kalpaḥ (कल्पः)
चतुर्युगसहस्रेण कल्पो दैनन्दिनो लयः ।
One thousand Catur-yugas make one Kalpa, which is one day of Brahmā (followed by a night of equal length). Thus, He is Kalpaḥ (The Eon).


Shloka 433: Mahālayaḥ (महालयः)
द्वा-सप्ततिसहस्त्रैस्तैः स्यान्महाप्रलयो विधेः ॥ ४३३ ॥
Seventy-two such Kalpas constitute a Mahāpralaya (Great Dissolution) of Brahmā. Thus, He is Mahālayaḥ (The Great Dissolution).


राशिस्तारा तिथिर्योगो वारः करणमंशकम् ॥
लभं होरा कालचक्रं मेरुः सप्तर्षयो ध्रुवः ॥१२३॥


Shloka 434: Rāśiḥ (राशिः), Tārā (तारा), Tithiḥ (तिथिः)
राशिर्द्वादश मेषाद्याः कृत्तिकाद्याश्च तारकाः । त्वमेव च तिथिश्चान्द्री कला पञ्चदशात्मिका ॥ ४३४॥
You are the twelve Rāśis (zodiac signs) beginning with Meṣa (Aries). You are the Tārās (stars or lunar mansions) beginning with Kṛttikā. You are the Tithi (lunar day), which is the fifteen divisions (kalās) of the moon. Thus, He is Rāśiḥ (The Zodiac Sign), Tārā (The Star/Lunar Mansion), and Tithiḥ (The Lunar Day).


Shloka 435: Yogaḥ (योगः)
विष्कम्भप्रथमा योगास्त्वद्रूपाः सप्तविंशतिः । योगा अमृतसिद्ध्याद्या आनंदा-द्यास्त्वमेव च ॥ ४३५ ॥
The twenty-seven Yogas (astrological combinations), beginning with Viṣkambha, are of your form. The Yogas such as Amṛtasiddhi and Ānanda are also you alone. Thus, He is Yogaḥ (The Astrological Yoga).










Shloka 436: Vāraḥ (वारः), Karaṇam (करणम्), Aṁśakam (अंशकम्)
रव्यादिसप्तवारात्मा बवादि-करणात्मकः । चत्वारि प्रतिनक्षत्रमंशकानि त्वमेव हि ॥ ४३६ ॥
You are the essence of the seven Vāras (weekdays) beginning with Ravi (Sunday). You are the essence of the Karaṇas (half-tithis) beginning with Bava. You are indeed the four Aṁśakas (quarters) per Nakṣatra (lunar mansion). Thus, He is Vāraḥ (The Weekday), Karaṇam (The Half-Lunar Day), and Aṁśakam (The Division/Quarter).


Shloka 436: Lagnam (लग्नम्)
राशीनामुदयो लग्नम् ।
The rising (Udaya) of the Rāśis is Lagna (the ascendant). Thus, He is Lagnam (The Ascendant).


Shloka 436: Horā (होरा)
होरा लग्नार्थसंमिता ।
Horā is the half of a Rāśi (equal to Lagna). Thus, He is Horā (The Horā).


Shloka 437: Kālacakram (कालचक्रम्)
कालचक्रं शैशुमारं मेरुः सौवर्णपर्वतः ॥ ४३७ ॥
Kālacakra is the cosmic wheel of time, also known as Śaiśumāra (the dolphin-shaped constellation). Meru is the golden mountain. Thus, He is Kālacakram (The Wheel of Time).


Shloka 437: Meruḥ (मेरुः)
Thus, He is Meruḥ (Mount Meru).


Shloka 437: Saptarṣayaḥ (सप्तर्षयः)
सप्तर्षयः कश्यपाद्या औत्तानचरणिर्भुवः ।
The seven sages (Saptarṣi) beginning with Kaśyapa and the son of Uttānapāda (Dhruva) are… Thus, He is Saptarṣayaḥ (The Seven Sages).


Shloka 437: Dhruvaḥ (ध्रुवः)
Thus, He is Dhruvaḥ (The Pole Star).








राहुर्मन्दः कविर्जीवो बुधो भौमः शशी रविः ॥ 
कालः सृष्टिः स्थितिर्विश्वं स्थावरं जङ्गमं च यत् ॥ १२४ ॥


Shloka 438: Rāhuḥ (राहुः), Mandaḥ (मन्दः), Kaviḥ (कविः), Jīvaḥ (जीवः), Budhaḥ (बुधः), Bhoumaḥ (भौमः), Śaśī (शशी), Raviḥ (रविः)
राह्वादयो ग्रहा अष्टौ त्वद्रूपा एव नेतरे ॥ ४३८ ॥
The eight planets beginning with Rāhu (Rāhu, Saturn, Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, Moon, and Sun) are of your form alone, not of another. Thus, He is Rāhuḥ (The Eclipse Planet), Mandaḥ (Saturn), Kaviḥ (Venus), Jīvaḥ (Jupiter), Budhaḥ (Mercury), Bhoumaḥ (Mars), Śaśī (The Moon), and Raviḥ (The Sun).


Shloka 439: Kālaḥ (कालः)
कलनात् काल इत्युक्तो जगत्संहरणक्रिया ।
Because He measures (Kalana) or because He is the act of dissolving the universe, He is called Kālaḥ (Time/Death).


Shloka 439: Sṛṣṭiḥ (सृष्टिः)
सृष्टिः स्थितिश्च जगदुत्पादनप्राणनक्रिये ॥ ४३९ ॥
The act of producing the universe is Sṛṣṭi (Creation). Thus, He is Sṛṣṭiḥ (Creation).


Shloka 439: Sthitiḥ (स्थितिः)
The act of enlivening or maintaining the universe is Sthiti (Preservation). Thus, He is Sthitiḥ (Preservation).


Shloka 439: Viśvam (विश्वम्) & SthāvaraṂ JangamaṂ Ca Yat (स्थावरं जङ्गमं च यत्)
यत्स्थावरादि विश्वं तत्त्वमित्येकाभिधानकम् ।
Whatever universe (Viśvam) there is, consisting of the moving (Jangama) and non-moving (Sthāvara), that is you alone. This is the single designation. Thus, He is Viśvam (The Universe) and SthāvaraṂ JangamaṂ Ca Yat (All That is Moving and Non-Moving).












भूरापोऽग्निर्मरुद्योमाहकृतिः प्रकृतिः पुमान् ॥ 
ब्रह्मा विष्णुः शिवो रुद्र ईशः शक्तिः सदाशिवः ॥ १२५ ॥


Shloka 440: Bhūḥ (भूः), Apo (आपः), Agniḥ (अग्निः), Marut (मरुत्), Yoma (योम / व्योम)
भूरापोऽग्निर्मरुद्व्योमपञ्चभूतात्मको भवान् ॥ ४४०॥
You are the essence of the five great elements: earth (Bhūḥ), water (Apaḥ), fire (Agniḥ), wind (Marut), and ether (Yoma / Vyoma). Thus, He is Bhūḥ (The Earth), Apaḥ (The Waters), Agniḥ (The Fire), Marut (The Wind), and Yomā (The Sky/Ether).


Shloka 441: Ahakṛtiḥ (अहकृतिः / अहङ्कारः), Prakṛtiḥ (प्रकृतिः), Pumān (पुमान्)
अहङ्कतिरहङ्कारः प्रकृतिर्मूलकारणम् । पुमांश्च पञ्चविंशस्त्वं प्रकृत्याद्यैरसंहतः ॥४४१॥
You are Ahaṅkāra (the ego principle). You are Prakṛti (the primordial nature, the root cause). You are the twenty-fifth principle, Puruṣa (the cosmic being). Thus, He is Ahakṛtiḥ (The Ego-Principle), Prakṛtiḥ (Primordial Nature), and Pumān (The Cosmic Being).


Shloka 442: Brahmā (ब्रह्मा), Viṣṇuḥ (विष्णुः), Śivaḥ (शिवः), Rudraḥ (रुद्रः), Īśaḥ (ईशः), Śaktiḥ (शक्तिः), Sadāśivaḥ (सदाशिवः)
मन्त्रस्थब्रह्मविष्ण्वीशरुद्राः पादाः सदाशिवः । फलकस्तत्र कामेशः शिवस्तस्यांकगामिनी ॥ ४४२ ॥ शक्तिः कामेश्वरीत्येते सप्तापि भवदात्मकाः ।
In the mantra (structure), Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Īśa (Rudra), and Rudra are the feet; Sadāśiva is the board (phalaka); Kāmeśa is Śiva; and moving on his limb is the Śakti named Kāmeśvarī. These seven are all of your nature. Thus, He is Brahmā (The Creator), Viṣṇuḥ (The Preserver), Śivaḥ (The Auspicious One), Rudraḥ (The Howler), Īśaḥ (The Lord), Śaktiḥ (The Divine Energy), and Sadāśivaḥ (The Eternal Auspicious One).


त्रिदशाः पितरः सिद्धा यक्षा रक्षांसि किन्नराः ॥ 
साध्या विद्याधरा भूता मनुष्याः पशवः खगाः ॥ १२६ ॥


Shloka 443: Tridaśāḥ (त्रिदशाः), Pitaraḥ (पितरः), Siddhāḥ (सिद्धाः), Yakṣāḥ (यक्षाः), Rākṣāṁsi (रक्षांसि), Kinnarāḥ (किन्नराः), Sādhyāḥ (साध्याः), Vidyādharāḥ (विद्याधराः), Bhūtāḥ (भूताः), Manuṣyāḥ (मनुष्याः), Paśavaḥ (पशवः), Khagāḥ (खगाः)
त्रिदशा दिकशैलान्ता अर्थास्त्वं तिथिभिर्मिताः ॥४४३॥
You are the thirty-three gods (Tridaśāḥ), the ancestors (Pitaraḥ), the perfected beings (Siddhāḥ), the nature spirits (Yakṣāḥ), the demons (Rākṣāṁsi), the celestial musicians (Kinnarāḥ), the divine beings (Sādhyāḥ), the knowledge-holders (Vidyādharāḥ), the ghosts (Bhūtāḥ), the humans (Manuṣyāḥ), the animals (Paśavaḥ), and the birds (Khagāḥ). Thus, He is Tridaśāḥ (The Thirty-three Gods), Pitaraḥ (The Ancestors), Siddhāḥ (The Perfected Ones), Yakṣāḥ (The Nature Spirits), Rākṣāṁsi (The Demons), Kinnarāḥ (The Celestial Musicians), Sādhyāḥ (The Divine Beings), Vidyādharāḥ (The Knowledge-Holders), Bhūtāḥ (The Ghosts/Beings), Manuṣyāḥ (The Humans), Paśavaḥ (The Animals), and Khagāḥ (The Birds).


Shloka 444: Bhūtam (भूतम्)
भवान् भूतमतीतं च भव्यं क्षेमं च भावि च । भवोद्भवः शिवोत्पन्नः संसारप्रभवोऽथवा ॥ ४४४ ॥
You are the past (Bhūtam). Also the future, the present, etc. Thus, He is Bhūtam (The Past / The Elements). (The verse continues describing Him as the origin of existence, born of Śiva, or the source of the world.)


समुद्राः सरितः शैला भूतं भव्यं भवोद्भवः ॥ 
साङ्ख्यं पातञ्जलं योगः पुराणानि श्रुतिः स्मृतिः ॥ १२७ ॥


Shloka 444: Samudrāḥ (समुद्राः), Saritaḥ (सरितः), Śailāḥ (शैलाः), Bhūtam (भूतम्), Bhavyam (भव्यम्), Bhavodbhavaḥ (भवोद्भवः)
(From the conclusion of the previous verse and beginning of this verse) You are the oceans (Samudrāḥ), rivers (Saritaḥ), mountains (Śailāḥ), the past (Bhūtam), the future (Bhavyam), and the origin of existence (Bhavodbhavaḥ). Thus, He is Samudrāḥ (The Oceans), Saritaḥ (The Rivers), Śailāḥ (The Mountains), Bhūtam (The Past/Elements), Bhavyam (The Future), and Bhavodbhavaḥ (The Origin of Existence).


Shloka 445-446: Sāṅkhyaṁ (साङ्ख्यम्), Pātañjalaṁ (पातञ्जलम्), Yogaḥ (योगः), Purāṇāni (पुराणानि), Śrutiḥ (श्रुतिः), Smṛtiḥ (स्मृतिः)
अथ सांख्यादयो विद्यास्त्वद्रूपाः सप्तविंशतिः । साङ्ख्यं कपिलमुन्युक्तं शास्त्रं पातञ्जलं पुनः ॥ ४४५ ॥ सामसूत्र-निदानाख्यं योगः फणिपतीरितः । ब्राह्मादीनि पुराणानि श्रुतयो बहृचादयः ॥ ४४६ ॥ मन्वाद्याः श्रुतयो वेदाङ्गानि कल्पादिकानि षटू ॥
Now, the twenty-seven branches of knowledge beginning with Sāṅkhya are of your form. Sāṅkhya is the system taught by Kapila. Pātañjala is the system taught by Patañjali. Yoga is the system (Sāmasūtra Nidāna) proclaimed by Śeṣa (Phāṇipati). The Purāṇas beginning with Brahmā (or Brahmāṇḍa). The Śrutis (Vedas) beginning with Ṛgveda. The Smṛtis beginning with Manu. 
The six Vedāṅgas beginning with Kalpa. Thus, He is Sāṅkhyaṁ (The Sāṅkhya Philosophy), Pātañjalaṁ (The Yoga Philosophy of Patañjali), Yogaḥ (The Path of Union), Purāṇāni (The Purāṇas), Śrutiḥ (The Vedas), and Smṛtiḥ (The Traditional Laws).


वेदाङ्गानि सदाचारो मीमांसान्यायविस्तरः ॥ 
आयुर्वेदो धनुर्वेदो गान्धर्वं काव्यनाटकम् ॥ १२८ ॥ 
वैखानसं भागवतं सात्वतं पाञ्चरात्रकम् ॥ 
शैवं पाशुपतं कालामुखं भैरवशासनम् ॥ १२९ ॥


Shloka 447: Vedāṅgāni (वेदाङ्गानि), Sadācāraḥ (सदाचारः)
वेदाङ्गानि सदाचारो... वेदाङ्गानि (the six limbs of the Vedas) and Sadācāra (righteous conduct). He is Vedāṅgāni (The Auxiliary Disciplines of the Vedas) and Sadācāraḥ (Righteous Conduct).


Shloka 448: Mīmāṁsā (मीमांसा), Nyāyavistaraḥ (न्यायविस्तरः)
मीमांसान्यायविस्तरः । मीमांसा षोडशाध्यायी संकर्षसहिता सती । त्रिचतुर्लक्षणे भक्ति-ब्रह्ममीमांसके अपि ॥४४८॥ कणाद गौतममुनिप्रणीतो न्याय-विस्तरः ॥
Mīmāṁsā is the sixteen-chapter exegesis (along with the Sānkarṣa Kāṇḍa). The detailed system of Nyāya (logic) was propounded by the sages Kaṇāda and Gautama. Thus, He is Mīmāṁsā (The Philosophical Inquiry) and Nyāyavistaraḥ (The Expanded System of Logic).


Shloka 449: Āyurvedaḥ (आयुर्वेदः), Dhanurvedaḥ (धनुर्वेदः), Gāndharvam (गान्धर्वम्)
ऋग्यजुःसामवेदानामुपवेदा अपि क्रमात् ॥४४९॥ आयुर्वेदधनुर्वेद‌गांधर्वास्तन्मयो भवान् ॥
The Upavedas (subsidiary Vedas) of the Ṛg, Yajus, and Sāma Vedas are respectively Āyurveda (medicine), Dhanurveda (archery), and Gāndharva (music and arts). You are the embodiment of these. Thus, He is Āyurvedaḥ (The Science of Medicine), Dhanurvedaḥ (The Science of Archery), and Gāndharvam (The Art of Music).


Shloka 450: Kāvyanāṭakam (काव्यनाटकम्)
काव्यनाटक-शब्दाभ्यां श्रव्यं दृश्यं च गृह्यते ॥ ४५०॥
By the terms Kāvya (poetry) and Nāṭaka (drama), that which is audible (Śravya) and that which is visible (Dṛśya) are understood. Thus, He is Kāvyanāṭakam (Poetry and Drama).


Shloka 451: Vaikhānasam (वैखानसं), Bhāgavatam (भागवतम्), Sātvatam (सात्वतम्), Pāñcarātrakam (पाञ्चरात्रकम्)
विष्णोर्वैखानसादीनि... पृथकू चत्वारि चत्वारि तन्त्राण्येतत्त्वदात्मकम् ॥ ४५२ ॥
The four distinct Tantras of Viṣṇu are Vaikhānasa, Bhāgavata, Sātvatam, and Pāñcarātram. You are their essence. Thus, He is Vaikhānasam (The Vaikhānasa System), Bhāgavatam (The Bhāgavata System), Sātvatam (The Sātvata System), and Pāñcarātrakam (The Pāñcarātra System).


Shloka 452: Śaivam (शैवम्), Pāśupatam (पाशुपतम्), Kālāmukham (कालामुखम्), Bhairavasāsanam (भैरवशासनम्)
शैवानि तु महेशितुः । पृथकू चत्वारि चत्वारि तन्त्राण्येतत्त्वदात्मकम् ॥ ४५२ ॥
The four distinct Tantras of Maheśvara (Śiva) are Śaiva, Pāśupata, Kālāmukha, and Bhairava. You are their essence. Thus, He is Śaivam (The Śaiva System), Pāśupatam (The Pāśupata System), Kālāmukham (The Kālāmukha System), and Bhairavasāsanam (The Bhairava Doctrine).


शाक्तं वैनायकं सौरं जैनमार्हतसंहिता ॥ 
सदसद्यक्तमव्यक्तं सचेतनमचेतनम् ॥ १३० ॥


Shloka 453: Śāktaṁ (शाक्तम्), Vaināyakaṁ (वैनायकम्), Sauraṁ (सौरम्), Jainam (जैनम्), Ārhata-Saṁhitā (आर्हतसंहिता)
शाक्तादित्रितयं शक्तेर्गणेशस्य विवस्वतः । तन्त्रे द्वे नास्तिकोन्नीते अपि जैनार्हते तथा ॥४५३॥
The trio beginning with Śākta (i.e., Śākta, Vaināyaka, and Saura) belong to Śakti, Gaṇeśa, and the Sun respectively. Similarly, the two tantras upholding atheism are the Jaina and the Ārhata (Buddhist) scriptures. Thus, He is Śāktaṁ (The Śākta System), Vaināyakaṁ (The Vaināyaka/Gāṇapatya System), Sauraṁ (The Saurya System), Jainam (The Jaina Doctrine), and Ārhata-Saṁhitā (The Buddhist Scripture).


Shloka 454: Sad-Asadyaktam (सदसद्यक्तम्)
कार्याणां करण-स्थान्तरवस्थानं सदात्मता । अकारणेनावस्थानं तदभावेऽ-सदात्मता ॥४५४॥
The state of being established in the cause (Karaṇa) of effects is the nature of the Real (Sat). The state of being without a cause, or its absence, is the nature of the Unreal (Asat). Thus, He is the bestower of the knowledge of both – Sad-Asadyaktam (The Bestower of the Real and the Unreal).






Shloka 454: Avyaktam (अव्यक्तम्)
सर्वकार्यात्मना व्यक्तमव्यक्तं कारणा-त्मना ॥ ४५५ ॥
He is the Unmanifest (Avyaktam) as the cause, in the form of the primordial Prakṛti.


Shloka 455: Sacetanam (सचेतनम्) & Acetanam (अचेतनम्)
सचेतनं प्राणिमात्रं व्योमादिकमचेतनम् ॥
All living beings (Prāṇimātra) constitute the sentient (Sacetanam). The sky, etc., constitute the insentient (Acetanam). Thus, He is Sacetanam (The Sentient / Conscious) and Acetanam (The Insentient / Unconscious).


बन्धो मोक्षः सुखं भोगोऽयोगः सत्यमणुर्महान्। 
स्वस्ति हुं फट् स्वधा स्वाहा श्रौषड्वौषड्वषण्णमः ॥ १३१ ॥


Shloka 456: Bandhaḥ (बन्धः)
बन्ध आत्मन्यनात्मत्वभ्रमो नात्मनि चात्मता । एतत्सर्व भवानेव भगवन् परिकीर्तितः ॥ ४५६ ॥
The illusion of non-Self in the Self, and the notion of Self in the non-Self – this is bondage (Bandhaḥ). 
O Lord, all of this is proclaimed as you alone. Thus, He is Bandhaḥ (Bondage).


Conclusion of the Eighth Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ । 
गणेशनामसाहस्त्रखद्योते शतमष्टमम् ॥ ८०० ॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), which is a light on the thousand names of Gaṇeśa, composed by Bhāskara, also known as Agnicit, the eighth hundred is completed.


Shloka 456: Mokṣaḥ (मोक्षः)
(The destruction of that illusion is liberation. He is that as well.) Thus, He is Mokṣaḥ (Liberation).


Shloka 457: Sukham (सुखम्) & Bhogaḥ (भोगः)
क्षस्त्वविद्याविध्वंसस्ततो यदवशिष्यते । तत्सुखं प्रत्य-गानन्दो भोगः सोऽनुभवात्मकः ॥ ४५७ ॥
What remains after the destruction of ignorance is Sukha (Bliss). That inner Ānanda is Bhoga (Experience), which is of the nature of direct perception. Thus, He is Sukham (Bliss) and Bhogaḥ (Experience/Enjoyment).




Shloka 457: Ayogaḥ (अयोगः)
अयोगः संग-रहितः ।
He who is free from all attachment, or the state of non-union (disconnection), is Ayogaḥ. Thus, He is Ayogaḥ (Non-Attachment/Disunion).


Shloka 458: Satyam (सत्यम्)
तद्धि सत्यमबाधितम् ।
That which is uncontradicted is Satyam (Truth). Thus, He is Satyam (Truth).


Shloka 458: Aṇuḥ (अणुः)
स एवाणुर्मनःषष्ठेन्द्रियागोचरतावशात् ॥ ४५८ ॥
He alone is the Aṇuḥ (Minute/Atom) because He is beyond the reach of the mind and the five senses (and the sixth, the intellect). Thus, He is Aṇuḥ (The Subtle/Atom).


Shloka 458: Mahān (महान्)
ततोऽधिकस्य सौख्यस्याभावादेव स वै महान् ॥
Because there is no greater bliss than Him, He is indeed Mahān (The Great). 
Thus, He is Mahān (The Great).


Shloka 459: Svasti (स्वस्ति)
तदेव सम्यगस्तीति स्वस्ति नास्ति ततः परम् ॥ ४५९ ॥
That which truly exists is Svasti (Well-being/Auspiciousness). Nothing exists beyond it. Thus, He is Svasti (Auspiciousness).


Shloka 460: Huṁ (हुं) & Phaṭ (फट्)
अन्यस्य दूरीकरणात्तदेव ब्रह्म हुं मतम् । दूरो-त्सारणमात्रं न किंतु नाशोऽपि तेन फटू ॥ ४६० ॥
That very Brahman is considered Huṁ, because it repels everything else. It is not merely the act of keeping away, but also the destruction; therefore, Phaṭ. Thus, He is Huṁ (The Repelling Seed) and Phaṭ (The Destroying Mantra).


Shloka 461: Svadhā (स्वधा), Svāhā (स्वाहा), Śrauṣaṭ (श्रौषट्), Vauṣaṭ (वौषट्), Vaṣaṭ (वषट्), Namaḥ (नमः)
खधेति पितृदैवत्यं स्वाहेत्यन्नन्यादिदैवतम् । औषडित्यादयस्तत्तच्छब्दयुक्रर्मलक्षकाः ॥ ४६१ ॥
Svadhā is the invocation for the ancestors (Pitṛs). Svāhā is for Agni and other deities. Śrauṣaṭ, Vauṣaṭ, Vaṣaṭ, and Namaḥ are ritual utterances that characterize various Vedic actions (karma). Thus, He is Svadhā (The Offering to Ancestors), Svāhā (The Offering to Fire), Śrauṣaṭ (The Mantra for Praise), Vauṣaṭ (The Mantra for Pouring), Vaṣaṭ (The Mantra of Offering), and Namaḥ (The Mantra of Salutation).


Shloka 462: Mahāphale (महाफले) / Summary
सर्वेषां कर्मणामिष्टसिद्ध्यर्थत्वान्महाफले । सुखे लब्धे तु तत्रैव तत्सर्व पर्यवस्यति ॥ ४६२ ॥ तेन कर्मापि सकलं भवेदेकात्मकं सुखम् ॥
Since all rituals aim to attain desired results, their culmination is the great fruit (Mahāphale). When bliss (Sukham) is attained, everything resolves into that alone. Thus, all action (Karma) becomes one with that bliss. He is that ultimate fruit. Thus, He is Mahāphale (The Great Fruit).


ज्ञानं विज्ञानमानन्दो बोधः संविच्छमो यमः ॥ 
एक एकाक्षराधार एकाक्षरपरायणः ॥ १३२ ॥


Shloka 463: Jñānam (ज्ञानम्) & Vijñānam (विज्ञानम्)
मोक्षे धीर्ज्ञानमन्यत्र विज्ञानं तद्वयं भवान् ॥ ४६३ ॥
The knowledge that leads to liberation is Jñānam. Knowledge of everything else (worldly matters) is Vijñānam. You are both of these. Thus, He is Jñānam (Supreme Knowledge) and Vijñānam (Applied Knowledge).


Shloka 464: Ānandaḥ (आनन्दः) & Bodhaḥ (बोधः)
त्वमेव प्रत्यगानन्दः प्रत्यग्बोधस्त्वमेव हि । योगिभिः सेव्यते संविद्वाह्यवृत्तिनिरासिका ॥ ४६४ ॥
You indeed are inner Ānanda (Bliss). You indeed are inner Bodha (Awareness/Consciousness). That which is served by Yogis, the Consciousness (Saṃvit) that removes external mental states, is you. Thus, He is Ānandaḥ (Bliss) and Bodhaḥ (Awakening/Consciousness).


Shloka 464: Saṃvit (संवित्)
Thus, He is Saṃvit (Pure Consciousness).


Shloka 465: Śamaḥ (शमः) & Yamaḥ (यमः)
सर्वस्य शमनात्सर्वोपरमात्त्वं शमो यमः ॥ ४६५ ॥
Because you are the allayer (Śamana) of everything and the cessation (Uparama) of everything, you are Śamaḥ (Tranquility/Control of Mind) and Yamaḥ (Restraint/Regulation). Thus, He is Śamaḥ (Inner Calmness) and Yamaḥ (Self-Control).


Shloka 466: Ekaḥ (एकः)
एक एवाद्वितीयस्त्वं भेदत्रैविध्यशून्यतः ॥ ४६६॥
You alone are One (Ekaḥ) without a second, devoid of the three kinds of differences (variations within itself, variations from others, variations of its own nature). Thus, He is Ekaḥ (The One).


Shloka 466: Ekākṣarādhāraḥ (एकाक्षराधारः)
गंबीजान्तस्थितेरेकाक्षराधार इति स्मृतः ॥
Because you are established in the seed-syllable 'Gaṁ', you are remembered as Ekākṣarādhāraḥ (The Support of the Single Syllable).


Shloka 466: Ekākṣaraparāyaṇaḥ (एकाक्षरपरायणः)
ॐमित्ये-काक्षरस्थत्वादेकाक्षरपरायणः ॥
Because you are established in the single syllable 'Oṁ' (which is of the nature of Brahman), you are Ekākṣaraparāyaṇaḥ (The One Devoted to / Abiding as the Single Syllable).


एकाग्रधीरेकवीर एकानेकस्वरूपधृक् ॥ 
द्विरूपो द्विभुजो द्यक्षो द्विरदो द्वीपरक्षकः ॥ १३३ ॥


Shloka 467: Ekāgrasdhīḥ (एकाग्रधीः)
एकाग्रधीः स्वात्ममात्रप्रवणापि मतिर्भवान् ॥ ४६७ ॥
You are Ekāgrasdhīḥ (The One of Unwavering Intellect) — the intellect that is single-pointed and inclined only towards the Self.


Shloka 468: Ekavīraḥ (एकवीरः)
अहमि प्रलयं कुर्वन्निदमः प्रतियोगिनी । पराक्रमपरोऽस्येक-वीरस्त्वत्तो न चापरः ॥ ४६८ ॥
Destroying the ego (Aham) and its counterpart "this" (Idam), you are the supreme hero of valor. There is no other hero like you. Thus, He is Ekavīraḥ (The Sole Hero).


Shloka 469: Ekānekasvarūpadhṛk (एकानेकस्वरूपधृक्)
प्रतिभूतमवस्थानादेका-नेकस्वरूपधृक् । एकधा बहुधा चैव दृश्यसे जलचन्द्रवत् ॥ ४६९ ॥
Because you reside in every living being, you assume both one and many forms. You are seen as one and as many, like the moon reflected in water. Thus, He is Ekānekasvarūpadhṛk (The One Who Assumes Both Single and Multiple Forms).


Shloka 470: Dvirūpaḥ (द्विरूपः)
द्वे ब्रह्मणी इति श्रुत्या द्विरूपोऽस्यपरं परम् । त्वमेव द्विभुजो यक्षो द्विरदः प्रकटार्थकः ॥ ४७० ॥
According to the Śruti, "There are two Brahmans" (the Absolute and the conditioned). Therefore, you possess two forms (the transcendent and the immanent). Thus, He is Dvirūpaḥ (The Two-Formed One).


Shloka 470: Dvibhujaḥ (द्विभुजः)
Thus, He is Dvibhujaḥ (The Two-Armed One), as the meaning is clear.


Shloka 470: Dvakṣaḥ (द्व्यक्षः / द्व्यक्षः)
Thus, He is Dvakṣaḥ (The Two-Eyed One).


Shloka 470: Dviradaḥ (द्विरदः)
Thus, He is Dviradaḥ (The Two-Tusked One / Elephant).


Shloka 470: Dvīparakṣakaḥ (द्वीपरक्षकः)
सप्त-द्वीपाधिपत्यस्य प्रदानाद्वीपरक्षकः ॥
Because you bestow sovereignty over the seven continents (Dvīpa), you are their protector. Thus, He is Dvīparakṣakaḥ (The Protector of the Continents).


द्वैमातुरो द्विवदनो द्वन्द्वातीतो द्वयातिगः ॥ 
त्रिधामा त्रिकरस्त्रेतात्रिवर्गफलदायकः ॥१३४॥


Shloka 471: Dvaimāturaḥ (द्वैमातुरः)
द्वैमातुरोऽस्युमागङ्गे मातरौ तव विश्श्रुते ॥ ४७१ ॥
You are celebrated as Dvaimāturaḥ (The One with Two Mothers) — Umā (Pārvatī) and Gaṅgā are your two mothers.


Shloka 471: Dvivadanaḥ (द्विवदनः)
तवैव मूर्तिरग्न्याख्या तेन द्विवदनो भवान् ॥
The form called Agni (Fire) is indeed yours; therefore, you are Dvivadanaḥ (The Two-Faced One).








Shloka 472: Dvandvātītaḥ (द्वन्द्वातीतः)
शीतोष्णादीन्यति-क्रान्तो द्वन्द्वातीत इति श्रुतः ॥ ४७२ ॥
Having transcended dualities such as cold and heat, you are known as Dvandvātītaḥ (The One Beyond Duality).


Shloka 472: Dvayātigaḥ (द्वयातिगः)
रजस्तमश्चा-तिलङ्घय वर्तमानो द्वयातिगः ॥
Transcending the two qualities of Rajas and Tamas (and also Sattva), you are Dvayātigaḥ (The One Who Has Surpassed the Pair of Opposites).


Shloka 473: Tridhāmā (त्रिधामा)
त्रिधामा सूर्यचन्द्राग्नितेज-स्त्रितयमूर्तिमान् ॥ ४७३ ॥
You are Tridhāmā (The Possessor of Three Luminaries) — embodied as the three forms of radiance: the sun, the moon, and fire.


Shloka 473: Trikaraḥ (त्रिकरः)
त्रयाणामपि लोकानां करणात्रि-करो भवान् ॥
Because you are the agent (Kara) or the hand (Kara) for the three worlds, you are Trikaraḥ (The Three-Handed One).


Shloka 474: Tretātrivargaphaladāyakaḥ (त्रेतात्रिवर्गफलदायकः)
नर्याद्यग्नित्रया काङ्गधर्मकामार्थकर्मणाम् ॥४७४॥ फलप्रद इति त्रेतात्रिवर्गफलदायकः ॥
You bestow the fruits of the three goals of life (Trivarga: Dharma, Artha, Kāma) in the Tretā Yuga (and by extension, all ages). Thus, He is Tretātrivargaphaladāyakaḥ (The Bestower of the Fruits of the Three Goals in the Tretā Age).


त्रिगुणात्मा त्रिलोकादिस्त्रिशक्तीशस्त्रिलोचनः ॥ 
चतुर्बाहुश्चतुर्दन्तश्चतुरात्मा चतुर्मुखः ॥१३५॥


Shloka 475: Trigunātmā (त्रिगुणात्मा)
गुणत्रयवती मूलप्रकृतिस्त्रिगुणात्मता ॥ ४७५ ॥ तस्या धृतिस्त्वमेवेति त्रिगुणात्मेति गीयसे ॥
The primordial nature (Mūlaprakṛti) possessing the three qualities (Guṇas) is the state of being Trigunātmā. You are the sustainer of that; therefore, you are sung as Trigunātmā (The One Whose Self is the Three Qualities).
Shloka 476: Trilokādiḥ (त्रिलोकादिः)
त्रयाणामपि लोकानां त्रिलोकादिश्च कारणम् ॥ ४७६ ॥
The creator (Ādi) and cause of the three worlds: thus, He is Trilokādiḥ (The Origin of the Three Worlds).


Shloka 477: Triśaktīśaḥ (त्रिशक्तीशः)
रमालज्जानङ्गयोग स्त्रि-शक्तिः कथ्यते मनुः । प्राभावौत्साहमान्च्या वा त्रिशक्तीशस्तदीश्वरः ॥ ४७७ ॥
The triad of powers (Triśakti) is spoken of as: Ramā (Lakṣmī), Lajjā (Modesty), and Aṅgayoga? or as power of manifestation (Prabhāva), enthusiasm (Utsāha), and wisdom? He is the lord (Īśa) of those three powers. Thus, He is Triśaktīśaḥ (The Lord of the Three Powers).


Shloka 477: Trilocanaḥ (त्रिलोचनः)
त्रिलोचनः... इति स्फुटम् ॥
He who has three eyes: thus, Trilocanaḥ (The Three-Eyed One) is clear.


Shloka 478: Caturbāhuḥ (चतुर्बाहुः)
चतुर्बाहुः... इति स्फुटम् ॥
He who has four arms: thus, Caturbāhuḥ (The Four-Armed One) is clear.


Shloka 478: Caturdantaḥ (चतुर्दन्तः)
चतुर्दन्त... इति स्फुटम् ॥
He who has four tusks: thus, Caturdantaḥ (The Four-Tusked One) is clear.


Shloka 478: Caturātmā (चतुरात्मा)
आत्मान्तरात्मा ज्ञानात्मा परमात्मेति भेदतः ॥४७८॥ आत्मोपनिषदि प्रोक्तश्चतुरात्मा त्वमेव हि ॥
The different forms of the Self: the individual self (Ātmā), the inner self (Antarātmā), the knowledge self (Jñānātmā?), and the supreme self (Paramātmā). As proclaimed in the Ātmopaniṣad, you indeed are Caturātmā (The Fourfold Self).


Shloka 479: Caturmukhaḥ (चतुर्मुखः)
चतुर्विधा मुखे वेदा यस्य स त्वं चतुर्मुखः ॥
The four Vedas exist on your face; therefore, you are Caturmukhaḥ (The Four-Faced One).






चतुर्विधोपायमयश्चतुर्वर्णाश्रमाश्रयः ॥
चतुर्विधवचोवृत्तिपरिवृत्तिप्रवर्तकः ॥ १३६ ॥


Shloka 480: Caturvidhopāyamayaḥ (चतुर्विधोपायमयः)
भेदो दण्डः साम दानमित्युपायचतुष्टयम् । चतुर्विधो-पायमयस्तज्जन्य फलसाधकः ॥ ४८० ॥
The four means (Upāya) are: Bheda (creating dissension), Daṇḍa (punishment), Sāma (conciliation), and Dāna (gift). He who embodies these four means and accomplishes the fruit born of them is Caturvidhopāyamayaḥ (The One Who is the Embodiment of the Four Means).


Shloka 481: Caturvarṇāśramāśrayaḥ (चतुर्वर्णाश्रमाश्रयः)
ब्राह्मणब्रह्मचर्यादि-वर्णाश्रमविभागशः । विहितैः कर्मभिः प्राप्यश्चतुर्वर्णाश्रमा-श्रयः ॥ ४८१॥
He who is attained through the prescribed duties (Karmas) according to the division of the four Varṇas (castes: Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya, Vaiśya, Śūdra) and the four Āśramas (stages of life: Brahmacarya, Gārhasthya, Vānaprastha, Saṃnyāsa) is Caturvarṇāśramāśrayaḥ (The Refuge of the Four Castes and Four Stages of Life).


Shloka 482: Caturvidhavacovṛttiparivṛttipravartakaḥ (चतुर्विधवचोवृत्तिपरिवृत्तिप्रवर्तकः)
गुहायां वर्तयंस्तिस्त्रः पश्यंति मध्यमा परा । वैखरी परितो बाह्यवर्तनेन प्रवर्तयन् ॥ ४८२ ॥ चतुर्विध-बचोवृत्तिपरिवृत्तिप्रवर्तकः ॥
He who activates the fourfold stages of speech (Vāc): operating within the cavity (of the heart) are the three – Paśyantī, Madhyamā, and Parā, while activating Vaikharī externally in the world through sequential expression is Caturvidhavacovṛttiparivṛttipravartakaḥ (The One Who Sets in Motion the Cycle of the Fourfold Functions of Speech).


चतुर्थीपूजनप्रीतश्चतुर्थीतिथिसंभवः ॥ 
पञ्चाक्षरात्मा पञ्चात्मा पञ्चास्यः पञ्चकृत्यकृत् ॥ १३७ ॥


Shloka 483: Caturthīpūjanaprītaḥ (चतुर्थीपूजनप्रीत) & Caturthītithisaṁbhavaḥ (चतुर्थीतिथिसंभवः)
चतुर्थीपूजनप्रीतश्चतुर्थीतिथिसंभवः । इति नाम द्वयं स्पष्टं स्याद्गणेशपुराणतः ॥ ४८३ ॥
He is delighted by worship (Pūjana) on the fourth lunar day (Caturthī), and he is born from (or manifests on) the fourth lunar day. These two names are clear from the Gaṇeśa Purāṇa. Thus, He is Caturthīpūjanaprītaḥ (The One Pleased by Worship on the Fourth Day) and Caturthītithisaṁbhavaḥ (The One Who Manifests on the Fourth Day).
Shloka 484: Pañcākṣarātmā (पञ्चाक्षरात्मा)
नादबिन्दुमका रोकारा-काराः प्रणवस्थिताः ॥ ४८४ ॥ त्वच्छरीरमतः पञ्चाक्षरात्मा परिकीर्त्यसे ॥
The Nāda (sound), Bindu (dot), the letter 'Ma', the letter 'kāra' (A?), and the letter 'Rokāra'? – these five are established in Praṇava (Oṁ). These constitute your body; therefore, you are proclaimed as Pañcākṣarātmā (The One Whose Self is the Five Syllables).


Shloka 485: Pañcātmā (पञ्चात्मा)
ब्रह्मा विष्णुश्च रुद्रश्च ईश्वरश्च सदाशिवः ॥४८५॥ यस्यैते विग्रहाः पञ्च स पञ्चात्मेति गीयसे ॥
He whose five forms (Vigrahas) are Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara, and Sadāśiva is sung as Pañcātmā (The One Whose Self is Fivefold).


Shloka 486: Pañcāsyaḥ (पञ्चास्यः)
विस्तीर्ण वदनं यस्य ब्रह्माण्डकवलक्षमम् ॥ ४८६ ॥ पचेर्विस्तारवाचित्वात्स पञ्चास्य इति स्मृतः ॥
He whose face (Vadana) is vast enough to swallow the cosmic egg (Brahmāṇḍa) is remembered as Pañcāsyaḥ (The Five-Faced One / The Wide-Mouthed One) – because the root 'Pañc' indicates expansion.


Shloka 487: Pañcakṛtyakṛt (पञ्चकृत्यकृत्)
सृष्टिः स्थितिश्च संहारस्तिरोधानमनु-ग्रहः ॥ ४८७ ॥ ब्रह्मादिरूपैरेतानि कुर्वाणः पञ्चकृत्यकृत् ॥
He who performs the five acts (Pañcakṛtya) – creation (Sṛṣṭi), preservation (Sthiti), dissolution (Saṁhāra), concealment (Tirodhāna), and blessing (Anugraha) – through forms beginning with Brahmā is Pañcakṛtyakṛt (The Performer of the Five Acts).


पञ्चाधारः पञ्चवर्णः पञ्चाक्षरपरायणः ॥ 
पश्चतालः पञ्चकरः पञ्चप्रणवभावितः ॥ १३८ ॥


Shloka 488: Pañcādhāraḥ (पञ्चाधारः)
पञ्चाधारोऽसि भूतानां पञ्चानामपि धारकः ॥ ४८८ ॥
You are Pañcādhāraḥ (The Fivefold Support) because you are the bearer (Dhāraka) of the five great elements (Bhūtas).








Shloka 489: Pañcavarṇaḥ (पञ्चवर्णः)
सर्वदा सूर्यकोटिप्रभः सन् कृतत्रेतयोश्चन्द्रवर्णोऽर्जुनद्रुच्छविः । 
द्वापरे शक्रगोपोपमोऽभूत्कलौ धूम्रवर्णोऽभवत्पञ्चवर्णो भवान् ॥ ४८९ ॥
You always possess the effulgence of ten million suns. Yet in the Kṛta and Tretā Yugas, you have the color of the moon (white) and the shine of silver; in the Dvāpara Yuga, you are like the Indragopa insect (red); in the Kali Yuga, you are smoke-colored. Thus, you are Pañcavarṇaḥ (The One of Five Colors).


Shloka 489: Pañcākṣaraparāyaṇaḥ (पञ्चाक्षरपरायणः)
जपन् पञ्चाक्षरं शैवं पञ्चाक्षरपरायणः ॥
He who is devoted to (or is the goal of) the five-syllabled Śaiva mantra ("Namaḥ Śivāya") is Pañcākṣaraparāyaṇaḥ (The One Devoted to the Five-Syllabled Mantra).


Shloka 490-491: Pañcatālaḥ (पञ्चतालः)
आमध्यमाग्रादङ्गुष्ठात्प्रमाणं ताल उच्यते ॥ ४९० ॥ ताल-पञ्चकदेहाढ्यः पञ्चतालोऽसि वामनः ॥
The measurement from the tip of the middle finger to the thumb is called one Tāla. You possess a body endowed with five such Tālas (a measure of 5:4 proportion), and you are the dwarf (Vāmana). Thus, He is Pañcatālaḥ (The One of Five Tālas in Height).


Shloka 491: Pañcakaraḥ (पञ्चकरः)
पञ्चहस्तमितः प्रांशुरपि पञ्चकरो भवान् ॥ ४९१॥
You are five Hasta (cubits) in height, or you possess five hands (Karas). Thus, He is Pañcakaraḥ (The Five-Handed One / Five-Cubits Tall).


Shloka 492: Pañcapraṇavabhāvitaḥ (पञ्चप्रणवभावितः)
तारवाग्भवलैज्जाभाः प्रसादपरया सह । प्रणवाः पञ्च तैर्वाच्यः पञ्चप्रणवभावितः ॥ ४९२ ॥
The five Praṇavas (sacred syllables Oṁ) are: Tāra (Oṁ), Vāgbhava (Aiṁ?), Laijjābha (Hrīṁ?), Prasāda (Śrīṁ?), and Parā (or another). He who is invoked (or contemplated upon) by these five is Pañcapraṇavabhāvitaḥ (The One Meditated Upon with the Five Oṁs / The One Who Contains the Five Praṇavas).










पञ्चब्रह्ममयस्फूर्तिः पञ्चावरणवारितः ॥ 
पञ्चभक्ष्यप्रियः पञ्चबाणः पश्चशिवात्मकः ॥१३९॥


Shloka 493: Pañcabrahmanaya-sphūrtiḥ (पञ्चब्रह्ममयस्फूर्तिः)
सद्योजातवामदेवाघोरतत्पुरुषेश्वरैः । पञ्चब्रह्ममयस्फूर्ति-रभिन्नस्फुरणात्मकः ॥ ४९३ ॥
Your manifestation (Sphūrti) consists of the five Brahmans (Pañcabrahman): Sadyojāta, Vāmadeva, Aghora, Tatpuruṣa, and Īśāna. You are of the nature of an undivided, radiant manifestation. Thus, He is Pañcabrahmanaya-sphūrtiḥ (The One Whose Manifestation is the Five Brahmans).


Shloka 494: Pañcāvaraṇavāritaḥ (पञ्चावरणवारितः)
पञ्चावृतिस्तवप्रोक्तैरङ्गाद्या-वरणैर्वृतः । छन्नो वा पञ्चभिः कोशैः पञ्चावरणवारितः ॥४९४॥
He who is surrounded (Vārita) by the five enclosures (Āvaraṇas) – such as the Aṅga Āvaraṇa – as described in your Tantra, or he who is covered by the five sheaths (Kośas), is Pañcāvaraṇavāritaḥ (The One Encompassed by the Five Enclosures).


Shloka 495: Pañcabhakṣyapriyaḥ (पञ्चभक्ष्यप्रियः)
लड्डूक मंडकपूरी फेणीवटकाभिधानि भक्ष्याणि । यस्य प्रियाणि पञ्चापि पञ्चभक्ष्यप्रियः स भवान् ॥ ४९५ ॥
The five types of food (Bhakṣya) – Laḍḍuka, Maṇḍaka, Pūrī, Pheṇī, and Vaṭaka – are dear to you. Therefore, you are Pañcabhakṣyapriyaḥ (The One Fond of the Five Eatable Offerings).


Shloka 496: Pañcabāṇaḥ (पञ्चबाणः)
बा-णैश्वर्यभिधाम्बायाः कामेश्वरशिवस्य च । प्रत्येकं पञ्चबीजानि सिद्धान्येव तु तद्विदाम् ॥ ४९६ ॥ तदात्मकतया पञ्चवाणः पञ्चशिवात्मकः ॥
For the goddess Kāmeśvarī (associated with the power of arrows) and for the god Kāmeśvara Śiva, each has five perfected Bījas (seed-syllables) known to the wise. Being of that nature, He is Pañcabāṇaḥ (The Five-Arrowed One / The One who is the Five Bījas).


Shloka 496: Pañcaśivātmakaḥ (पञ्चशिवात्मकः)
Thus, He is Pañcaśivātmakaḥ (The One Whose Self is the Five Śivas).








षट्कोणपीठः षट्चक्रधामा षड्ग्रन्थिभेदकः । 
षडध्वध्वान्तविध्वंसी षडगुलमहाह्रदः ॥ १४० ॥


Shloka 497: Ṣaṭkoṇapīṭhaḥ (षट्कोणपीठः)
षट्‌कोणपीठः कोणाः षद् पूजास्थानानि यस्य सः ॥ ४९७ ॥
He whose seat (Pīṭha) is the six-angled (hexagonal) figure (representing the six petals or the six worship places) is Ṣaṭkoṇapīṭhaḥ (The One Whose Seat is the Hexagon).


Shloka 498: Ṣaṭcakradhāmā (षट्चक्रधामा)
षट्चक्रधामा त्वं मूलाधिष्ठानमणिपूरकाः । अनाहतविशु-ङ्ख्याज्ञावासस्थानानि यस्य सः ॥ ४९८ ॥
You are the abode of the six Cakras: Mūlādhāra, Svādhiṣṭhāna, Maṇipūra, Anāhata, Viśuddhi, and Ājñā. Thus, He is Ṣaṭcakradhāmā (The One Whose Abode is the Six Cakras).


Shloka 499: Ṣaḍgranthibhedakaḥ (षड्ग्रन्थिभेदकः)
मूलाज्ञामणिपूरेषु द्वौ द्वौ ग्रंथी भिनत्ति यः । वह्निकुंडलिनी सैव भवान् षड्ग्रंथि-भेदकः ॥ ४९९ ॥
He who pierces the two knots (Granthis) each in Mūlādhāra, Maṇipūra, and Ājñā (or the six knots in total) is called Ṣaḍgranthibhedakaḥ (The One Who Pierces the Six Knots).


Shloka 500: Ṣaḍadhvadhvāntavidhvaṁsī (षडध्वध्वान्तविध्वंसी)
पदभुवनवर्णतत्त्वकलामंत्राख्याः षडध्वानः । तच्छोधनकैर्तृत्वेन षडंध्वध्वांतविध्वंसी ॥ ५०० ॥
The six spiritual paths (Ṣaḍadhvan) are: Pada, Bhuvana, Varṇa, Tattva, Kalā, and Mantra. He who destroys the darkness (Ajñāna) of these six paths by purifying them is Ṣaḍadhvadhvāntavidhvaṁsī (The Destroyer of the Darkness of the Six Spiritual Paths).


Shloka 501: Ṣaḍaṅgulamahāhradaḥ (षडगुलमहाह्रदः)
महा-हृदो नाभिरूपो गांभीर्येण षडङ्गुलः । पिचण्डिलत्वाद्यस्यैष षडङ्गुलमहाहदः ॥ ५०१ ॥
He whose great lake (Mahāhrada) is the navel region, which is six Aṅgulas (finger-widths) deep, is Ṣaḍaṅgulamahāhradaḥ (The Great Lake of Six Aṅgulas Depth).










षण्मुखः षण्मुखभ्राता षट्शक्तिपरिवारितः ॥ 
षड्डेरिवर्गविध्वंसी षडूर्मिभयभञ्जनः ॥ १४१ ॥


Shloka 502: Ṣaṇmukhaḥ (षण्मुखः)
षट्संख्याकानि शास्त्राणि मुखे यस्य स षण्मुखः । स भवान् षण्मुखभ्राता सेनानीर्यस्य तेऽनुजः ॥ ५०२ ॥
He who has the six categories of scriptures (or six faces) is Ṣaṇmukhaḥ (the six-faced one, Skanda). You are that Lord, and also the brother of Ṣaṇmukha. Thus, He is Ṣaṇmukhaḥ (The Six-Faced One) and Ṣaṇmukhabhrātā (The Brother of the Six-Faced One).
(Some texts interpret the second name as "He whose brother is Ṣaṇmukha" i.e., Gaṇeśa as the elder brother of Skanda).


Shloka 502: Ṣaṭśaktiparivāritaḥ (षट्शक्तिपरिवारितः)
षडङ्ग-युवतिच्छन्नः षट्शक्तिपरिवारितः ॥
He who is surrounded (Parivārita) by the six Śaktis (powers) is Ṣaṭśaktiparivāritaḥ (The One Attended by Six Powers). (These are identified with the six Aṅgas or six female energies).


Shloka 503: Ṣaḍḍerivargavidhvaṁsī (षड्डेरिवर्गविध्वंसी)
षङ्गैरिवर्गविध्वंसी कामक्रोधौ च मत्सरम् ॥ ५०३ ॥ लोभमोहमदान् हंसि षडिमान्वैरिशब्दितान् ॥
You destroy the six enemies (Ṣaḍḍerivarga) – Kāma (desire), Krodha (anger), Matsara (jealousy), Lobha (greed), Moha (delusion), and Mada (pride). Thus, He is Ṣaḍḍerivargavidhvaṁsī (The Destroyer of the Six Enemies).


Shloka 504: Ṣaḍūrmibhayabhañjanaḥ (षडूर्मिभयभञ्जनः)
अशनायां पिपासां च शोकं मोहं जरां मृतिम् ॥५०४॥ षडूर्मिशब्दितान्निघ्नन् षड्डूर्मिभयभञ्जनः ॥
You also destroy the six waves (Ṣaḍūrmi) – hunger (Aśanāyā), thirst (Pipāsā), sorrow (Śoka), delusion (Moha), old age (Jarā), and death (Mṛti). Thus, He is Ṣaḍūrmibhayabhañjanaḥ (The Shatterer of the Fear of the Six Waves).












षट्तर्कदूरः षट्कर्मनिरतः षद्साश्रयः ॥ 
सप्तपातालचरणः सप्तद्वीपोरुमण्डलः ॥ १४२॥


Shloka 505: Ṣaṭtarkadūraḥ (षट्तर्कदूरः)
षड्दर्शनोदितैस्तकैर्युक्तिभिर्यो न गृह्यते ॥ ५०५ ॥ वाग-तीतः स षटूतर्कदूर इत्यभिधीयते ॥
He who cannot be apprehended by the logics (Tarka) and arguments produced by the six philosophical systems (Ṣaḍdarśana) and who is beyond speech is called Ṣaṭtarkadūraḥ (The One Beyond the Six Schools of Logic).


Shloka 506: Ṣaṭkarmanirataḥ (षट्कर्मनिरतः)
षट्‌कर्मनिरतः सक्तः षट्सु यागादिकर्मसु ॥ ५०६ ॥
He who is devoted (Nirata) to the six prescribed duties (Ṣaṭkarma) – such as sacrifice (Yāga) and others – is Ṣaṭkarmanirataḥ (The One Devoted to the Six Rituals).


Shloka 506: Ṣaḍrasāśrayaḥ (षड्रसाश्रयः)
मधुरादिरसानामप्याधारः षड्रमाश्रयः ॥
He who is the support (Āśraya) of the six tastes (Ṣaḍrasa) – sweet, sour, salty, pungent, bitter, and astringent – is Ṣaḍrasāśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Six Tastes).


Shloka 507: Saptapātālacaraṇaḥ (सप्तपातालचरणः)
अतलाद्या अधोऽधःस्थाः सप्त लोका यदंघ्रिगाः ॥ ५०७ ॥
The seven netherworlds (Pātāla) – Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talātala, Rasātala, Mahātala, and Pātāla – are situated below his feet. Thus, He is Saptapātālacaraṇaḥ (The One for Whom the Seven Netherworlds are His Feet).


Shloka 508: Saptadvīporumaṇḍalaḥ (सप्तद्वीपोरुमण्डलः)
सप्तजम्ब्वादयो द्वीपा यस्य सक्थिभुवर्मुखाः । ऊर्ध्वगाः सप्तगोलोकावधयो यस्य मूर्ध्नि सः ॥ ५०८ ॥ सप्त-पातालचरणः सप्तद्वीपोरुमंडलः ॥
The seven continents (Dvīpa) – Jambu, Plakṣa, Śālmali, Kuśa, Krauñca, Śāka, and Puṣkara – are situated on his thighs. Thus, He is Saptadvīporumaṇḍalaḥ (The One Whose Thigh-Region is the Seven Continents).






सप्तस्वर्लोकमुकुटः सप्तसप्तिवरप्रदः ॥ 
सप्ताङ्गराज्यसुखदः सप्तर्षिगणमण्डितः ॥१४३॥


Shloka 509: Saptasvarlokamukuṭaḥ (सप्तस्वर्लोकमुकुटः)
सप्तस्वर्लोकमुकुट इति नामत्रयेरितः ॥ ५०९ ॥ ताभिर्ज-टाभिः सहितः सप्त इत्युच्यते शिवः ॥
This name is expressed through three (or as a single name). He whose crown (Mukuṭa) consists of the seven heavenly worlds (Svarloka) is Saptasvarlokamukuṭaḥ (The One for Whom the Seven Heavens are the Crest). (The commentary links this to Śiva's matted locks containing the seven worlds.)


Shloka 510: Saptasaptivarapradaḥ (सप्तसप्तिवरप्रदः)
मणिमल्ल मृधे तस्मै भवान् प्रादाद्धयोत्तमम् ॥५१०॥ सूर्याय वा वरं तेन सप्तसप्तिवर-प्रदः ॥
In the fight with Maṇimalla, you granted an excellent horse to (someone). Or, you granted a boon to the sun (Sūrya) for his seven horses. Thus, He is Saptasaptivarapradaḥ (The Bestower of the Boon of Seven Horses).


Shloka 511: Saptāṅgarājyasukhadaḥ (सप्ताङ्गराज्यसुखदः)
स्वाम्यमात्यादिसप्ताङ्गयुगराज्यात् सुखं ददत् ॥ ५११॥ सप्ताङ्गराज्यसुखदः ॥
He who bestows the happiness (Sukha) of a kingdom (Rājya) endowed with the seven constituents (Aṅgas) – the king (Svāmin), minister (Amātya), allies (Suhṛt), treasury (Kośa), army (Daṇḍa), territory (Rāṣṭra), and fortress (Durga) – is Saptāṅgarājyasukhadaḥ (The Bestower of Happiness of a Seven-Limbed Kingdom).


Shloka 512: Saptarṣigaṇamaṇḍitaḥ (सप्तर्षिगणमण्डितः)
सप्तभिः कश्यपादिभिः । गणदेवैश्च सेव्यत्वात् सप्तर्षिगणमंडितः ॥ ५१२ ॥
He who is adorned (Maṇḍita) by the group (Gaṇa) of the seven sages (Saptarṣi) – Kaśyapa, Atri, Vasiṣṭha, Viśvāmitra, Gautama, Jamadagni, and Bharadvāja – and who is served by them is Saptarṣigaṇamaṇḍitaḥ (The One Adorned by the Host of Seven Sages).












सप्तच्छन्दोनिधिः सप्तहोता सप्तस्वराश्रयः ॥ 
सप्ताब्धिकेलिकासारः सप्तमातृनिषेवितः ॥ १४४ ॥


Shloka 513: Saptacchandonidhiḥ (सप्तच्छन्दोनिधिः)
सप्तछन्दोनिधिः पथ्यछन्दः सप्तकसंश्रयः । होत्रादयो स्थावाकांता होतारः सप्त सौमिकाः ॥५१३॥
He who is the repository (Nidhi) of the seven metres (Chandas) – Gāyatrī, Uṣṇik, Anuṣṭubh, Bṛhatī, Paṅkti, Triṣṭubh, and Jagatī – is Saptacchandonidhiḥ (The Repository of the Seven Metres).


Shloka 513: Saptahotā (सप्तहोता)
महाविहर्मुनिर्वापि सप्तहोता तदात्मकः ॥
The seven sacrificers (Hotā) – Hotṛ, Potṛ, Neṣṭṛ, Agnīdhra, Prastotṛ, Subrahmaṇya, and Brāhmaṇācchaṁsin – or the great sage (Mahāvira). He who is the embodiment of these is Saptahotā (The Sevenfold Sacrificer / The Seven Hotā Priests).


Shloka 514: Saptasvarāśrayaḥ (सप्तस्वराश्रयः)
षड्जादिस्वरवान्नाद इति सप्तस्वराश्रयः ॥ ५१४॥
He who possesses the seven musical notes (Svara) – Ṣaḍja, Ṛṣabha, Gāndhāra, Madhyama, Pañcama, Dhaivata, and Niṣāda – and is the support of Nāda (primordial sound) is Saptasvarāśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Seven Notes).


Shloka 514: Saptābdhikelikāsāraḥ (सप्ताब्धिकेलिकासारः)
सप्ताब्धिकेलिकासारो यस्य क्रीडासरोऽर्णवः ॥
He whose playground (Kelikāsāra) or sporting lake is the seven oceans (Saptābdhi) – of salt, sugarcane juice, wine, ghee, curd, milk, and sweet water – is Saptābdhikelikāsāraḥ (The One Whose Pleasure-Lake is the Seven Oceans).


Shloka 515: Saptamātṛniṣevitaḥ (सप्तमातृनिषेवितः)
ब्राहृयादिमातृसेव्यत्वात् सप्तमातृनिषेवितः ॥ ५१५ ॥
He who is served (Niṣevita) by the seven Mothers (Saptamātṛ) – Brāhmī, Māheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaiṣṇavī, Vārāhī, Indrāṇī, and Cāmuṇḍā – is Saptamātṛniṣevitaḥ (The One Attended by the Seven Mothers).








सप्तच्छन्दोमोदमदः सप्तच्छन्दोमखप्रभुः ॥ 
अष्टमूर्तिध्येयमूर्तिरष्टप्रकृतिकारणम् ॥ १४५ ॥


Shloka 516: Saptacchandomodamadaḥ (सप्तच्छन्दोमोदमदः)
पथ्यानि सप्तच्छन्दांसि तेषां मोदेन यो मदः । तेनैव घूर्ण-नात् सप्तच्छन्दोमोदमदः स्मृतः ॥ ५१६॥
The seven metres (Chanda) are the pathways. He whose intoxication (Mada) arises from the delight (Moda) of those metres, and by which he is made to reel, is called Saptacchandomodamadaḥ (The One Intoxicated by the Delight of the Seven Metres).


Shloka 516: Saptacchandomakhaprabhuḥ (सप्तच्छन्दोमखप्रभुः)
पेथ्याद्यक्रतुपूज्यत्वात् सप्तच्छन्दोमखप्रभुः ॥
Because he is worshipped in sacrifices (Makha) such as the Pathyā (Soma sacrifice) and others that involve the seven metres, he is Saptacchandomakhaprabhuḥ (The Lord of the Sacrifice of the Seven Metres).


Shloka 517: Aṣṭamūrtidhyeyamūrtiḥ (अष्टमूर्तिध्येयमूर्तिः)
अष्टमूर्तिशिवस्तेन यन्मूर्ति-हृदि चिन्त्यते ॥ ५१७ ॥ सोऽष्टमूर्तिध्र्येयमूर्तिध्र्येयो वा पृथगष्टभिः ॥
Śiva has eight forms (Aṣṭamūrti). The form (Mūrti) of you that is meditated upon in the heart is Aṣṭamūrtidhyeyamūrtiḥ (The One Whose Meditated Form Consists of Eight Forms).


Shloka 518: Aṣṭaprakṛtikāraṇam (अष्टप्रकृतिकारणम्)
प्रकृत्यहङ्कृतिमहत्पञ्चतन्मात्रसंज्ञिताः ॥ ५१८ ॥ प्रकृतीर्यो जनयति सोऽष्टप्रकृतिकारणम् ॥
He who generates the eight Prakṛtis (primordial elements) – Prakṛti (nature), Ahaṅkāra (ego), Mahat (intellect), and the five Tanmātras (subtle elements: sound, touch, form, taste, smell) – is Aṣṭaprakṛtikāraṇam (The Cause of the Eightfold Primordial Nature).


















अष्टाङ्गयोगफल भूरष्टपत्राम्बुजासनः ॥
अष्टशक्तिसमृद्धश्रीरष्टैश्वर्यप्रदायकः ॥ १४६ ॥


Shloka 519: Aṣṭāṅgayogaphalabhūḥ (अष्टाङ्गयोगफल भूः)
अष्टाङ्गयोगफलभूः समाध्यन्तैर्यमादिभिः ॥ ५१९ ॥ अङ्गैर्युक्तस्य हृद्वृत्तिरोधस्य फलदायकः ॥
He who is the ground (Bhūḥ) or bestower of the fruit (Phala) of the eight-limbed Yoga (Aṣṭāṅga Yoga) — which consists of Yama, Niyama, Āsana, Prāṇāyāma, Pratyāhāra, Dhāraṇā, Dhyāna, and Samādhi — and who grants the fruit of restraining the modifications of the heart to one endowed with these limbs, is Aṣṭāṅgayogaphalabhūḥ (The Ground/Bestower of the Fruit of Eight-Limbed Yoga).


Shloka 520: Aṣṭapatrāmabujāsanaḥ (अष्टपत्राम्बुजासनः)
पङ्कजेऽष्टदले तिष्ठन् अष्टपत्राम्बुजासनः ॥ ५२० ॥
He who is seated (Āsanaḥ) on the lotus (Ambuja) with eight petals (Aṣṭapatra) — the heart-lotus — is Aṣṭapatrāmabujāsanaḥ (The One Seated on the Eight-Petaled Lotus).


Shloka 521: Aṣṭaśaktisamṛddhaśrīḥ (अष्टशक्तिसमृद्धश्रीः)
अष्टशक्तिसमृद्ध-श्रीर्दलाष्टकनिवासिना । तीब्रादिशक्त्यष्टकेन परितः सेवितो भवान् ।। ५२१ ॥
He whose glory (Śrī) is enriched (Samṛddha) by the eight Śaktis (powers) — such as Tīvrā and others — who reside in the eight petals and who serve (him) from all sides, is Aṣṭaśaktisamṛddhaśrīḥ (The One Whose Glory is Enriched by the Eight Powers).


Conclusion of the Ninth Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृत्तौ । 
गणेशनामसाहस्रखद्योते नवमं शतम् ॥ ९०० ॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), which is a light on the thousand names of Gaṇeśa, composed by Bhāskara, also known as Agnicit, the ninth hundred is completed.


Shloka 521: Aṣṭaiśvaryapradāyakaḥ (अष्टैश्वर्यप्रदायकः)
दाताऽणिमादिसिद्धीनामष्टैश्वर्यप्रदायकः ॥
He who is the giver of the eight great lordly powers (Aṣṭaiśvarya) — Aṇimā (minuteness), Laghimā (lightness), Prāpti (attainment), Prākāmya (irresistible will), Mahimā (greatness), Īśitva (lordship), Vaśitva (control), and Kāmāvasāyitā (suppression of desires) — is Aṣṭaiśvaryapradāyakaḥ (The Bestower of the Eight Lordly Powers).


अष्टपीठोपपीठ श्रीरष्टमातृसमावृतः ॥ 
अष्टभैरवसेव्योऽष्टवसुवन्द्योऽष्टमूर्तिभृत् ॥ १४७ ॥


Shloka 522: Aṣṭapīṭhopapīṭhaśrīḥ (अष्टपीठोपपीठ श्रीः)
अष्टपीठोपपीठश्रीर्महापीठोपपीठयोः ॥ ५२२॥ पुराणे स्फुटयोर्भूरिसङ्ख्ययोः संपदात्मकः॥
The eight great sacred seats (Mahāpīṭhas) and their subordinate seats (Upapīṭhas) are clearly described in the Purāṇas. He who is the embodiment of the glory (Śrī) and prosperity of these is Aṣṭapīṭhopapīṭhaśrīḥ (The Glory of the Eight Pīṭhas and Upapīṭhas).


Shloka 523: Aṣṭamātṛsamāvṛtaḥ (अष्टमातृसमावृतः)
अष्टामी तु महालक्ष्मीर्बा-ह्याद्याः सप्त मातरः ॥ ५२३ ॥ आवृता यस्य तिष्ठन्ति सोऽ-ष्टमातृसमावृतः॥
The eight Mothers (Mātṛs): the eighth (aṣṭamī) is Mahālakṣmī, and the other seven (sapta mātaraḥ) are the outer ones (Brāhmī, Māheśvarī, etc.). He who is surrounded (Samāvṛta) by them is Aṣṭamātṛsamāvṛtaḥ (The One Encompassed by the Eight Mothers).


Shloka 524: Aṣṭabhairavasevyaḥ (अष्टभैरवसेव्यः)
अष्टभैरवसेव्योऽष्टौ भैरवा बटुकादयः ॥ ५२४ ॥ तैः सेव्यो॥
The eight Bhairavas – such as Batuka (Bhairava), and others (Asitāṅga, Ruru, Caṇḍa, Krodha, Unmatta, Kapāla, and Bhīṣaṇa) – are his servants. He who is served (Sevya) by them is Aṣṭabhairavasevyaḥ (The One Served by the Eight Bhairavas).


Shloka 525: Aṣṭavasuvandyaḥ (अष्टवसुवन्द्यः)
वसवोऽष्टौ तु प्रभासांता धरादयः । तैर्वन्दितो भवानष्टवसुवंद्यः प्रकीर्तितः ॥ ५२५ ॥
The eight Vasus – Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Āpa, Anala, Anila, Pratyūṣa, and Prabhāsa – are the bestowers of wealth. He who is praised (Vandya) by them is proclaimed as Aṣṭavasuvandyaḥ (The One Worshipped by the Eight Vasus).


Shloka 525: Aṣṭamūrtibhṛt (अष्टमूर्तिभृत्)
भूतानि पुण्यवन्तौ स्वरे तद्रूपोऽष्टमूर्तिभृत् ॥
He who bears (Bhṛt) the eight forms (Aṣṭamūrti) – the five elements (earth, water, fire, air, ether), the sun, the moon, and the sacrificer (or soul) – is Aṣṭamūrtibhṛt (The Bearer of the Eight Forms).






अष्टचक्रस्फुरन्मूर्तिरष्टद्रव्यहविःप्रियः ॥ 
नवनागासनाध्यासी नवनिध्यनुशासिता ॥१४८॥


Shloka 526: Aṣṭacakrasphuranmūrtiḥ (अष्टचक्रस्फुरन्मूर्तिः)
अष्टचक्रा नवद्वारा देवानां पूरिति श्रुतेः ॥ ५२६ ॥ यंत्रे तिष्ठन्नष्टचक्रस्फुरन्मूर्तिरिति स्मृतः ॥
According to the Śruti, "The city of the gods has eight wheels and nine gates." He who resides in that body-yantra (mystical diagram) and whose form radiates (Sphuran) with the eight cakras (energy centers) is remembered as Aṣṭacakrasphuranmūrtiḥ (The One Whose Form Radiates with the Eight Wheels/Cakras).


Shloka 527: Aṣṭadravyahaviḥpriyaḥ (अष्टद्रव्यहविःप्रियः)
तिलेषु सक्तुचिपिटः कदल्यो मोदकास्तिलाः ॥ ५२७ ॥ नारिकेलघृताक्तानीत्यष्टद्रव्यहविः प्रियः ॥
The eight substances (Aṣṭadravya) used as oblations (Havis) are: sesame seeds, parched grain, flattened rice, plantain, Modakas, sesame cakes, coconut, and ghee (or items mixed with ghee). He who is fond of these eight oblations is Aṣṭadravyahaviḥpriyaḥ (The One Fond of the Eight Oblatory Substances).


Shloka 528: Navanāgāsanādhyāsī (नवनागासनाध्यासी)
नवनागासनाध्यासी नागैः कर्कोटका-दिभिः ॥ ५२८ ॥ पत्रेष्वष्टसु मध्ये च यस्यासनमधिष्ठितम् ॥
The nine serpents (Navanāga) – such as Karkoṭaka, Vāsuki, Śeṣa, etc. – serve as a couch or seat. He who is seated upon (Adhyāsī) that seat (Āsana) formed by the eight petals (of the lotus) and the pericarp in the middle, is Navanāgāsanādhyāsī (The One Seated on the Throne of Nine Serpents).


Shloka 529: Navanidhyanuśāsitā (नवनिध्यनुशासिता)
शासच्छंखमुकुंदादीन् नवनिध्यनुशासिता ॥ ५२९ ॥
He who rules over (Anuśāsitā) the nine treasures (Navanidhi) – such as Śaṅkha, Mukunda, Mahāpadma, Nīla, Makara, Kacchapa, Padma, Kunda, and Kharva – and commands them, is Navanidhyanuśāsitā (The Ruler of the Nine Treasures).














नवद्वारपुराधारो नवाधारनिकेतनः ॥ 
नवनारायणस्तुत्यो नवदुर्गानिषेवितः ॥१४९॥


Shloka 530: Navadvārapurādhāraḥ (नवद्वारपुराधारः)
नवद्वार पुराधारो जीवरूपेण देहभृत् । कुलाकुलसहस्रारे मूलाद्याज्ञांतिमानि षट् ॥ ५३० ॥
The body (Pura) has nine gates (Navadvāra): two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, mouth, anus, and genitals. He who is the support (Ādhāra) of this city (Pura) in the form of the individual soul (Jīva) is Navadvārapurādhāraḥ (The Supporter of the Nine-Gated City).


Shloka 530: Navādhāraniketanaḥ (नवाधारनिकेतनः)
लंबिकेति नवस्वास्से नवा-धारनिकेतनः ॥
He whose abode (Niketana) is in the nine supports (Navādhāra) — the six cakras (Mūlādhāra, Svādhiṣṭhāna, Maṇipūra, Anāhata, Viśuddhi, Ājñā) plus Lāmbikā (possibly the Ājñā's end), and two others (perhaps Sahasrāra and another) — is Navādhāraniketanaḥ (The One Whose Abode is the Nine Supports).


Shloka 531-532: Navanārāyaṇastutyaḥ (नवनारायणस्तुत्यः)
धर्माद्यनन्तबदरी रूपशङ्करसुन्दरैः ॥५३१॥ लक्ष्म्या साध्येनोपपदैर्युक्ता नारायणा नव । नवनारायणस्तुत्यस्तैः स्तुत्यः स भवानिति ॥
The nine Nārāyaṇas (Nav Nārāyaṇa) are: Dharma (Yama), Ananta (Śeṣa), Badarī, Rūpa, Śaṅkara, Sundara, Lakṣmī, Sādhya, and Upapada (?). He who is praised (Stutya) by these nine Nārāyaṇas is Navanārāyaṇastutyaḥ (The One Praised by the Nine Nārāyaṇas).


Shloka 533: Navadurgāniṣevitaḥ (नवदुर्गानिषेवितः)
दुर्गाया नवकूष्माण्ड-चन्द्रघण्टादयोऽभिधाः । प्रसिद्धास्ताभिरीड्यत्वान्नवदुर्गा-निषेवितः ॥ ५३३ ॥
The nine Durgās (Navadurgā) are well-known: Śailaputrī, Brahmacāriṇī, Chandraghaṇṭā, Kūṣmāṇḍā, Skandamātā, Kātyāyanī, Kālarātrī, Mahāgaurī, and Siddhidātrī. He who is served (Niṣevita) by these nine Durgās is Navadurgāniṣevitaḥ (The One Served by the Nine Durgās).












नवनाथमहानाथो नवनागविभूषणः ॥ 
नवरत्नविचित्राङ्गो नवशक्तिशिरोधृतः ॥१५०॥


Shloka 534: Navanāthamahānāthaḥ (नवनाथमहानाथः)
ज्ञानप्रकाशसत्यानन्द विमर्शस्वभावसुभगानाम् । नवनाथ-महानाथो नाथत्वात्प्रतिभपूर्णयोश्च भवान् ॥ ५३४ ॥
The nine Nāthas (Masters) are: Jñāna, Prakāśa, Satya, Ānanda, Vimarśa, Svabhāva, Subhaga, and two others (?). He who is the great master (Mahānātha) of these nine Nāthas, because of his lordship over them and his fullness of brilliance, is Navanāthamahānāthaḥ (The Great Lord of the Nine Lords).


Shloka 534: Navanāgavibhūṣaṇaḥ (नवनागविभूषणः)
कर्कोटकादिमण्ड्यत्वान्नवनागविभूषणः ॥ ५३५ ॥
He who is adorned (Vibhūṣaṇa) by the nine serpents (Navanāga) such as Karkoṭaka, Vāsuki, Śeṣa, etc., wearing them as ornaments, is Navanāgavibhūṣaṇaḥ (The One Adorned with Nine Serpents).


Shloka 535: Navaratnavicitrāṅgaḥ (नवरत्नविचित्राङ्गः)
नवरत्नविचि-त्राङ्गो वज्रमुक्तादिभूषितः ॥
He whose limbs (Aṅga) are variegated (Vicitra) with the nine jewels (Navaratna) — such as Vajra (diamond), Muktā (pearl), Ruby, Emerald, Sapphire, Topaz, Coral, Cat's eye, and Coral (or others) — is Navaratnavicitrāṅgaḥ (The One with Limbs Adorned with Nine Jewels).


Shloka 535: Navaśaktiśirodhṛtaḥ (नवशक्तिशिरोधृतः)
तीब्राद्यानवते पीठे नवशक्तिशिरोधृतः ॥
The nine Śaktis (powers) reside in the nine seats (Pīṭha). He who is borne on the head (Śirodhṛta) by these nine Śaktis (as a crest) is Navaśaktiśirodhṛtaḥ (The One Who is the Head-Ornament of the Nine Powers).
















दशात्मको दशभुजो दशदिक्पतिवन्दितः ॥ 
दशाध्यायो दशप्राणो दशेन्द्रियनियामकः ॥ १५१ ॥


Shloka 536: Daśātmakaḥ (दशात्मकः)
दिशो दश तदात्मा यो व्यापकः स दशात्मकः ॥ ५३६ ॥
He who is the Self (Ātmā) of the ten directions (Daśa Diś) — pervading East, South-East, South, South-West, West, North-West, North, North-East, Up, and Down — is Daśātmakaḥ (The One Whose Self is the Ten Directions).


Shloka 536: Daśabhujaḥ (दशभुजः)
महागणपतेर्मूर्त्या भवान् दशभुजोऽभवत् ॥
You, in the form of Mahāgaṇapati, possess ten arms. Thus, He is Daśabhujaḥ (The Ten-Armed One).


Shloka 537: Daśadikpativanditaḥ (दशदिक्पतिवन्दितः)
इन्द्रादयोऽष्टौ दिक्पाला ऊर्ध्वाधोदिगधीश्वरौ ॥ ५३७ ॥ क्रमाद्ब्रह्मानन्त इति दशदिक्पतिवन्दितः ॥
The eight guardians of the directions (Dikpālas) are: Indra (East), Agni (South-East), Yama (South), Nirṛti (South-West), Varuṇa (West), Vāyu (North-West), Kubera (North), and Īśāna (North-East). Added to the lords of the directions Up (Brahmā) and Down (Ananta), these are the ten Dikpatis. He who is praised (Vandita) by these ten guardians is Daśadikpativanditaḥ (The One Worshipped by the Ten Guardians of the Directions).


Shloka 538: Daśādhyāyaḥ (दशाध्यायः)
दशाध्यायश्चतुर्वेदी षडङ्गय-ध्ययनान्मतः ॥ ५३८ ॥
He who is the master of the four Vedas and the six Vedāṅgas, together comprising ten chapters (or subjects) of study, is considered Daśādhyāyaḥ (The One of Ten Chapters / The Master of the Tenfold Scripture).


Shloka 538: Daśaprāṇaḥ (दशप्राणः)
दशप्राणः पंचपंचप्राणनागादिरूपवान् ॥
He who possesses the ten vital airs (Daśaprāṇa): the five primary ones (Prāṇa, Apāna, Samāna, Udāna, Vyāna) and the five secondary ones (Nāga, Kūrma, Kṛkara, Devadatta, Dhanañjaya). Thus, He is Daśaprāṇaḥ (The One with Ten Vital Airs).




Shloka 539: Daśendriyaniyāmakaḥ (दशेन्द्रियनियामकः)
वागाद्यात्मत्वगाद्यात्मदशेन्द्रियनियामकः ॥ ५३९ ॥
He is the controller (Niyāmaka) of the ten Indriyas (senses): five Jñānendriyas (organs of knowledge: speech, hands, feet, anus, genitals) and five Karmendriyas (organs of action: ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose). Thus, He is Daśendriyaniyāmakaḥ (The Regulator of the Ten Senses).


दशाक्षरमहामन्त्रो दशाशाव्यापिविग्रहः ॥ 
एकादशादिभी रुद्रैः स्तुत एकादशाक्षरः ॥ १५२ ॥


Shloka 540: Daśākṣaramahāmantraḥ (दशाक्षरमहामन्त्रः)
उक्तो हस्तिपिशाचीति मन्त्राश्चेत्प्रणवादिमः। दशाक्षर-महामन्त्रस्त्वदैवत्यस्त्वमेव सः ॥ ५४० ॥
The mantra beginning with Praṇava (Oṁ) known as the Hastipiśācī (or other ten-syllabled mantras consisting of ten syllables such as "Oṁ Gaṁ Gaṇapataye Namaḥ") is the great ten-syllabled mantra (Daśākṣaramahāmantra). Its deity is you, and you alone are that mantra. Thus, He is Daśākṣaramahāmantraḥ (The Great Ten-Syllabled Mantra).


Shloka 540: Daśāśāvyāpivigrahaḥ (दशाशाव्यापिविग्रहः)
दशदिग्व्यापि-देहत्वाद्दशाशाव्यापिविग्रहः ॥ ५४१ ॥
Because his form (Vigraha) pervades (Vyāpi) the ten directions (Daśāśā), he is Daśāśāvyāpivigrahaḥ (The One Whose Form Pervades the Ten Directions).


Shloka 541: Ekādaśādibhirudraiḥ Stutaḥ (एकादशादिभी रुद्रैः स्तुतः)
रुद्रा एकादशारभ्य सह-स्राणि सहस्रशः ॥ ५४१ ॥ एकादशादिभी रुद्रैः स्तुतस्तैः सकलैर्नुतः ॥
The Rudras, beginning from the eleven (Ekādaśa) and up to thousands upon thousands, praise him. He who is praised (Stuta) by all these Rudras (from the eleven upwards) is Ekādaśādibhirudraiḥ Stutaḥ (The One Praised by the Eleven and Other Rudras).


Shloka 542: Ekādaśākṣaraḥ (एकादशाक्षरः)
तारशक्ती विघ्नशक्ती वशमानय उद्वयम् ॥५४२॥ एकादशाक्षरो मन्त्रस्त्वदैवत्यस्त्वमेव सः ॥
The eleven-syllabled mantra (Ekādaśākṣara), such as "Oṁ Gaṁ Gaṇapataye Namaḥ" (eleven syllables) or other mantras of eleven syllables, has you as its deity, and you are that mantra. Thus, He is Ekādaśākṣaraḥ (The One Who is the Eleven-Syllabled Mantra).




द्वादशोद्दण्डदोर्दण्डो द्वादशान्तनिकेतनः ॥ 
त्रयोदशभिधाभिन्नविश्वेदेवाधिदैवतम् ॥१५३॥


Shloka 543: Dvādaśoddaṇḍadordaṇḍaḥ (द्वादशोद्दण्डदोर्दण्डः)
द्वादशो इंडदोर्दडो गाडैर्द्वादशभिर्भुजैः ॥ ५४३ ॥
He who possesses twelve mighty (Uddaṇḍa) arm-like rods (Dordaṇḍa) — i.e., twelve powerful arms — is Dvādaśoddaṇḍadordaṇḍaḥ (The One with Twelve Uplifted Strong Arms).


Shloka 544: Dvādaśāntaniketanaḥ (द्वादशान्तनिकेतनः)
द्वादशांतं ललाटोवं ब्रह्मरंध्रावसानकम् । प्रकटो योगिनां तत्र द्वाद-शांतनिकेतनः ॥ ५४४ ॥
He whose abode (Niketana) is the Dvādaśānta (the twelfth end) — which is the end of the Brahma-randhra (aperture of Brahman) located at the forehead — and who manifests there to the yogis, is Dvādaśāntaniketanaḥ (The One Whose Abode is the Twelfth End).


Shloka 545: Trayodaśābhidhābhinna-viśvedevādhidaivatam (त्रयोदशभिधाभिन्नविश्वेदेवाधिदैवतम्)
पुरूरवप्रभृतिभिः पूज्यस्त्वं विश्वदै-वतैः । त्रयोदशाभिधाभिन्नविश्वेदेवाधिदैवतम् ॥
You are worshipped by the Viśvedevas (all the gods) who are thirteen in number according to their distinct names. You are the super-deity (Adhidaivata) of the Viśvedevas. Thus, He is Trayodaśābhidhābhinna-viśvedevādhidaivatam (The Presiding Deity of the Viśvedevas, Who are Distinguished by Thirteen Names).


चतुर्दशेन्द्रवरदश्चतुर्दशमनुप्रभुः । 
चतुर्दशादिविद्याढ्यश्चतुर्दशजगत्प्रभुः ॥ १५४ ॥


Shloka 546: Caturdaśendravaradaḥ (चतुर्दशेन्द्रवरदः)
चतुर्दशानामिन्द्राणां मनूनां वरदोऽधिपः । चतुर्दशेंद्र-वरदश्चतुर्दशमनुप्रभुः ॥ ५४६ ॥
He is the bestower of boons (Varada) to the fourteen Indras (Caturdaśa Indra), who rule over the fourteen Manvantaras. Thus, He is Caturdaśendravaradaḥ (The Bestower of Boons to the Fourteen Indras).








Shloka 546: Caturdaśamanuprabhuḥ (चतुर्दशमनुप्रभुः)
He is also the lord (Prabhu) of the fourteen Manus (Caturdaśa Manu) — Svayambhuva, Svarociṣa, Auttami, Tāmasa, Raivata, Cākṣuṣa, Vaivasvata, Sāvarṇi, Dakṣasāvarṇi, Brahma-sāvarṇi, Dharma-sāvarṇi, Rudra-sāvarṇi, Deva-sāvarṇi, and Indra-sāvarṇi. Thus, He is Caturdaśamanuprabhuḥ (The Lord of the Fourteen Manus).


Shloka 547: Caturdaśādividyāḍhyaḥ (चतुर्दशादिविद्याढ्यः)
चतुर्दशादिविद्याख्यो वेदाद्याः सोपवेदकाः । चतुर्दशाष्ट दश च प्रसिद्धास्तासु पण्डितः ॥ ५४७॥
He is endowed with the fourteen (Caturdaśa) principal branches of knowledge (Vidyā) — the four Vedas (Ṛg, Yajus, Sāma, Atharva), the six Vedāṅgas (Śikṣā, Kalpa, Vyākaraṇa, Nirukta, Chandas, Jyotiṣa), and the four Upavedas (Āyurveda, Dhanurveda, Gandharvaveda, Sthāpatyaveda). Thus, He is Caturdaśādividyāḍhyaḥ (The One Possessing the Fourteen Sciences).


Shloka 547: Caturdaśajagatprabhuḥ (चतुर्दशजगत्प्रभुः)
आपातालादा सत्याच्चतुर्दशजगत्प्रभुः ॥
He is the lord (Prabhu) of the fourteen worlds (Caturdaśa Jagat) — the seven upper worlds (Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Svaḥ, Mahaḥ, Janaḥ, Tapaḥ, Satya) and the seven lower worlds (Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Rasātala, Talātala, Mahātala, Pātāla). Thus, He is Caturdaśajagatprabhuḥ (The Lord of the Fourteen Worlds).


सामपञ्चदशः पञ्चदशीशीतांशुनिर्मलः । 
षोडशाधारनिलयः षोडशस्वरमातृकः॥ १५५ ॥


Shloka 548: Sāmapañcadaśaḥ (सामपञ्चदशः)
यत्पंचदशभिः स्तोमै राज्यस्तोत्रचतुष्टयम् ॥ ५४८ ॥ साम-युक्तं तदात्मत्वात् सामपंचदशो भवान् ॥
The four royal hymns (Rājya-stotra) are connected with the fifteen Stomas (Sāma chants). Because you are the embodiment of that Sāma (Veda) with its fifteen-fold divisions, you are Sāmapañcadaśaḥ (The Fifteenfold Sāmaveda / One with Fifteen Sāma Chants).


Shloka 549: Pañcadaśīśītāṁśunirmalaḥ (पञ्चदशीशीतांशुनिर्मलः)
स्वच्छो राकें-दुवत्पंचदशीशीतांशुनिर्मलः ॥ ५४९ ॥
You are as spotless (Nirmala) as the fifteen-day-old full moon (Pañcadaśī) which is the cool-rayed one (Śītāṁśu). Thus, He is Pañcadaśīśītāṁśunirmalaḥ (The One as Spotless as the Fifteen-Day-Old Moon).




Shloka 550: Ṣoḍaśādhāranilayaḥ (षोडशाधारनिलयः)
षोडशाधारनिल-योऽस्यंतश्चक्रेषु संस्थितः । षडाधारनवाधारषोडशाधारलक्षणम् ॥ ५५० ॥ वेद्यं गुरुमुखादेवेत्यागमे शिवशासनम् ॥
He whose abode (Nilaya) is in the sixteen supports (Ṣoḍaśādhāra) — which are the six cakras (Mūlādhāra, Svādhiṣṭhāna, Maṇipūra, Anāhata, Viśuddhi, Ājñā) plus ten others (the four petals of Ājñā and others — described as the sixteen Ādhāras).


Shloka 551: Ṣoḍaśasvaramātṛkaḥ (षोडशस्वरमातृकः)
स्वरान्मिमीते मानेन षोडशखरमातृकः ॥ ५५१ ॥
He who is the creator or measurer of the sixteen vowels (Ṣoḍaśa Svara) — a, ā, i, ī, u, ū, ṛ, ṝ, ḷ, ḹ, e, ai, o, au, aṁ, aḥ — is the mother (Mātṛka) of these sixteen sounds. Thus, He is Ṣoḍaśasvaramātṛkaḥ (The Source of the Sixteen Vowels).


षोडशांतपदावासः षोडशेन्दुकलात्मकः ॥ 
कलासप्तदशी सप्तदशः सप्तदशाक्षरः ॥ १५६॥


Shloka 552: Ṣoḍaśāntapadāvāsaḥ (षोडशांतपदावासः)
षोडशांतपदावसो ब्रह्मरंध्राजकर्णिकाम् ॥ ५५२ ॥ आरभ्योर्ध्व षोडशांत मुन्मन्याः परतः स्थितः ॥
He whose dwelling place (Āvāsa) is the state beyond the sixteenth (Ṣoḍaśānta) — which is the end of the sixteen (starting from the pericarp of the thousand-petaled lotus at the Brahma-randhra and extending above to the state beyond the mind) — is Ṣoḍaśāntapadāvāsaḥ (The One Whose Abode is the Limit of the Sixteenth).


Shloka 553: Ṣoḍaśendukalātmakaḥ (षोडशेन्दुकलात्मकः)
अमृता मानि-नीत्यादिषोडशेंदुकलात्मकः ॥ ५५३ ॥
He who is the embodiment (Ātmaka) of the sixteen digits (Kalā) of the moon (Indu) — Amṛtā, Māninī, and others — is Ṣoḍaśendukalātmakaḥ (The One Whose Self is the Sixteen Moon-Digits).


Shloka 554: Kalāsaptadaśī (कलासप्तदशी)
कला सप्तदशी नाम प्रसिद्धा त्रिपुरागमे । त्रयोदशाक्षरी तुर्यविद्याख्या त्वं तदात्मकः ॥ ५५४ ॥
In the Tripurāgama, the seventeenth digit (Kalāsaptadaśī) is well-known as the thirteenth syllable and is called the Turīya Vidyā. You are the embodiment of that. Thus, He is Kalāsaptadaśī (The Seventeenth Digit).


Shloka 554: Saptadaśaḥ (सप्तदशः)
यत्तु सप्तदशस्तोमं पृष्ठस्तोत्रचतुष्टयम् । सामयुक्तं तदात्मत्वाद्भवान् सप्तदशो मतः ॥ ५५५ ॥
The Sāma Veda, combined with the four Pṛṣṭha Stotras (Vāk, Praṣṭha, Āśvina, and others), constitutes the seventeen-fold Stoma (Saptadaśa Stoma). You are the embodiment of that; therefore, you are considered Saptadaśaḥ (The Seventeenfold One).


Shloka 554: Saptadaśākṣaraḥ (सप्तदशाक्षरः)
वौषडाश्रावययजास्तु श्रौषडूयेयजामहे । इति त्वं आप्नुषे यज्ञानिति सप्तदशाक्षरः ॥
The mantra containing seventeen syllables, such as "Vauṣaṭ, Āśrāvaya, Yajā, etc., Śrauṣaṭ, Yajāmahe" — by which you attain the sacrifices — you are that. Thus, He is Saptadaśākṣaraḥ (The Seventeen-Syllabled Mantra).


अष्टादशद्वीपपतिरष्टादशपुराणकृत् ॥ 
अष्टादशौषधीसृष्टिरष्टादशविधिः स्मृतः ॥ १५७ ॥


Shloka 556: Aṣṭādaśadvīpapatiḥ (अष्टादशद्वीपपतिः)
अष्टादशद्वीपपतिः सप्तैकादशसंख्ययोः ॥ ५५६ ॥ द्वीपोपद्वीपयोजैबुसिंहलाद्योरधीश्वरः ॥
He is the lord (Pati) of the eighteen continents (Aṣṭādaśadvīpa) — the seven principal continents (Jambu, Plakṣa, Śālmali, Kuśa, Krauñca, Śāka, Puṣkara) and the eleven subordinate islands (Upadvīpa) such as Jaiyabu, Siṃhala, etc. Thus, He is Aṣṭādaśadvīpapatiḥ (The Lord of the Eighteen Continents).


Shloka 557: Aṣṭādaśapurāṇakṛt (अष्टादशपुराणकृत्)
मात्स्यकौर्मब्राह्मपाद्मा-द्यष्टादशपुराणकृत् ॥ ५५७ ॥
He is the creator (Kṛt) of the eighteen Purāṇas (Aṣṭādaśa Purāṇa): Matsya, Kūrma, Brahmāṇḍa, Padma, Viṣṇu, Vāyu, Bhāgavata, Nārada, Mārkaṇḍeya, Agni, Bhaviṣya, Brahmavaivarta, Liṅga, Varāha, Skanda, Vāmana, Kālikā, and Śiva. Thus, He is Aṣṭādaśapurāṇakṛt (The Author of the Eighteen Purāṇas).


Shloka 558: Aṣṭādaśauṣadhīsṛṣṭiḥ (अष्टादशौषधीसृष्टिः)
अष्टादशौषधीसृष्टिर्धान्य-सृष्टिविचक्षणः । मुख्यधान्योपधान्यानि तेषु द्वादश षट् क्रमात् ॥ ५५८ ॥
He is the creator (Sṛṣṭiḥ) of the eighteen medicinal herbs (Aṣṭādaśauṣadhī) and the grains. The principal grains are twelve, and the secondary grains are six. Thus, He is Aṣṭādaśauṣadhīsṛṣṭiḥ (The Creator of the Eighteen Herbs).


Shloka 559: Aṣṭādaśavidhiḥ (अष्टादशविधिः)
विधयो पूर्वनियमपरिसंख्याः पृथक् पृथक् । प्रयोगविनियोगे त्याख्याभिर्नव ते द्विधा ॥ ५५९ ॥ गुण-प्रधानभेदादित्यष्टादशविधिः स्मृतः ॥
The Vidhis (ritual injunctions) are classified as: Pūrva (primary), Niyama (restrictions), Parisankhyā (exclusive alternatives), etc. According to differences in application and usage, there are nine types, which are further divided into two (principal and secondary) based on being chief or subordinate. Thus, the total is eighteen. He who embodies these is remembered as Aṣṭādaśavidhiḥ (The One Who is the Eighteenfold Ritual Injunction).


अष्टादशलिपिव्यष्टिसमष्टिज्ञानकोविदः ॥ 
एकविंशः पुमानेकविंशत्यंगुलिपल्लवः ॥१५८॥


Shloka 560-561: Aṣṭādaśalipivyaṣṭisamaṣṭijñānakovidaḥ (अष्टादशलिपिव्यष्टिसमष्टिज्ञानकोविदः)
नागरद्राविडांध्राद्याः स्वतंत्रा लिपयो भुवि ॥ ५६०॥ अष्टा-दश तदंशोत्था अवान्तरभिदा अपि । देशभेदेन बहवस्त-ज्ज्ञाने त्वं विचक्षणः ॥ ५६१ ॥ अष्टादशलिपिव्यष्टिस-मष्टिज्ञानकोविदः ॥
The independent scripts (Lipis) in the world — Nāgarī, Drāviḍī, Āndhrī, etc. — are eighteen (Aṣṭādaśa). Their subdivisions (Vyasti) and the totality of scripts (Samaṣṭi) are known to you. You are expert in this knowledge. Thus, He is Aṣṭādaśalipivyaṣṭisamaṣṭijñānakovidaḥ (The One Expert in the Knowledge of the Eighteen Scripts, Their Individual Forms, and Their Collective Whole).


Shloka 562-563: Ekaviṁśaḥ Pumān (एकविंशः पुमान्)
दशहस्त्या अङ्गुलयः पद्मा अंगुलयो दश ॥ ५६२ ॥ एकविंशः पुमानात्मेत्यामनंत्यैतरेयिणः ॥
Ten fingers on the hands (Daśahastya Aṅgulayaḥ) and ten toes on the feet (Padmā Aṅgulayaḥ) make twenty. The Self (Ātmā) is the twenty-first. As the Aitareya Upaniṣad declares, "The Puruṣa (Pumān) is the twenty-first." Thus, He is Ekaviṁśaḥ Pumān (The Twenty-First Person/Puruṣa).


Shloka 563: Ekaviṁśatyanguḷipallavaḥ (एकविंशत्यंगुलिपल्लवः)
सङ्घ शुण्डाञ्चले नैकविंशत्येङ्गुगुलिपल्लवः ॥ ५६३ ॥
He whose trunk tip (Śuṇḍāñcala) has the sprout (Pallava) of twenty-one fingers' breadth (Ekaviṁśati Aṅguli) in length is Ekaviṁśatyanguḷipallavaḥ (The One Whose Trunk Sprout is Twenty-One Fingers Long).






चतुर्विंशतितत्त्वात्मा पञ्चविंशाख्यपूरुषः ॥ 
सप्तविंशतितारेशः सप्तविंशतियोगकृत् ॥१५९॥


Shloka 564: Caturviṁśatitattvātmā (चतुर्विंशतितत्त्वात्मा) & Pañcaviṁśākhyapūruṣaḥ (पञ्चविंशाख्यपूरुषः)
तत्त्वानि जिनसंख्यानि तदूर्ध्वः पुरुषो भवान् । चतुर्विं-शतितत्त्वात्मा पंचविंशाख्यपूरुषः ॥ ५६४ ॥
The twenty-four principles (Tattvas) — from Prakṛti (primordial nature) to the five gross elements, including the eleven senses, the three internal organs (mind, intellect, ego), and the five subtle elements — are you. Above them, you are the twenty-fifth principle, the Puruṣa. Thus, He is Caturviṁśatitattvātmā (The One Who is the Twenty-Four Tattvas) and Pañcaviṁśākhyapūruṣaḥ (The One Known as the Twenty-Fifth Person/Puruṣa).


Shloka 565: Saptaviṁśatitāreśaḥ (सप्तविंशतितारेशः) & Saptaviṁśatiyogakṛt (सप्तविंशतियोगकृत्)
नक्षत्राणां च योगानां ईशः कर्ता क्रमाद्भवान् । सप्तविंशतितारेशः सप्तविंशतियोगकृत् ॥ ५६५ ॥
You are the Lord (Īśa) of the twenty-seven stars (Tārās/Nakṣatras) — Aśvinī, Bharaṇī, Kṛttikā, etc. You are the creator (Kṛt) of the twenty-seven Yogas (astrological combinations) — Viṣkambha, Prīti, Āyuṣmān, etc. Thus, He is Saptaviṁśatitāreśaḥ (The Lord of the Twenty-Seven Stars) and Saptaviṁśatiyogakṛt (The Creator of the Twenty-Seven Yogas).


द्वात्रिंशद्भैरवाधीशश्चतुस्त्रिंशन्महाहृदः । 
षट्त्रिंशत्तत्त्वसम्भूतिरष्टात्रिंशत्कलातनुः ॥ १६०॥


Shloka 566: Dvātriṁśadbhairavādhīśaḥ (द्वात्रिंशद्भैरवाधीशः)
द्वात्रिंशद्वैर वाधीशश्चत्वारो भैरवाष्टकाः । असितांगा-दयो ये ये तेषां तेषामधीश्वरः ॥ ५६६॥
There are eight groups of Bhairavas, each group containing four Bhairavas – thus making thirty-two Bhairavas in total, starting with Asitāṅga. He who is the supreme lord (Adhīśa) over all of them is Dvātriṁśadbhairavādhīśaḥ (The Lord of the Thirty-Two Bhairavas).


Shloka 567: Catustriṁśanmahāhradaḥ (चतुस्त्रिंशन्महाहृदः)
पुष्कराद्या देवखाताः संति पुण्या महाहदाः। तदात्मकत्वेन भवांश्चतुस्त्रिंशन्महा-हृदः ॥ ५६७ ॥
There are thirty-four holy great lakes (Mahāhrada) — Puṣkara, Mānasa, etc., which are divine reservoirs. You, being the embodiment of them, are Catustriṁśanmahāhradaḥ (The One Who is the Thirty-Four Great Lakes).


Shloka 568: Ṣaṭtriṁśattattvasambhūtiḥ (षट्त्रिंशत्तत्त्वसम्भूतिः)
षट्त्रिंशत्तत्त्वसंभूतिः शैवतंत्रोक्तया दिशा । शिवादिक्षितिपर्यंतषत्रिंशत्तत्त्वकारणम् ॥ ५६८ ॥
According to the Śaiva Tantras, the thirty-six Tattvas (principles) range from Śiva at the top down to the Earth (Kṣiti) at the bottom. He is the cause (Kāraṇam) or the very origin (Sambhūtiḥ) of these thirty-six Tattvas. Thus, He is Ṣaṭtriṁśattattvasambhūtiḥ (The Origin of the Thirty-Six Tattvas).


Shloka 569: Aṣṭātriṁśatkalātanuḥ (अष्टात्रिंशत्कलातनुः)
वहेः सूर्यस्य चन्द्रस्य दश द्वादश षोडश । कलाः सन्ति तदात्मत्वादष्टात्रिंशत्कलातनुः ॥ ५६९ ॥
Fire (Vahni) has ten Kalās (digits), the Sun (Sūrya) has twelve, and the Moon (Candra) has sixteen — totaling thirty-eight Kalās. You, being the embodiment of these, are Aṣṭātriṁśatkalātanuḥ (The One Whose Body is the Thirty-Eight Digits).


नमदेकोनपञ्चाशन्मरुद्वर्गनिरर्गलः ॥ 
पञ्चाशदक्षरश्रेणी पञ्चाशद्रुद्रविग्रहः ॥ १६१ ॥
Shloka 570: Namadekonapañcāśanmarudvarganirargalaḥ (नमदेकोनपञ्चाशन्मरुद्वर्गनिरर्गलः)
मरुद्वर्गनतश्चासौ निष्प्रत्यूहगतिश्च सः । नमदेकोनपंचा-शन्मरुद्वर्गनिरर्गलः ॥ ५७० ॥
The group of forty-nine Maruts (Deities of wind/storms) bows down (Namad) to him. He is unobstructed (Nirargala) in his movement. Thus, He is Namadekonapañcāśanmarudvarganirargalaḥ (The One to Whom the Forty-Nine Maruts Bow and Who is Without Any Obstruction).


Shloka 571: Pañcāśadakṣaraśreṇī (पञ्चाशदक्षरश्रेणी)
पंचाशदक्षरश्रेणीत्युच्यते मातृकात्मना ।
The series (Śreṇī) of fifty letters (Pañcāśat Akṣara) is the Mātṛkā (matrix of phonemes). He is that. Thus, He is Pañcāśadakṣaraśreṇī (The One Who is the Fifty-Letter Syllabic Series).


Shloka 571: Pañcāśadrudravigrahaḥ (पञ्चाशद्रुद्रविग्रहः)
श्रीकंठादिशिवात्मत्वात् पंचाशद्रुद्रविग्रहः ॥ ५७१ ॥ केशवाद्याश्च कीर्त्याद्या विष्णवस्तस्य शक्तयः ॥
He is the embodiment (Vigraha) of the fifty Rudras (Pañcāśad Rudra) – Śrīkaṇṭha, etc., and also of the Viṣṇus – Keśava, etc., and of the Śaktis known as Kīrti, etc. Thus, He is Pañcāśadrudravigrahaḥ (The One Who Has the Form of the Fifty Rudras).








पञ्चाशद्विष्णुशक्तीशः पञ्चाशन्मातृकालयः ॥ 
द्विपञ्चाशद्वपुःश्रेणी त्रिषष्ट्यक्षरसंश्रयः ॥१६२॥


Shloka 572: Pañcāśadviṣṇuśaktīśaḥ (पञ्चाशद्विष्णुशक्तीशः)
पञ्चाशद्विष्णुशक्तीशस्तदीशत्वेन कथ्यसे ॥ ५७२ ॥
You are declared as the lord (Īśa) of the fifty Viṣṇus and the fifty Śaktis (Pañcāśad Viṣṇu and Pañcāśad Śakti). Thus, He is Pañcāśadviṣṇuśaktīśaḥ (The Lord of the Fifty Viṣṇus and Fifty Śaktis).


Shloka 573: Pañcāśanmātṛkālayaḥ (पञ्चाशन्मातृकालयः)
एकपञ्चाशतोर्णानामालयो लय एव वा । नाद एव तदात्मत्वा-त्पञ्चाशन्मातृकालयः ॥ ५७३ ॥
He is the abode (Ālaya) or the place of dissolution (Laya) of the fifty-one letters (Ekapañcāśat varṇa). Being of the nature of Nāda (primordial sound) itself, he is Pañcāśanmātṛkālayaḥ (The Abode of the Fifty Mātṛkās – The Fifty-One Phonemes).


Shloka 574-575: Dvipañcāśadvapuḥśreṇī (द्विपञ्चाशद्वपुःश्रेणी) & Triṣaṣṭyakṣarasaṃśrayaḥ (त्रिषष्ट्यक्षरसंश्रयः)
लैङ्गववर्णितपाशानामविद्यापञ्चपर्वणि । अष्टाष्टदिग्वसुधृतिभिन्नानां देहदायिनाम् ॥ ५७४ ॥ त्वद्रूपत्वाद्विपश्चाशद्वपुःश्रेणीति गीयसे । त्रिष-ष्टिश्चतुःषष्टिर्वा वर्णाः शंभुमते मताः ॥ ५७५ ॥ कला अपि चतुःषष्टिः प्रसिद्धास्तत्समाश्रयः । तन्निर्णेता तत्खनिस्त्वं त्रिषष्ट्यक्षरसंश्रयः ॥
The series of fifty-two forms (Dvipañcāśad Vapuḥ) — divided as eight (Dik), eight (Vasu), etc. — are of your nature. Thus, you are praised as Dvipañcāśadvapuḥśreṇī (The Series of Fifty-Two Forms). In the Śaiva tradition, the letters (Varṇas) are considered to be sixty-three or sixty-four. The sixty-four arts (Kalā) are also well-known. You are the abode (Samāśraya) of these sixty-three letters, their knower (Nirṇetā), and their mine (Khanin). Thus, He is Triṣaṣṭyakṣarasaṃśrayaḥ (The Abode of the Sixty-Three Syllables).


















चतुःषष्ट्यर्णनिर्णेता चतुःषष्टिकलानिधिः ॥ 
चतुःषष्टिमहासिद्धयोगिनीवृंदवंदितः ॥ १६३॥


Shloka 576-577: Catuḥṣaṣṭyarṇanirṇetā (चतुःषष्ट्यर्णनिर्णेता) & Catuḥṣaṣṭikalanidhiḥ (चतुःषष्टिकलानिधिः)
चतुःषष्ट्यर्णनिर्णेता चतुःषष्टिकलानिधिः । अक्षोभ्या-दिचतुःषष्टिमिथुनैर्वदितो भवान् ॥ ५७७ ॥
He is the ascertainer (Nirṇetā) of the sixty-four letters (Catuḥṣaṣṭi Varṇa) — the fifty-one Mātṛkās plus the thirteen additional vowels or modified forms. He is the repository (Nidhi) of the sixty-four arts (Kalā). You are spoken of as having sixty-four pairs (Mithuna) starting with Akṣobhya. 
Thus, He is Catuḥṣaṣṭyarṇanirṇetā (The One Who Ascertains the Sixty-Four Syllables) and Catuḥṣaṣṭikalanidhiḥ (The Treasure-House of the Sixty-Four Arts).


Shloka 577: Catuḥṣaṣṭimahāsiddhayoginīvṛndavanditaḥ (चतुःषष्टिमहासिद्धयोगिनीवृंदवंदितः)
चतुःषष्टिमहा-सिद्धयोगिनीवृंदवंदितः ॥
He who is worshipped (Vandita) by the hosts (Vṛnda) of the sixty-four great Siddhas and the sixty-four Yoginīs is Catuḥṣaṣṭimahāsiddhayoginīvṛndavanditaḥ (The One Worshipped by the Hosts of the Sixty-Four Great Siddhas and Yoginīs).


अष्टषष्टिमहातीर्थक्षेत्र भैरवभावनः ॥ 
चतुर्नवतिमंत्रात्मा षण्णवत्यधिकप्रभुः ॥१६४॥


Shloka 579: Aṣṭaṣaṣṭimahātīrthakṣetra-bhairavabhāvanaḥ (अष्टषष्टिमहातीर्थक्षेत्र भैरवभावनः)
शैवतीर्थान्यष्टषष्टिः श्रीकाशीखंडपाद्मयोः ॥ ५७८ ॥ 
उक्तानि तेषु क्षेत्रेषु भावयन् भैरवं शिवम् । अष्टषष्टिमहातीर्थ-क्षेत्रभैरवभावनः ॥ ५७९ ॥
Sixty-eight sacred Śaiva Tīrthas (pilgrimage sites) are described in the Kāśīkhaṇḍa and Padma Purāṇa. Meditating upon Lord Bhairava (Śiva) in those holy places (Kṣetra) and filling them with his essence, He is Aṣṭaṣaṣṭimahātīrthakṣetra-bhairavabhāvanaḥ (The One Who Contemplates Bhairava in the Sixty-Eight Great Sacred Tīrthas and Kṣetras).












Shloka 581: Caturnavatimantrātmā (चतुर्नवतिमंत्रात्मा)
अष्टात्रिंशत्कला मंत्राः पञ्चाश-न्मातृकाः कलाः । हंसः शुचिप्रतद्विष्णुर्विष्णुर्योनि त्रियंबकम् ॥ ५८० ॥ तद्विष्णोर्मूलविद्येति चतुर्नवतिसंज्ञकाः । द्रव्य-शुद्ध्यै कलासूत्रे जामदग्येन वर्णिताः ॥ ५८१ ॥ चतुर्नवति-मंत्रात्मा तावन्मंत्रात्मको भवान् ॥
The thirty-eight Kalā mantras, the fifty Mātṛkā Kalās, and the mantras Haṁsa, Śuci, Pratad Viṣṇu, Viṣṇur Yoni, Tryambakam, Tad Viṣṇoḥ, and Mūlavidyā — together these comprise the ninety-four mantras (Caturnavati Mantra). You are the embodiment (Ātmā) of these ninety-four mantras. Thus, He is Caturnavatimantrātmā (The One Who is the Essence of the Ninety-Four Mantras).


Shloka 583: Ṣaṇṇavatyadhikaprabhuḥ (षण्णवत्यधिकप्रभुः)
तंत्रराजे षण्ण वतिः प्रोक्ताः श्रीचक्रदेवताः ॥ ५८२ ॥ विद्यागणेशयोर्योगा-ज्जायतेऽधिकदेवताः । तासामीशः समस्तानां षण्णवत्य-धिकप्रभुः ॥ ५८३ ॥
In the Tantrarāja, the deities of the Śrīcakra are said to be ninety-six (Ṣaṇṇavati). By the union of Vidyā and Gaṇeśa, additional deities are born. He who is the lord (Prabhu) of all those ninety-six and more is Ṣaṇṇavatyadhikaprabhuḥ (The Lord of Ninety-Six and More).
(The commentary rejects an alternative interpretation of this name involving 360 days of the year as contextually inconsistent and contrary to mantra tradition.)


शतानन्दः शतधृतिः शतपत्रायतेक्षणः ॥ 
शतानीकः शतमखः शतधारावरायुधः ॥ १६५ ॥


Shloka 584: Śatānandaḥ (शतानन्दः)
शतानन्दः शतगुणा आनन्दा मानुषादयः । ब्रह्मानन्दा-दिमाये ये ते सर्वेऽपि तदात्मकाः ॥ ५८४ ॥
The forms of bliss (Ānanda) are manifold: human bliss, divine bliss, and the bliss of Brahmā, etc. These are multiplied a hundredfold (Śataguṇa). You are the embodiment of all these. Thus, He is Śatānandaḥ (The Hundredfold Bliss / The One Whose Bliss is Hundredfold).


Shloka 584: Śatadhṛtiḥ (शतधृतिः)
ब्रह्मांडानामन-न्तानां धर्ता शतधृतिर्भवान् ॥
You are the bearer (Dhṛti) of innumerable universes (Brahmāṇḍas). Thus, He is Śatadhṛtiḥ (The Hundredfold Supporter / One with Hundred Supports).








Shloka 585: Śatapatrāyatekṣaṇaḥ (शतपत्रायतेक्षणः)
पद्मपत्रायताक्षस्त्वं शत-पत्रायतेक्षणः ॥ ५८५ ॥
Your eyes are long and beautiful like the petals of the lotus (Padmapatra). Thus, He is Śatapatrāyatekṣaṇaḥ (The One Whose Eyes are Long Like a Hundred Lotus Petals / The Lotus-Eyed One).


Shloka 586: Śatānīkaḥ (शतानीकः)
शतानीको भूरिसैन्यः शक्रः शतमखो भवान् । अथवा बहुसंख्यानि पूजनादीनि यस्य सः ॥ ५८६ ॥
He who possesses a great army or a hundred leaders (Śatanīka), or he who is Indra (Śakra) performing a hundred sacrifices (Śatamakha). He to whom countless forms of worship (Pūjana) are offered. Thus, He is Śatānīkaḥ (The One with a Hundred Armies/The One of Hundred Sacrifices) and Śatamakhaḥ (The One Who Performed a Hundred Sacrifices — Indra).


Shloka 587: Śatadhārāvarāyudhaḥ (शतधारावरायुधः)
शतं धारा अरास्तीक्षा यदायुधवरस्य सः । वज्रो-त्कृष्टायुधो वाऽपि शतधारावरायुधः ॥ ५८७ ॥
The best of weapons (Varāyudha) — the thunderbolt (Vajra) — has a hundred edges or sharp points (Śatadhāra). He who possesses that supreme weapon is Śatadhārāvarāyudhaḥ (The One Whose Excellent Weapon Has a Hundred Edges / The Bearer of the Vajra).


सहस्रपत्रनिलयः सहस्रफणभूषणः ॥ 
सहस्रशीर्षापुरुषः सहस्राक्षः सहस्रपात् ॥ १६६॥


Shloka 588: Sahasrapatranilayaḥ (सहस्रपत्रनिलयः)
सहस्रपत्रनिलयो ब्रह्मरंध्रस्थपद्मगः ॥
He who abides (Nilaya) in the lotus of a thousand petals (Sahasrapatra) situated in the Brahma-randhra (the aperture at the crown of the head) is Sahasrapatranilayaḥ (The One Who Dwells in the Thousand-Petaled Lotus).


Shloka 588: Sahasraphaṇabhūṣaṇaḥ (सहस्रफणभूषणः)
फण। सहस्रवद्भूष्यः सहस्रफणभूषणः ॥ ५८८ ॥
He who is adorned (Bhūṣaṇa) with a thousand serpent hoods (Sahasraphaṇa) — like Śeṣa or other serpents — is Sahasraphaṇabhūṣaṇaḥ (The One Adorned with a Thousand Serpent Hoods).




Shloka 589: Sahasraśīrṣāpuruṣaḥ (सहस्रशीर्षापुरुषः)
सहस्रशीर्षापुरुष इत्येकं नाम ते स्फुटम् ॥
"The Puruṣa (Cosmic Being) with a thousand heads" — this is clearly one name. As stated in the Puruṣa Sūkta: "Sahasraśīrṣā Puruṣaḥ" — Sahasraśīrṣāpuruṣaḥ (The Thousand-Headed Cosmic Person).


Shloka 589: Sahasrākṣaḥ (सहस्राक्षः) & Sahasrapāt (सहस्रपात्)
अनंतनेत्रचरणः सहस्राक्षः सहस्रपात् ॥ ५८९ ॥
He who has a thousand eyes (Sahasrākṣa) and a thousand feet (Sahasrapāt). Thus, He is Sahasrākṣaḥ (The Thousand-Eyed One) and Sahasrapāt (The Thousand-Footed One).


सहस्रनामसंस्तुत्यः सहस्राक्षबलापहः ॥ 
दशसाहस्रफणभृत्फणिराजकृतासनः ॥ १६७ ॥


Shloka 590: Sahasranāmasaṃstutyaḥ (सहस्रनामसंस्तुत्यः)
सहस्रनामसंस्तुत्यः स्तुत्यर्थोऽसंख्यनामभिः । यमा-विशन्ति नामानि सर्वाणीति किल श्रुतेः ॥ ५९० ॥
He who is praised (Saṃstutya) by a thousand names (Sahasranāma) — indeed, all names enter into you, as the Śruti says. Thus, He is Sahasranāmasaṃstutyaḥ (The One Praised by a Thousand Names).


Shloka 590: Sahasrākṣabalāpahaḥ (सहस्राक्षबलापहः)
प्रसिद्धं तत्पुराणे यत् सहस्राक्षबलापहः ।
It is well-known in the Purāṇa that he is the destroyer (Apaha) of the strength (Bala) of the thousand-eyed (Sahasrākṣa) Indra. Thus, He is Sahasrākṣabalāpahaḥ (The One Who Destroyed the Power of Thousand-Eyed Indra).


Shloka 591: Daśasāhasraphaṇabhṛt-phaṇirājakṛtāsanaḥ (दशसाहस्रफणभृत्फणिराजकृतासनः)
दशसाहस्रफणभृ-त्फणिराजकृतासनः ॥ ५९१ ॥ इच्छया सृष्टिनिर्मातुः किमसाध्यं तव प्रभो ॥
He who is seated (Āsana) upon the King of Serpents (Phaṇirāja) — Śeṣa — who bears ten thousand hoods (Daśasāhasraphaṇa). Thus, He is Daśasāhasraphaṇabhṛt-phaṇirājakṛtāsanaḥ (The One Who Has Made a Seat of the Serpent-King Who Bears Ten Thousand Hoods).










अष्टाशीतिसहस्राद्यमहर्षिस्तोत्रयंत्रितः ॥ 
लक्षाधीशप्रियाधारो लक्षाधारमनोमयः ॥ १६८ ॥


Shloka 593: Aṣṭāśītisahasrādya-maharṣistotrayantritaḥ (अष्टाशीतिसहस्राद्यमहर्षिस्तोत्रयंत्रितः)
सर्वविद्या कलाराशिरक्षणैकप्रयोजनः ॥ ५९२ ॥ विष्णुना हिमवत्पृष्ठे स्थापिता गृहमेधिनः । पुराणे वैष्णवे प्रोक्तास्तैः स्तु-त्योऽसि नियंत्रितः॥५९३॥ अष्टाशीतिसहस्राद्यमहर्षिस्तो-त्रयंत्रितः ॥
In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, the eighty-eight thousand great sages (Aṣṭāśītisahasra Maharṣi) were established by Viṣṇu on the slopes of the Himalayas. You are praised (Stotra) and controlled (Yantrita) by them through their hymns. Thus, He is Aṣṭāśītisahasrādya-maharṣistotrayantritaḥ (The One Who is Praised and Worshipped through the Hymns of the Eighty-Eight Thousand Great Sages).


Shloka 594: Lakṣādhīśapriyādhāraḥ (लक्षाधीशप्रियाधारः)
लक्षाधीशप्रियाधारो लक्षाधीशा धनेश्वराः ॥ ५९४ ॥ तेषां प्रियः सन्नाधारो धनवृद्ध्यर्थमाश्रितः ॥
The lords of hundreds of thousands (Lakṣādhīśa) are the lords of wealth (Dhaneśvara), i.e., Kubera and his attendants. He is dear (Priya) to them and is their support (Ādhāra), resorted to for the increase of wealth. Thus, He is Lakṣādhīśapriyādhāraḥ (The One Who is the Beloved Support of the Lords of Hundreds of Thousands).


Shloka 595: Lakṣādhāramanomayaḥ (लक्षाधारमनोमयः)
लक्षाणि चित्तस्थैर्यार्थ प्रसिद्धानि तदाश्रितं ॥ ५९५ ॥ मनो यस्य तदात्त्मा त्वं लक्षाधारमनोमयः ॥
The hundreds of thousands (Lakṣa) of mantras or objects are well-known for steadying the mind. That mind rests upon him, and he is of the nature of that mind. You are that. Thus, He is Lakṣādhāramanomayaḥ (The One Whose Mind is the Support of Hundreds of Thousands [of Mantras or Thoughts]).


चतुर्लक्षजपप्रीतश्चतुर्लक्षप्रकाशितः ॥ 
चतुरशीतिलक्षाणां जीवानां देहसंस्थितः ॥ १६९ ॥


Shloka 596: Caturlakṣajapaprītaḥ (चतुर्लक्षजपप्रीतश्चतुर्लक्षप्रकाशितः)
चतुर्लक्षजपप्रीनः पुरश्चर्या हि सा मनोः ॥ ५९६ ॥
He who is pleased (Prīta) by the repetition (Japa) of a mantra four hundred thousand times (Caturlakṣa) — that being the preliminary rite (Puraścaraṇa) for the mantra — is Caturlakṣajapaprītaḥ (The One Pleased by Four Hundred Thousand Japa Repetitions).
Shloka 597: Caturlakṣaprakāśitaḥ (चतुर्लक्षप्रकाशितः)
पुराणाष्टादशग्रंथसंख्या लक्षचतुष्टयम् । तैः प्रकाशित रूपस्त्वं चतुर्लक्षप्रकाशितः ॥ ५९७ ॥
The eighteen Purāṇas consist of four hundred thousand (Caturlakṣa) verses. You, whose form is revealed (Prakāśita) by these, are Caturlakṣaprakāśitaḥ (The One Revealed by the Four Hundred Thousand [Verses of the Purāṇas]).


Shloka 598: Caturśītilakṣāṇāṁ Jīvānāṁ Dehasaṁsthitaḥ (चतुरशीतिलक्षाणां जीवानां देहसंस्थितः)
सर्वजीवात्मतेयत्तानवच्छेदश्च रोचिषः। कलंकतापासंपर्कः कथ्यते नामभिस्त्रिभिः ॥ ५९८ ॥ चतुरशीतिलक्षाणां जीवानां देहसंस्थितः ॥
He who dwells (Dehasaṁsthitaḥ) within the bodies of the eighty-four hundred thousand (Caturśītilakṣa) species of living beings (Jīvas) is Caturśītilakṣāṇāṁ Jīvānāṁ Dehasaṁsthitaḥ (The One Who Resides in the Bodies of Eighty-Four Lakh Species of Souls).


कोटिसूर्यप्रतीकाशः कोटिचंद्रांशुनिर्मलः ॥
शिवाभवाध्युष्टकोटिविनायकधुरंधरः ॥ १७० ॥


Shloka 599: Koṭisūryapratīkāśaḥ (कोटिसूर्यप्रतीकाशः)
कोटिसूर्यप्रतीकाशः कोटिचंद्रांशुनिर्मलः ॥ ५९९ ॥
He who shines (Pratīkāśa) like ten million suns (Koṭi Sūrya) is Koṭisūryapratīkāśaḥ (The One Who Resembles Ten Million Suns).


Shloka 599: Koṭicandrāṁśunirmalaḥ (कोटिचन्द्रांशुनिर्मलः)
He who is as spotless (Nirmala) as the rays of ten million moons (Koṭi Candra) is Koṭicandrāṁśunirmalaḥ (The One as Spotless as the Rays of Ten Million Moons).


Shloka 600: Śivā-bhavādhyuṣṭa-koṭi-vināyaka-dhuraṁdharaḥ (शिवाभवाध्युष्टकोटिविनायकधुरंधरः)
ग्रहा विनायकाभिख्याः सार्धकोटित्रयात्मकाः । भवस्य च शिवायाश्च प्रत्येकं संति तत्पतिः ॥ ६०० ॥ शिवाभवाध्युष्ट-कोटिविनायकधुरंधरः ॥
There are groups of Vināyakas (obstacle-creating deities) numbering three and a half crores (Sārdha-koṭi-traya) each for Bhava (Śiva) and for Śivā (Pārvatī). He who is the bearer of the burden (Dhuraṁdhara) of the crores of Vināyakas presided over (Adhyuṣṭa) by Śivā and Bhava is Śivā-bhavādhyuṣṭa-koṭi-vināyaka-dhuraṁdharaḥ (The One Who Bears the Burden of the Crores of Vināyakas Ruled Over by Śivā and Bhava).


सप्तकोटिमहामंत्रमंत्रितावयवद्युतिः ॥ 
त्रयस्त्रिंशत्कोटिसुर श्रेणीप्रणतपादुकः ॥ १७१ ॥


Shloka 602: Saptakoṭimahāmantramantritāvayavadyutiḥ (सप्तकोटिमहामंत्रमंत्रितावयवद्युतिः)
विश्वरूपस्य तेऽङ्गानि सर्वमंत्राधिदेवताः ॥ ६०१ ॥ अतः संजातमंत्रैस्तैर्घोतसे ऽवयवैरपि । सप्तकोटिमहामंत्रमंत्रिता-वयवद्युतिः ॥ ६०२॥
The limbs of your universal form are the presiding deities of all mantras. Therefore, you shine through those mantras that have arisen from your limbs. He whose limbs are consecrated (Mantrita) by the seven crore (Saptakoṭi) great mantras and whose splendor (Dyuti) radiates from them is Saptakoṭimahāmantramantritāvayavadyutiḥ (The One Whose Limbs are Illuminated by the Seven Crore Great Mantras).


Shloka 603: Trayastriṁśatkoṭisuraśreṇīpraṇatapādukaḥ (त्रयस्त्रिंशत्कोटिसुर श्रेणीप्रणतपादुकः)
ईदृशान्नाधिकस्त्वत्तः कोऽपि देवस्ततो भवान् । त्रयस्त्रिशत्कोटिसुरश्रेणीप्रणतपादुकः ॥ ६०३
There is no deity greater than you. Therefore, the entire host of thirty-three crore (Trayastriṃśatkoṭi) gods bow down (Praṇata) at your feet. Thus, He is Trayastriṁśatkoṭisuraśreṇīpraṇatapādukaḥ (The One Whose Feet are Bowed to by the Host of Thirty-Three Crore Gods).


अनन्तनामानन्तश्रीरनन्तानन्तसौख्यदः ॥
ॐ इति वैनायकं नाम्नां सहस्रमिदमीरितम् ॥ १७२ ॥


Shloka 604: Anantanāmā (अनन्तनामा)
अनंतनामा सर्वेऽपि शब्दास्त्वन्नामतां गताः । यावत्प्रति-ष्ठितं ब्रह्म तावती वागिति श्रुतेः ॥ ६०४ ॥
He who has infinite names (Anantanāmā) — for all words have become your names, as the Śruti says: "As far as Brahman extends, so far does speech extend." Thus, He is Anantanāmā (The One with Infinite Names).


Shloka 605: Anantaśrīḥ (अनन्तश्रीः)
अनंतश्रीर-संख्यास्ते विद्यासंपत्तिकीर्तयः । प्रातिस्विकमनं तानामानन्त्ये गणना तु या ॥ ६०५ ॥
He whose glory (Śrī) is infinite (Ananta) — your knowledge, wealth, and fame are countless; the reckoning of their infinity is beyond enumeration. Thus, He is Anantaśrīḥ (The One of Infinite Glory).




Shloka 606: Anantānantasaukhyadaḥ (अनन्तानन्तसौख्यदः)
तावंतं दददानन्द मनन्तानन्त-सौख्यदः । अनंतानंददानं तु स्वाद्वैते पर्यवस्यति ॥ ६०६ ॥
He who bestows (Da) happiness (Saukhya) that is infinite (Ananta) and endless (Ananta) is Anantānantasaukhyadaḥ (The Bestower of Boundless and Endless Happiness). The giving of infinite bliss culminates in the state of non-duality (Advaita).


Conclusion of the Tenth Hundred
इति भारत्युपाख्यस्य भास्कराग्निचितः कृतौ । 
गणेशनामसाहस्त्रखद्योते दशमं शतम् ॥ १००० ॥
Thus, in the work named "Khadyota" (The Firefly), which is a light on the thousand names of Gaṇeśa, composed by Bhāskara, also known as Agnicit, the tenth hundred 
(and thus the complete thousand names) is completed. (ल Dhanyavādah. Om Tat Sat. )


Concluding Verses (607-609)
आदौ गणेश्वरः पश्चात्सर्वनेत्राधिवासकः । तेजोवती-शिरोरलं भोगदाकांतिमंडितः ॥ ६०७ ॥ उडुभृन्मौलिरथ च प्रोक्तो ढुंढिविनायकः । रसप्रियोऽहर्निशं च मोक्षोऽष्टैश्वर्य-दायकः ॥ ६०८ ॥ इमानि शतकादीनि नामानि क्रमतो दश । संख्याक्रमनिरासाय न विस्मर्याणि सूरिभिः ॥ ६०९॥
Thus, in the Ganesha Sahasranama, the names are arranged in groups of hundreds. The wise should not forget these ten groups (of one hundred names each), from the beginning with Gaṇeśvara to the end, in order to avoid confusion in the numerical sequence.




























अथ ग्रन्थफलश्रुतिः
ॐ इति वैनायकं नाम्नां सहस्रमिदमीरितम् ॥ १७२ ॥
इदं ब्राह्मे मुहूर्ते वै यः पठेत् प्रत्यहं नरः । 
करस्थं तस्य सकलमैहिकामुष्मिकं सुखम् ॥ १७३ ॥ 
आयुरारोग्यमैश्वर्यं धैर्यं शौर्यं बलं यशः । 
मेधा प्रज्ञा धृतिः कान्तिः सौभाग्यमतिरूपता ॥ १७४ ॥
This text, containing a thousand names of Vinayaka (Ganapati), is recited as "Om." A person who recites this daily during the Brahma muhurta (the auspicious hour before dawn) will have all worldly and otherworldly happiness in their hands. They attain long life, health, prosperity, courage, valor, strength, fame, intellect, wisdom, patience, beauty, good fortune, and exceptional charm.


Commentary
इतीति । अनेन प्रकारेणेत्यर्थः, इदमित्यङ्गुल्या निर्देशः; पदद्वयेन सहस्रसंख्याया अन्यूनानधिकता ध्वनिता; तेनाष्टौ नामानीहाधिकृत्य पदानि च्छिन्दंतो वचनाभावान्निरस्ताः । यत्तु-अष्टसंख्याधिक्यं विनाऽस्य फलप्रदत्वं नास्तीत्युक्त्वा सोमक्रय प्रकरणस्याष्ट संख्यार्थवादं लिखंति, तत्पामरप्रतारण-मात्रम्; विष्णुललितादिसहस्रनामसु क्वापि फलासिद्ध्यनापत्तेः, तस्मात्स्वस्य नामपदच्छेदासामर्थ्यमपह्रोतुं तद्वचनमिति दिक् ॥ १७१ ॥ 
"Thus" (Iti) means "in this manner." The indication "this" (Idam) is a gesture with the finger. The use of the two terms together implies that there are neither fewer nor more than a thousand names. Therefore, those who, by taking eight names as a single phrase, break the words (padas) differently are refuted due to the absence of scriptural support. As for those who, stating that "without the addition of the number eight, this (hymn) does not bestow fruit," then cite the eulogy of the number eight from the Soma-Kraya section (of the Vedas) — that is merely the deception of the ignorant. Otherwise, there would be the non-attainment of fruit in the Vishnu Sahasranama, Lalita Sahasranama, etc., as well. Therefore, that statement is merely an attempt to hide their own inability to properly divide the names. This much is sufficient.


अस्य स्तोत्रस्य जप ऐहिककामस्यामुष्मिककामस्य निष्कामस्य चेति त्रिविधः । 
तत्र प्रथममाह साधैः षोडशभिः आयुरित्यादिभिः ॥ 
The recitation (Japa) of this hymn is of three types: for worldly desires (Aihika Kāma), for other-worldly desires (Āmuṣmika Kāma), and for those without desire (Niṣkāma). Among these, the first is described with sixteen phrases beginning with "Āyuḥ" (longevity).
प्रज्ञा ग्राहिणी बुद्धिः, मेधा धारणावती बुद्धिः ॥ १७३ ॥ 
Prajñā (प्रज्ञा) means receptive intellect. Medhā (मेधा) means retentive 
intellect (the ability to retain what is learned).
क्षमा परापकारप्रतीकारक्रियाभावः, क्षांतिः परकृतापकारप्रयुक्तक्रोधस्याप्यभावः ॥ १७४-१७५ ॥ 
ज्ञानं मोक्षजनकचरमवृत्ति, विज्ञानं शास्त्रशिल्पविषयकं शास्त्रम् ॥ १७६ ॥ 
Kṣamā (क्षमा) is the absence of action to retaliate against an injury caused by another. Kṣānti (क्षान्ति) is the absence of anger even produced by an injury caused by another. Jñāna (ज्ञान) is the ultimate mental state leading to liberation. Vijñāna (विज्ञान) is knowledge of the scriptures and arts/science (Śāstra).


सत्यं दया क्षमा शान्तिर्दाक्षिण्यं धर्मशीलता । 
जगत्संयमनं विश्वसंवादो वादपाटवम् ॥ १७५ ॥ 
सभापाण्डित्यमौदार्यं गाम्भीर्यं ब्रह्मवर्चसम्। 
औन्नत्यं च कुलं शीलं प्रतापो वीर्यमार्यता ॥ १७६ ॥ 
ज्ञानं विज्ञानमास्तिक्यं स्थैर्यं विश्वातिशायिता ।
धनधान्याभिवृद्धिश्च सकृदस्य जपाद्भवेत् ॥ १७७ ॥ 
ये वश्यं चतुर्विधं नृणां जपादस्य प्रजायते । 
राज्ञो राजकलत्रस्य राजपुत्रस्य मन्त्रिणः ॥ १७८ ॥ 
जप्यते यस्य वश्यार्थं स दासस्तस्य जायते । 
धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणामनायासेन साधनम् ॥ १७९ ॥ 
शाकिनीडाकिनीरक्षोयक्षोरगभयापहम् । 
साम्राज्यसुखदं चैव समस्तरिपुमर्दनम् ॥ १८० ॥ 
समस्त कलहध्वंसि दग्धबीजप्ररोहणम् । 
दुःस्वप्नशमनं क्रुद्धस्वामिचित्तप्रसादनम् ॥ १८१ ॥ 
षट्कर्माष्टमहासिद्धित्रिकालज्ञानसाधनम् । 
परकृत्याप्रशमनं परचक्रविमर्दनम् ॥ १८२ ॥ 
संग्रामरङ्गे सर्वेषामिदमेकं जयावहम् । 
सर्ववन्ध्यात्वदोषघ्नं गर्भरक्षैककारणम् ॥ १८३ ॥ 
पठ्यते प्रत्यहं यत्र स्तोत्रं गणपतेरिदम् । 
देशे तत्र न दुर्भिक्षमीतयो दुरितानि च ॥ १८४ ॥
न तद्गृहं जहाति श्रीर्यत्रायं जप्यते स्तवः । 
क्षयकुष्ठप्रमेहाश भगंदरविषूचिकाः ॥ १८५ ॥
Truthfulness, compassion, forgiveness, peace, courtesy, righteousness and virtuous conduct, control over the world, universal harmony, eloquence in debate, scholarly wisdom in assemblies, generosity, depth of character, divine radiance (brahmavarcas), nobility, good lineage, character, valor, heroism, and nobility of spirit—by reciting this hymn just once, one attains knowledge, wisdom, faith, steadfastness, excellence over the entire world, and increase of wealth and grain. 


Through its recitation, the four kinds of people (kings, their queens, princes, and ministers) become submissive. Whoever is sought to be controlled by reciting this hymn becomes a servant to the reciter. It effortlessly accomplishes righteousness (dharma), wealth (artha), desire (kāma), and liberation (mokṣa). It dispels fears from śākinīs, ḍākinīs, demons (rakṣasas), yakṣas, and serpents (uraga), grants the happiness of universal sovereignty (sāmrājya), and crushes all enemies. It destroys all quarrels and causes the sprouting of burned seeds (i.e., restores ruined prospects). 


It removes bad dreams and pacifies the mind of an angry master. It serves as the means for the six rituals (ṣaṭkarma) and the eight great perfections (aṣṭamahāsiddhi), as well as knowledge of the three times (past, present, and future). It quells hostile actions and devastates opposing armies. In the midst of battle, this alone brings victory to all. It destroys all defects of barrenness and is the sole cause for the protection of the womb (i.e., safe pregnancy). Wherever this hymn of Gaṇapati is recited daily, in that land there is no famine, epidemic, or sins. Prosperity (śrī) never abandons that house where this hymn is recited. (It also destroys) consumption (tuberculosis), leprosy, diabetes, fistulas (bhagandara), and cholera (viṣūcikā).


Commentary
चतुर्विधासुरनरतिर्यक्स्थावरवश्यभेदात् नरवश्यविशेष-माह-राज्ञ इति ॥ १७७-१७९ ॥ 
The four types of beings—gods (Asura here means divine beings or demons in context), humans, animals, and immovable beings—can be controlled. Among these, explaining specifically the control over humans, (the text says) "for kings" (Rājñaḥ).


दग्धस्य रोगाग्निष्ठष्टस्य बीजस्य रेतसः प्ररोहणं प्रजोत्पादनसामर्थ्यप्रदम् ॥ १८०-१८१ ॥ 
It bestows the power of procreation—the germination of the seed (semen) 
that has been burnt or afflicted by the fire of disease.










षट्कर्माणि-मोहनमाकर्षणं स्तंभनं विद्वेषणमुच्चाटनं मारणं चेति भेदात् । शांतिवश्ययोस्तंत्रेषु षडूकर्ममध्ये परिगण-नेऽपि प्रकृते तयोः पार्थक्येन निर्देशान्मोहनाकर्षणे मेलिते । परकृत्या शत्रुभिः स्वमारणोद्देशेन निर्मिता राक्षसी ॥ १८२-१८३॥ 
The six ritual actions (Ṣaṭkarmāṇi) are: Mohana (enchantment), Ākarṣaṇa (attraction), Stambhana (paralysis), Vidveṣaṇa (creating enmity/discord), Uccāṭana (uprooting/banishment), and Māraṇa (killing). Although Śānti (pacification) and Vaśya (subjugation) are also counted among the six actions in some Tantras, in the present text they are mentioned separately, while Mohana and Ākarṣaṇa are combined. (The commentary also mentions) a demoness (Rākṣasī) created by enemies for the purpose of killing oneself through black magic (Parakṛtyā).
शांतिकर्माह-क्षयेत्यादिना ॥ १८४ ॥
Explaining the Śānti (pacification) rite, (the text says) 
"for destruction of pestilence, etc." (Kṣayetyādinā).


गुल्मं प्लीहानमश्मानमतिसारं महोदरम् । 
कासं श्वासमुदावर्तं शूलं शोफादिसम्भवम् ॥ १८६ ॥ 
शिरोरोगं वमिं हिक्कां गण्डमालामरोचकम्। 
वातपित्तकफद्वन्द्वत्रिदोषजनितज्वरम् ॥ १८७॥ 
आगन्तुं विषमं शीतमुष्णं चैकाहिकादिकम्। 
इत्याद्युक्तमनुक्तं वा रोगं दोषादिसम्भवम् ॥ १८८ ॥ 
सर्वं प्रशमयत्याशु स्तोत्रस्यास्य सकृज्जपः । 
सकृत्पाठेन संसिद्धः स्त्रीशूद्रपतितैरपि ॥ १८९ ॥ 
सहस्त्रनाममन्त्रोऽयं जपितव्यः शुभाप्तये ।
Tumors (gulma), splenic disorders (plīha), kidney stones (aśmā), diarrhea (atisāra), ascites (mahodara), cough (kāsa), asthma (śvāsa), urinary retention (udāvarta), colic pain (śūla), swelling (śopha) and other similar conditions, headaches (śiroroga), vomiting (vami), hiccups (hikkā), goiter or cervical lymphadenopathy (gaṇḍamālā), loss of appetite (arocaka), disorders of vāta, pitta, and kapha, fevers arising from the imbalance of all three doṣas (tridoṣajanyajvara), external or traumatic fevers (āgantu), intermittent fevers (viṣama), cold fevers (śīta), hot fevers (uṣṇa), quotidian and other types of fevers (aikāhikādikam)—in short, all diseases arising from doṣas or other causes, whether mentioned here or not, are quickly pacified by just a single recitation (sakṛjjapa) of this hymn. Even women, Śūdras, and the fallen (patita) attain perfection (samsiddhi) through reciting it once. This thousand-name mantra of Vināyaka should be chanted for the attainment of all forms of auspiciousness (śubhāptaye).


Commentary
अश्मानं अश्मरीरोगम् । अश्लीलमिति पाठे विशेषणं ॥१८५॥ 
"Aśmānam" (अश्मानम्) means the disease of urinary stones (Aśmarī). If the reading is "Aślīlam" (अश्लीलम्), it is an adjective (meaning "improper" or "obscene").
द्वंद्वाः वातादिषु युग्मानि त्रीणि ॥ १८६ ॥ 
"Dvandvāḥ" (द्वंद्वाः) refers to the three pairs (Yugmāni) among the Vāta (humors) and others (i.e., the three dualities: pleasure-pain, hot-cold, etc.).
अनुक्तं वातव्या-धिव्रणादिदोषादीत्यादिना दुष्कर्मग्रहणं ॥ १८७- १८९ ॥
By the expression "unmentioned" (Anuktam) and terms like "defects of Vāta, diseases, ulcers, etc." (Vātavyādhi-vraṇādi-doṣādītyādinā), the inclusion of evil actions (Duṣkarma) is to be understood.


महागणपतेः स्तोत्रं सकामः प्रजपन्निदम् ॥ १९० ॥ 
इच्छितान् सकलान् भोगानुपभुज्येह पार्थिवान् । 
मनोरथफलैर्दिव्यैर्व्योमयानैर्मनोरमैः ॥ १९१ ॥ 
चन्द्रेन्द्रभास्करोपेन्द्रब्रह्मशर्वादिसद्मसु । 
कामरूपः कामगतिः कामतो विचरन्निह ॥ १९२ ॥ 
भुक्त्वा यथेप्सितान् भोगानभीष्टान् सह बन्धुभिः । 
गणेशानुचरो भूत्वा महागणपतेः प्रियः ॥ १९३ ॥ 
नन्दीश्वरादिसानन्दी नन्दितः सकलैर्गणैः । 
शिवाभ्यां कृपया पुत्रनिर्विशेषं च लालितः ॥ १९४ ॥ 
शिवभक्तः पूर्णकामो गणेश्वरवरात् पुनः । 
जातिस्मरो धर्मपरः सार्वभौमोऽभिजायते ॥ १९५ ॥
A person who recites this hymn of Mahāgaṇapati with specific desires (sakāmaḥ) enjoys all the desired worldly pleasures here on earth. Then, through the fruits of his cherished wishes, he attains divine, delightful celestial vehicles (vyomayānas) and roams freely at will in the abodes of Chandra, Indra, Bhāskara (Sūrya), Upendra (Viṣṇu), Brahmā, Śarva (Śiva), and others—assuming any form he desires (kāmarūpa), moving anywhere he wishes (kāmagati), and acting according to his will (kāmataḥ). After enjoying all wished-for pleasures along with his beloved relatives, he becomes a follower of Gaṇeśa, dear to Mahāgaṇapati. Delighted along with Nandīśvara and others, and honored by all the gaṇas, he is lovingly cared for by Śiva and Pārvatī as if he were their own son. Having become a devotee of Śiva, with all his desires fulfilled, by the boon of Gaṇeśvara (Gaṇapati) he is born again as a great emperor (sārvabhauma) who remembers his past lives (jātismara) and is devoted to righteousness (dharmapara).


Commentary
द्वितीयमाह साथैः पंचभिर्महागणपतेरित्यादिभिः व्यो-मयानैः विमानैः ॥ १९०॥ 
The second (type of fruit, i.e., for other-worldly desires) is described with five phrases beginning with "Mahāgaṇapateḥ" (of the great Lord of Gaṇas). "Vyomayānaiḥ" (व्योमयानैः) means by celestial chariots or aircraft (Vimānaiḥ).
नंदीश्वरादिसानंदी नंदिकेश्वरादि-समाना नंदशाली, शिवाभ्यां 
गौरीहराभ्यां पुत्रनिर्विशेषं पुत्रतुल्यं यथा तथा ॥ १९१-१९३ ॥ 
"Sānandī" (सानंदी) means along with Nandīśvara and others. "Nandaśālī" (नंदशाली) means equal to Nandikeśvara and others. "Putranirviśeṣam" (पुत्रनिर्विशेषं) means equal to a son, just as with Śivābhyām (Gaurī and Hara, i.e., Pārvatī and Śiva).
शिवभक्तः ईश्वरभक्तः जीवः शिवश्वेति चिद्विभागांतर्गतोऽत्र शिवो विवक्षितः, 
न तु कैलासवासित्वादिगुणविशेषविशिष्टो गाणपत इति यावत्; जातिस्मरः पूर्वजन्मस्मरणवान् ॥ १९४-१९५ ॥
Here, "Śivabhaktaḥ" (शिवभक्तः) means a devotee of Īśvara (God). "Śivaḥ" (शिवः), which is included within the category of consciousness (Cidvibhāga), is intended here to mean the Gāṇapata (devotee of Gaṇapati), not one distinguished by qualities such as residing in Kailāsa, etc. "Jātismaraḥ" (जातिस्मरः) means one who remembers his previous births.


निष्कामस्तु जपन्नित्यं भक्त्या विघ्नेशतत्परः । 
योगसिद्धिं परां प्राप्य ज्ञानवैराग्यसंस्थितः ॥ १९६ ॥ 
निरन्तरोदितानन्दे परमानन्दसंविदि । 
विश्वोत्तीर्णे परे पारे पुनरावृत्तिवर्जिते ॥ १९७ ॥ 
लीनो वैनायके धाम्नि रमते नित्यनिर्वृतः । 
यो नामभिर्हुतेदेतैरर्चयेत् पूजयेन्नरः ॥ १९८ ॥ 
राजानो वश्यतां यान्ति रिपवो यान्ति दासताम् । 
मन्त्राः सिध्यन्ति सर्वेऽपि सुलभास्तस्य सिद्धयः ॥ १९९ ॥ 
मूलमन्त्रादपि स्तोत्रमिदं प्रियतरं मम । 
नभस्ये मासि शुक्लायां चतुर्थ्यां मम जन्मनि ॥ २०० ॥
On the other hand, a person who recites this hymn selflessly (niṣkāmaḥ), with devotion and constant focus on Vighneśa (Gaṇapati), attains the supreme perfection of yoga (yogasiddhi), established in knowledge (jñāna) and renunciation (vairāgya). Merged in the ever-manifest bliss, the supreme consciousness of bliss (paramānandasamvidi), beyond the universe, on the other shore devoid of all return (punarāvṛttivarjite), absorbed in the radiant abode of Vināyaka, he rejoices in eternal contentment. Any person who honors and worships (Lord Gaṇapati) with these sacred names, offering oblations, gains kings under his control, enemies become his servants, all mantras become perfected (sidhyanti), and all accomplishments (siddhayaḥ) are easily accessible to him. This hymn (stotra) is dearer to me (Lord Gaṇapati speaking) than even the root mantra (mūlamantra). It was revealed on my birth day, the fourth day of the bright fortnight (śuklāyāṃ caturthyām) in the month of Nabhasya (Bhādrapada).


Commentary
तृतीयमाह साधद्वयेन निष्काम इत्यादिना ॥ १९६ ॥ 
The third (type of fruit, i.e., for the desireless) is described with 
two phrases beginning with "Niṣkāma" (without desire).
लीनः जीवोपाधिलयात् । हुनेत् जुहुयात्, आर्ष रूपं ॥१९७-१९८ ॥ 
"Līnaḥ" (लीनः) means dissolved, due to the dissolution of the limiting adjuncts of the individual soul (Jīvopādhi-layāt). "Hunet" (हुनेत्) means "should offer oblations" (in the fire); 
this is an archaic (Ārṣa) grammatical form.
मूलमंत्रादष्टाविंशत्यक्षर महागणपतिमंत्रात्, नभस्ये भाद्रपदे ॥ १९९ - २००॥
"Mūlamantrāt" (मूलमन्त्रात्) refers to the twenty-eight-syllabled Mahāgaṇapati mantra. "Nabhasye" (नभस्ये) means in the month of Bhādrapada.


दूर्वाभिर्नामभिः पूजां तर्पणं विधिवच्चरेत् । 
अष्टद्रव्यैर्विशेषेण जुहुयाद्भक्तिसंयुतः ॥ २०१ ॥ 
तस्येप्सितानि सर्वाणि सिद्ध्यन्त्यत्र न संशयः । 
इदं प्रजप्तं पठितं पाठितं श्रावितं श्रुतम् ॥ २०२ ॥ 
व्याकृतं चर्चितं ध्यातं विमृष्टमभिनन्दितम् । 
इहामुत्र च सर्वेषां विश्वैश्वर्यप्रदायकम् ॥ २०३ ॥ 
स्वच्छन्दचारिणाप्येष येनायं धार्यते स्तवः । 
स रक्ष्यते शिवोद्भूतैर्गणैरध्युष्टकोटिभिः ॥ २०४ ॥ 
पुस्तके लिखितं यत्र गृहे स्तोत्रं प्रपूजयेत् । 
तत्र सर्वोत्तमा लक्ष्मीः संनिधत्ते निरन्तरम् ॥ २०५ ॥ 
दानैरशेषैरखिलैर्व्रतैश्च तीर्थैरशेषैः सकलैर्मखैश्च । 
न तत्फलं विन्दति यद्गणेश-सहस्रनाम्नां स्मरणेन सद्यः ॥ २०६ ॥ 
एतन्नाम्नां सहस्त्रं पठति दिनमणौ प्रत्यहं प्रोज्जिहाने 
सायं मध्यंदिने वा त्रिषवणमथवा संततं वा जनो यः । 


स स्यादैश्वर्यधुर्यः प्रभवति च सतां कीर्तिमुच्चैस्तनोति 
प्रत्यूहं हन्ति विश्वं वशयति सुचिरं वर्धते पुत्रपौत्रैः ॥ २०७ ॥
One should perform the worship (pūjā) and libations (tarpaṇa) with durvā grass along with these names, according to prescribed rules. Especially with eight offerings (aṣṭadravyaiḥ), one should perform oblations (homa) with devotion. All his desired things become accomplished without doubt. This hymn—whether recited, read, taught, heard, listened to, expounded upon, contemplated, meditated upon, reflected upon, or praised—confers universal sovereignty (viśvaiśvaryapradāyakam) both here and hereafter. Even a free-spirited wanderer (svacchandacāriṇā) who bears this hymn is protected by crores of hosts (gaṇas) born of Śiva, who reside everywhere around him. 


Wherever the hymn is written in a manuscript and worshipped in a house, the highest form of prosperity (laksmī) dwells there continuously. Even by all kinds of gifts (dānaiḥ), all vows (vrataiḥ), all pilgrimages (tīrthaiḥ), and all sacrifices (makhaiḥ), one does not attain that fruit which is obtained immediately by remembrance of the thousand names of Gaṇeśa. Whoever recites this thousand names daily at sunrise, in the evening, at noon, at the three junctures (triṣavaṇa), or continuously—he becomes capable of bearing great lordship (aiśvaryadhuryaḥ), increases the fame of the virtuous, destroys every obstacle, brings the whole world under his sway, and is long-enduringly blessed with sons and grandsons.


Commentary
नामभिः पूजायां चतुर्थीनमोन्तैः, तर्पणे द्वितीया, तर्पया-म्यंतैः होमे चतुर्थीस्वाहांतैरित्यर्थः ॥ २०१ ॥ 
For worship (Pūjā) with the names, (the endings should be) "Caturthī" (dative case) and "Namaḥ" (salutation). For libation (Tarpaṇa), (the ending should be) "Dvitīyā" (accusative case) with "Tarpayāmi" (I satisfy). For offering in fire (Homa), (the ending should be) "Caturthī" with "Svāhā". This is the meaning.


प्रजप्तं उपांशू-च्चरितं पठितं उच्चैर्व्यक्तमुच्चरितम् ॥ २०२ ॥ 
"Japaptam" (जप्रप्तं) means recited quietly (Upāṃśu). 
"Paṭhitam" (पठितं) means recited aloud clearly (Uccair-vyaktam).
व्याकृतं व्याख्यातं, चर्चितं ऊहापोहविषयीकृतं, 
ध्यातं मनसा विचा-रितं, विमृष्टं शोधितं, 
लेखकदोषनिरासेनेति यावत्; अभि-नंदितमनुमतम् ॥ २०३ ॥ 
"Vyākṛtam" (व्याकृतं) means explained. "Carcitam" (चर्चितं) means made an object of reasoning (Uhāpoha-viṣayīkṛtam). "Dhyātam" (ध्यातं) means contemplated mentally. "Vimṛṣṭam" (विमृष्टं) means purified, i.e., by removing scribal errors. "Abhinanditam" (अभिनंदितम्) means approved or welcomed.


शिवोद्भूतैः शिवेन शिवया च जनितैः अध्युष्टकोटिभिः प्रत्येकं सार्धकोटित्रयसंख्याकैः ॥२०४-२०५॥ 
"Śivodbhūtaiḥ" (शिवोद्भूतैः) means produced by Śiva (the Lord) and Śivā (Pārvatī). "Adhyuṣṭa-koṭibhiḥ" (अध्युष्टकोटिभिः) refers to the groups numbering three and a half crores (Sārdha-koṭi-traya) for each.
प्रोज्जिहाने उदयमाने 'ओहाङ् गतौ' इत्यस्य रूपम्, त्रिषवणं त्रिसंध्यं 
संततं वेति प्रयासाधिक्यात्फला-धिक्यं न्यायसिद्धं प्रभवति, 
देशप्रभुत्वं च लभते, प्रत्यूहं विघ्नम् ॥ २०६-२०७ ॥
"Projjihāne" (प्रोज्जिहाने) means "rising" – it is a form derived from the root "Uhāṅ" meaning "to go". "Triṣavaṇam" (त्रिषवणम्) means three times daily (for each Sandhyā). Or "trisaṃdhyam" (त्रिसंध्यम्) means continuously (through the three junctions of the day). Through greater effort, greater fruit is logically attained. He also obtains lordship over the country. "Pratyūham" (प्रत्यूहम्) means obstacle.


अकिंचनोऽपि मत्प्राप्तिचिन्तको नियताशनः । 
जपेत्तु चतुरो मासान् गणेशार्चनतत्परः ॥ २०८ ॥ 
दरिद्रतां समुन्मूल्य सप्तजन्मानुगामपि । 
लभते महतीं लक्ष्मीमित्याज्ञा पारमेश्वरी ॥ २०९ ॥ 
आयुष्यं वीतरोगं कुलमतिविमलं सम्पदश्चार्तदानाः । 
कीर्तिर्नित्यावदाता भणितिरभिनवा कान्तिरव्याधिभव्या । 
पुत्राः सन्तः कलत्रं गुणवदभिमतं यद्यदेतच्च सत्यं 
नित्यं यः स्तोत्रमेतत् पठति गणपतेस्तस्य हस्ते समस्तम् ॥ २१० ॥
Even a destitute person (akiñcano'pi) who thinks of attaining Me (Gaṇapati), controls his diet, and remains devoted to the worship of Gaṇeśa, reciting this hymn for four months—destroys poverty that follows him even for seven births and attains great prosperity. 


This is the command of the Supreme Lord (Pārameśvarī ājñā). Long life, freedom from disease, a most pure family, charitable giving of wealth, ever-pure fame, fresh and inspired speech, radiant health, virtuous sons, a good and devoted wife with excellent qualities—whatever is desired, all this is true. All these things rest in the hand of that person who recites this hymn of Gaṇapati daily.


Commentary
अकिंचनो दरिद्रः, सप्तजन्मानुगां भाविसप्तजन्मपर्यंत-मनुवर्तिष्यमाणामपि ॥ २०८ ॥ 
"Akiñcano" (अकिंचनः) means one who is poor (Daridraḥ). "Saptajanmānugām" (सप्तजन्मानुगाम्) means that which follows (one) up to seven future births.
आयुष्यादीनां नवानां तदु-त्तराणि नवपदानि विशेषणानि, 
आर्तेभ्यो दानं यासां ता आर्तदानाः, 
नित्यावदाता चिरस्थायित्वे सति शुद्धा अभिनवाः 
परैरकल्पिता अभिमतं मनसा चिंतितं यद्यत्तदेतत्सर्वं सत्यं, 
सत्यसंकल्पतेति यावत् ॥ २०९-२१० ॥
Among the nine (qualities) beginning with Āyuṣya (longevity), the nine subsequent phrases are their modifiers. "Ārtadānāḥ" (आर्तदानाः) are those which have giving (Dāna) to the distressed (Ārta) as their defining characteristic. "Nityāvadātāḥ" (नित्यावदाताः) means eternally pure, of long duration, new, and not fashioned by others. Whatever is desired (Abhimatam) in the mind – all that becomes true (Satya). This means: He is of true resolve (Satyasaṅkalpa).
















































गणेशस्यैकविंशतिनामपाठः 
(The Recitation of the Twenty-One Names of Gaṇeśa)


ॐ गणञ्जयो गणपतिर्हेरम्बो धरणीधरः । 
महागणपतिर्लक्षप्रदः क्षिप्रप्रसादनः ॥ २११ ॥ 
अमोघसिद्धिरमितो मन्त्रश्चिन्तामणिर्निधिः । 
सुमङ्गलो बीजमाशापूरको वरदः शिवः ॥ २१२ ॥
Om, Gaṇajaya, Gaṇapati, Heramba, Dharaṇīdhara, Mahāgaṇapati, Lakṣaprada, Kṣipraprasādana, Amoghasiddhi, Amita, Mantra, Cintāmaṇi, Nidhi, Sumaṅgala, Bīja, Āśāpūraka, Varada, Śiva,


Commentary
अथ सहस्रनामपठनासमर्थस्यैकविंशतिनामपाठं प्रतिनिधि-त्वेन विदधाति - गणंजय इत्यादिना ॥ एतेष्वष्टादशनामानि पूर्व व्याख्यातान्येवः तत्र गणपतिरिति गणेश्वरगणाधि-पादिनाम समानार्थकं, अमित इत्यत्रामृत इति वा पाठः, उभयथापि व्याख्यातमेव ॥ २११ ॥ 
Now, for one who is unable to recite the thousand names, the text prescribes a substitute recitation of twenty-one names, beginning with "Gaṇam jaya..." (Gaṇaṃ jaya, etc.). Among these (twenty-one names), eighteen have already been explained previously. Among them, "Gaṇapati" is synonymous with "Gaṇeśvara," "Gaṇādhipa," and other names. In the name "Amita" (अमित), some read "Amṛta" (अमृत). Both readings have already been explained.


सुमंगलसुमंगल इति नाम्ना सुमंगलनामचरितार्थम्, वरप्रद इत्यनेन वरदनामचिंतामणिः शिवो बीजमिति नामत्रयं त्विहापूर्व तत्र क्षेत्र-विशेषाधिष्ठातृगणपते श्चिंतामणिरिति संज्ञा चिंतितार्थप्रदत्वा-त्स्वर्गस्थचिंतामणिवत् तदैवत्यमंत्रविशेषस्याप्येषा संज्ञा तद्रूप-त्वाद्देवोऽपि चिंतामणिः । शिवपस्य तु वश कांतौ शिवः स्मृत्या इति जगदुत्पादनेच्छाशक्तिमत्त्वादयो बहवोऽर्थाः शिवाष्टोत्तरशतनामसु प्रथमनामव्याख्याने शिवा स्वाधीन-बल्लभेति ललितासहस्रनामव्याख्यानेऽतिविस्तरेणास्माभिर्वर्णिताः । बीजं सर्वजगत्कारणं ॥ २१२ ॥
The name "Sumaṅgala-sumaṅgala" (सुमंगलसुमंगल) elucidates the nature of the word "Sumaṅgala" (supreme auspiciousness). With the name "Varaprada" (bestower of boons), the significance of "Varada" (boon-giver) is covered. The three names – "Cintāmaṇi" (wish-fulfilling gem), "Śiva" (the auspicious one), and "Bījam" (the seed) – are new here (i.e., not previously explained). Among these, the name "Cintāmaṇi" is given to the Gaṇapati who presides over a particular sacred region (Kṣetra). Because he bestows whatever is desired, he is like the celestial Cintāmaṇi. This is also the designation for a specific mantra sacred to him, and since the deity is of that nature (wish-fulfilling), the Lord himself is Cintāmaṇi. The name "Śiva" has many meanings – he who has the power to create the universe, he who is remembered as "Śiva" meaning "to be gracious," etc. 
We have described these extensively in the commentary on the first name of the Śivāṣṭottaraśatanāma and in the commentary on the name "Śivā Svādhīna-Vallabhā" in the Lalitā Sahasranāma. "Bīja" (बीजम्) means the seed, the cause of the entire universe.


काश्यपो नन्दनो वाचासिद्धो ढुण्ढिविनायकः । 
मोदकैरेभिरत्रैकविंशत्या नामभिः पुमान् ॥ २१३ ॥ 
यः स्तौति मद्गतमना मदाराधनतत्परः । 
स्तुतो नाम्नां सहस्रेण तेनाहं नात्र संशयः ॥ २१४ ॥
नमो नमः सुरवरपूजिताये 
नमो नमो निरुपममङ्गलात्मने । 
नमो नमो विपुलपदैकसिद्धये 
नमो नमः करिकलभाननाय ते ॥ २१५ ॥
Kāśyapa, Nandana, Vācāsiddha, Ḍhuṇḍhivināyaka—
A person who, with his mind fixed on me (Gaṇapati) and devoted to my worship, 
praises me using these twenty-one names along with modakas, 
is indeed being praised by me through the thousand names; there is no doubt in this.


Salutations, salutations to you who are worshipped by the best of gods.
Salutations, salutations to you who are the embodiment of incomparable auspiciousness.
Salutations, salutations to you who are the single perfection of abundant states.
Salutations, salutations to you who have the face of a young elephant.














॥ इति श्रीगणेशपुराणे उपासनाखण्डे ईश्वरमहागणपतिसंवादे 
श्रीमद्गणेशदिव्यसहस्रनामामृतस्तोत्रकथनन्नाम षट्चत्वारिंशोऽध्यायः ॥ ४६ ॥
Thus concludes the forty-sixth chapter (adhyāya) entitled "The Narration of the Nectar-like Hymn of 
the Divine Thousand Names of Śrīmad Gaṇeśa," in the dialogue between Īśvara (Śiva) and Mahāgaṇapati, within the Upāsanākhaṇḍa (Section on Worship) of the Śrī Gaṇeśa Purāṇa.
Commentary
काश्यपः कश्यपपुत्रः, शिवाद्या गणाः । 
इयं च कथा गणेशपुराणे उत्तरखंडे प्रसिद्धा, धरणीधर 
आशापुरक इत्यादिनाममूलभूताः कथा अपि तत्रैवानुसंधेयाः; 
विस्तर-भयान्नेह प्रदर्यन्ते ॥ २१४-२१५ ॥ 
"Kāśyapaḥ" (काश्यपः) means the son of Kaśyapa. "Śivādyāḥ gaṇāḥ" (शिवाद्या गणाः) means the groups (of attendants) beginning with Śiva. This narrative is well-known in the Uttarakhaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa Purāṇa. The stories that are the basis for names such as "Dharaṇīdhara" (the supporter of the earth), "Āśāpūraka" (the fulfiller of hopes), etc., are also to be sought there. Out of fear of prolixity, they are not elaborated here.


ग्रन्थान्ते मङ्गलमा-चरति - नमो नम इति । विपुलपदं परंधाम तस्य मुख्या सिद्धिर्यस्मात्सः, स्पष्टमन्यदिति सर्व शिवम् ॥
At the end of the text, he performs the auspicious benediction: "Namo namaḥ" (Salutations, salutations). He whose supreme abode (Paraṁ Dhāma) is vast (Vipula) and from whom the principal perfection (Mukhyā Siddhi) arises – the rest is clear. All is Śiva (Auspiciousness).








































भाष्यकृत्प्रशस्तिः
Eulogy of the Commentator


गभीरबुधयज्वनस्तनुभुवोऽधिवाराणसि-त्रिलोचनपदानुगः कृतमखोऽग्निचिद्भास्करः ।।
Gabhīra-budha-yajvanas tanubhuvo 'dhi Vārāṇasi-trilocana-padānugaḥ kṛta-makho 'gnicid bhāskaraḥ |
The son of the profound wise sacrificer, residing in Varanasi, follower of the three-eyed Lord (Śiva), performer of sacrifices, the fire-kindler, Bhāskara (the sun) —


महागणपतेर्महान्त्यपि सहस्रनामानि तदयाजनितया धिया सुजनतुष्टये व्याकरोत् ॥ १ ॥
Mahā-gaṇapater mahānty api sahasra-nāmāni tad-ayā-janitayā dhiyā sujana-tuṣṭaye vyākarot || 1 ||
Has explained even the great thousand names of Mahāgaṇapati, with intelligence born from his compassion, for the satisfaction of the virtuous.


संप्रदायजुषामेष खद्योतो लोकबान्धवः ॥
Sampradāyajuṣām eṣa khadyoto lokabāndhavaḥ ||
This Khadyota (The Firefly) is a friend to the world for those who follow the tradition.


ग्रंथविस्तरलुब्धानां खद्योतो ज्योतिरिंगणः ॥ २ ॥
Grantha-vistara-lubdhānāṃ khadyoto jyotiriṅgaṇaḥ ||
For those greedy for voluminous texts, this Khadyota is like a firefly (a small light) in a cluster of luminaries.


श्लोकाः षट् ६ प्रथमे त्रयस्तु ३ चरमे नाम्नां शतां तेषु तु श्वास ७४ श्चित्त ६६ वणि ५४ क्सुता ६७ गति ६३ गुणा ५३ धर्मः ५९ सखे २७ त्यष्टसु ॥
Ślokāḥ ṣaṭ (6) prathame trayastu (3) carame nāmnāṃ śatāṃ teṣu tu śvāsa 74 citta 66 vaṇi 54 ksutā 67 gati 63 guṇā 53 dharmaḥ 59 sakhe 27 tyaṣṭasu ||
There are 6 verses in the beginning and 3 at the end. Among the hundreds of names, the letters count: śvāsa (74), citta (66), vaṇi (54), ksutā (67), gati (63), guṇā (53), dharmaḥ (59), sakhe (27) – thus in the eight (hundreds) —










स्तोता ६६ धीद ८९ इति द्वयोः समुदिता पादाधिका षट्‌शती पादोना द्विशती परापि १७५ तदयं ग्रंथोऽष्टशत्यात्मकः ॥
Stotā 66 dhīda 89 iti dvayoḥ samuditā pādādhikā ṣaṭśatī pādonā dviśatī parāpi 175 tad-ayaṃ grantho 'ṣṭaśatyātmakaḥ ||
Stotā (66) and dhīda (89) – these two together make 155. Thus, six hundred and a quarter (625?) and two hundred minus a quarter (175?) – this text is comprised of eight hundred (verses? or something else? The math is cryptic, but the total is 800).


इति श्रीमत्पदवाक्यप्रमाणपारावारपारीणभारत्युपनामकगंभीर-रायदीक्षित सूरिसूनु भास्कररायदीक्षिताग्निचिता रचितो गणपति सहस्रनामार्थप्रकाशकः खद्योतः संपूर्णः ॥
Iti śrīmat-pada-vākya-pramāṇa-pārāvāra-pārīṇa-bhāraty-upanāmaka-gambhīra-rāya-dīkṣita sūri-sūnu bhāskararāya-dīkṣitāgnicitā racito gaṇapati-sahasra-nāmārtha-prakāśakaḥ khadyotaḥ saṃpūrṇaḥ ||
Thus, the "Khadyota" which illuminates the meaning of the thousand names of Gaṇapati, composed by Bhāskararāya Dīkṣita Agnicit, the son of Śrīmat Gambhīrarāya Dīkṣita, who is called Bhāratī and who has crossed the ocean of words, sentences, and means of proof, is complete.


श्रीगणेशार्पणमस्तु ॥
Śrī-gaṇeśārpaṇam astu ||
May this be offered to Śrī Gaṇeśa.


श्रीरस्तु ॥
Śrīr astu ||
May there be prosperity.


संपूर्णोऽयं ग्रन्थः ।
Saṃpūrṇo 'yaṃ granthaḥ ||
This text is complete.