यज्ञो यज्ञपतिर्यज्ञगोप्ता यज्ञफलप्रदः ॥ 
यशस्करो योगगम्यो याज्ञिको याजकप्रियः ॥ १०७ ॥ 
रसो रसप्रियो रस्यो रञ्जको रावणार्चितः ॥ 
रक्षोरक्षाकरो रत्नगर्भो राज्यसुखप्रदः ॥ १०८ ॥ 


Shloka 372: Yajñaḥ (यज्ञः), Yajñapatiḥ (यज्ञपतिः), Yajñagoptā (यज्ञगोप्ता) & Yajñaphalapradaḥ (यज्ञफलप्रदः)
(From the context of verse 107, these names are clear. He is the sacrifice itself, the Lord of sacrifice, the protector of sacrifice, and the bestower of the fruits of sacrifice.)


Shloka 372: Yaśaskaraḥ (यशस्करः)
(He is the bestower of fame.)


Shloka 372: Yogagamyaḥ (योगगम्यः)
(He who is attainable through Yoga.)


Shloka 372: Yājñikaḥ (याज्ञिकः) & Yājakapriyaḥ (याजकप्रियः)
(He is the one devoted to sacrifice and is dear to the sacrificer.)


Shloka 372: Rasaḥ (रसः)
शांतादौ मधुरादौ वा रसे प्रीत्या रसप्रियः। रस्यते चर्व्यते प्राज्ञैर्भूयो भूयोऽनुभूयते ॥ ३७२ ॥ स रस्यस्तन्मनो-वृत्तिरञ्जनेनासि रञ्जकः ।
He is the essence (Rasa) itself, in peaceful or sweet forms. Thus, He is Rasaḥ (The Essence).


Shloka 372: Rasapriyaḥ (रसप्रियः)
He is dear to the essence, or He delights in the essence. Thus, He is Rasapriyaḥ (The Lover of Essence).


Shloka 372: Rasyaḥ (रस्यः)
He is relished and tasted again and again by the wise. Thus, He is Rasyaḥ (The One who is Relished).


Shloka 372: Rañjakaḥ (रञ्जकः)
You are the colorer (delighter) of the mind's modifications. Thus, He is Rañjakaḥ (The Delighter / One who Colors).


Shloka 373: Rāvaṇārcitaḥ (रावणार्चितः)
रावणैः शब्दनैर्वेदशास्त्रगीतादिपा-ठिभिः ॥ ३७३ ॥ दशास्येनापि सिद्धयर्थ पूजितो रावणार्चितः ।
He is worshipped by the roaring reciters of the Vedas, scriptures, songs, etc., and also by the ten-faced Rāvaṇa for attaining success. Thus, He is Rāvaṇārcitaḥ (The One Worshipped by Rāvaṇa).


Shloka 374: Rakṣorakṣākaraḥ (रक्षोरक्षाकरः)
रक्षांसि भस्मसात्कुर्वन् रक्षोरक्षाकरः स्मृतः ॥ ३७४॥
He who reduces the Rākṣasas (demons) to ashes is remembered as Rakṣorakṣākaraḥ (The Destroyer of Demons).


Shloka 375: Ratnagarbhaḥ (रत्नगर्भः)
रल-गर्भा मही तद्वान् रत्नगर्भस्तदाश्रये ।
The earth (Mahī) contains the womb of gems. He who possesses that (or is the support of that) is Ratnagarbhaḥ (The Womb of Jewels / One with Gems within).






Shloka 375: Rājyasukhapradaḥ (राज्यसुखप्रदः)
राज्यं तज्जन्मसौख्यं च ददद्राज्यसुखप्रदः ॥ ३७५ ॥
He who bestows kingdom and the happiness arising from it is Rājyasukhapradaḥ (The Bestower of Kingdom and Happiness).


लक्ष्यं लक्ष्यप्रदो लक्ष्यो लयस्थो लड्डुकप्रियः ॥ 
लानप्रियो लास्यपरो लोभकृल्लोकविश्रुतः ॥ १०९ ॥


Shloka 376: Lakṣyam (लक्ष्यम्)
तारेण धनुषा चित्तशरेण ब्रह्म वेधयेत् । इति श्रुत्या शरव्य-स्त्वं तल्लक्ष्यमसि योगिनाम् ॥ ३७६ ॥
You are the target (Lakṣya) of the Yogis, as stated in the Śruti: "One should pierce Brahman with the arrow of the mind, using the bow of the syllable Oṁ." Thus, He is Lakṣyam (The Target).


Shloka 377: Lakṣyapradaḥ (लक्ष्यप्रदः)
लक्ष्याणि चित्तस्थैर्या-र्थ लक्षसंख्यान्यदीदृशन् । ऋषयस्तानि निर्विघ्नं ददलक्ष्यप्रदो भवान् ॥ ३७७ ॥
You bestow upon the sages the various targets (spiritual goals), numbering in the hundreds of thousands, which are situated in the mind and are to be seen. Thus, You are Lakṣyapradaḥ (The Bestower of the Spiritual Target).


Shloka 377: Lakṣyaḥ (लक्ष्यः)
लक्ष्यो लक्षणया गम्यो महावाक्यगतैः पदैः ।
He is to be known (Lakṣyaḥ) through implication and through the words of the great Upaniṣadic statements (Mahāvākyas).


Shloka 378: Layasthaḥ (लयस्थः)
लयस्थः कल्पकालेऽपि तिष्ठंश्चित्तलयेऽपि वा ॥ ३७८ ॥
He remains existing even during the dissolution of the cosmos (Kalpa), or even when the mind is dissolved in deep meditation. Thus, He is Layasthaḥ (The One Abiding in Dissolution).


Shloka 379: Laḍḍukapriyaḥ (लड्डुकप्रियः)
लड्डुका वर्तुलाकाराः प्रियालतिलखाखसैः । रचिताः शर्करा-पक्कास्तत्प्रियो लड्डुकप्रियः ॥ ३७९ ॥
Laḍḍukas are round-shaped sweets made from Priyāla seeds, sesame seeds, and khakhasa (poppy seeds), cooked with sugar. He who is fond of them is Laḍḍukapriyaḥ (The Lover of Laḍḍukas).


Shloka 380: Lānapriyaḥ (लानप्रियः)
लानप्रियो गजावास-शालायां प्रीतिसंयुतः ।
He who is affectionate in the elephant stable (Lāna is a stable or a lion's lair) is Lānapriyaḥ (The One Fond of the Stable).


Shloka 380: Lāsyaparaḥ (लास्यपरः)
विलासार्हपरं धाम यस्य लास्यपरो हि सः ॥३८०॥
He whose supreme abode is worthy of divine play or dance is Lāsyaparaḥ (The One Devoted to Dance/Play).


Shloka 381: Lobhakṛt (लोभकृत्) & Lokaviśrutaḥ (लोकविश्रुतः)
ये लाभकारिणो लोकाः शीघ्रभक्तवरप्रदाः । तेषु श्रेष्ठतया ख्यातो लाभकृल्लोकविश्रुतः ॥ ३८१ ॥
He who is renowned (Viśruta) in the worlds (Loka) as the best among those who bestow benefits (Lābha) and quickly grant boons to devotees is Lobhakṛt (The Bestower of Gains) and Lokaviśrutaḥ (The One Renowned in the Worlds).


वरेण्यो वह्निवदनो वन्द्यो वेदान्तगोचरः ॥ 
विकर्ता विश्वतश्चक्षुर्विधाता विश्वतोमुखः ॥ ११० ॥


Shloka 382: Vareṇyaḥ (वरेण्यः)
वरेण्याख्यो गणपतेरद्वैतभजने रतः । कश्चिद्राजा तद-द्वैताद्वरेण्योऽस्युत्तमोऽपि वा ॥ ३८२ ॥
He is called Vareṇyaḥ (The Most Excellent / Worthy to be Chosen) – either as a king devoted to the non-dual worship of Gaṇapati, or as the supreme one due to his non-duality.


Shloka 383: Vahnivadanaḥ (वह्निवदनः)
यद्यद्भवन्तमुद्दिश्य स्रमिद्धेऽग्नौ हुतं हविः । तेनैव तृप्यसीत्यर्थात्त्वं वह्निवदनो मतः ॥३८३॥
Whatever oblation is offered into the blazing fire with you as its object, you are satisfied by that very act. Therefore, you are considered Vahnivadanaḥ (The One with Fire as His Face).


Shloka 384: Vandyaḥ (वन्द्यः)
वन्द्यो नम्योऽस्युपनिषद्गम्यो वेदान्तगोचरः ॥ ३८४ ॥
He is to be saluted (Vandyaḥ), bowed to, reached through the Upaniṣads, and is the object of Vedānta.




Shloka 384: Vedāntagocaraḥ (वेदान्तगोचरः)
Thus, He is Vedāntagocaraḥ (The One within the Range of Vedānta).


Shloka 384: Vikartā (विकर्ता)
विकर्ता त्वं हि षड्‌भावविकाराणां प्रवर्तकः ॥
You are the Vikartā (The Modifier / Separator / Creator) because you are the instigator of the six modifications of being (birth, existence, growth, change, decay, death).


Shloka 385: Viśvataścakṣuḥ (विश्वतश्चक्षुः)
यत्र क्वचन भक्तेन पत्रं पुष्पं फलं जलम् । दत्तं तत्रैव तत्पश्यन् धारयन् भक्षयन्नपि ॥ ३८५ ॥ कीर्त्यसे विश्वतश्चक्षुर्विधाता विश्वतोमुखः ।
You see everywhere, holding and even consuming whatever leaf, flower, fruit, or water is offered by a devotee, wherever it is offered. Therefore, you are proclaimed as Viśvataścakṣuḥ (The One with Eyes Everywhere).


Shloka 385: Vidhātā (विधाता)
Thus, He is Vidhātā (The Ordainer / Creator).


Shloka 385: Viśvatomukhaḥ (विश्वतोमुखः)
Thus, He is Viśvatomukhaḥ (The One with Faces Everywhere).


वामदेवो विश्वनेता वज्रिवज्रनिवारणः ॥ 
विश्वबन्धनविष्कम्भाधारो विश्वेश्वरप्रभुः ॥ १११ ॥


Shloka 386: Vāmadevaḥ (वामदेवः)
वामदेवो वल्गुतरं दीव्यसि द्योतसे यतः ॥ ३८६ ॥
You are called Vāmadeva (The Pleasant / Left-side Lord) because you shine most beautifully and radiate delight.


Shloka 386: Viśvanetā (विश्वनेता)
विश्वनेतासि जगतो विष्णोर्वा नायके यतः ।
You are the leader of the universe (Viśvanetā), or because you are the leader of Viṣṇu.




Shloka 387: Vajrivajranivāraṇaḥ (वज्रिवज्रनिवारणः)
इन्द्रवज्रस्तंभ-नेन वज्रिवज्रनिवारणः ॥३८७॥
He who stops (Nivāraṇa) the thunderbolt (Vajra) of Indra (Vajrin) is Vajrivajranivāraṇaḥ (The Checker of Indra's Thunderbolt).


Shloka 388: Viśvabandhanaviṣkambhādhāraḥ (विश्वबन्धनविष्कम्भाधारः)
विश्वनिर्मार्णपर्याप्तो देशो विष्कंभ उच्यते । विश्वबन्धनविष्कंभाधारस्तस्यापि धारणात् ॥ ३८८ ॥
The state (place) of universal projection (creation) is called Viṣkambha (the prop). He who is the support (Ādhāra) of that prop which binds the universe is Viśvabandhanaviṣkambhādhāraḥ (The Support of the Prop that Binds the Universe).


Shloka 388: Viśveśvaraprabhuḥ (विश्वेश्वरप्रभुः)
ब्रह्माण्डानां तदीशानांचेशो विश्वेश्वरप्रभुः ।
He is the lord (Prabhu) of the lord of the universe (Viśveśvara). Thus, He is Viśveśvaraprabhuḥ (The Lord of the Lord of the Universe).


शब्दब्रह्म शमप्राप्यः शंभुभक्तिगणेश्वरः ॥ 
शास्ता शिखाग्रनिलयः शरण्यः शिखरीश्वरः ॥ ११२ ॥


Shloka 389: Śabdabrahman (शब्दब्रह्म)
शब्दब्रह्म परां वाचमतीतो नादरूपधृक् ॥ ३८९॥
You are Śabdabrahman (The Absolute as Sound) because you transcend the supreme speech and assume the form of the primal sound (Nāda).


Shloka 389: Śamaprāpyaḥ (शमप्राप्यः)
शम-प्राप्यः शान्तिदान्ती जितैचित्तेन लभ्यसे ।
You are attainable (Prāpya) through the calmness (Śama) of a peaceful and self-controlled mind. Thus, He is Śamaprāpyaḥ (The One Attained through Inner Calm).


Shloka 390: Śambhvaṣṭagaṇeśvaraḥ (शंभ्वष्टगणेश्वरः)
शैवान् शाक्तान् गणांश्चेष्टे शंभुशक्तिगणेश्वरः ॥ ३९० ॥
He who rules over the Śaivas, Śāktas, and Gaṇas is Śambhvaṣṭagaṇeśvaraḥ (The Lord of Śambhu's Hosts).
(Commentary: Previous commentators read "Śambhuśaktir" as separate names, but this is rejected as inappropriate.)


Shloka 392: Śāstā (शास्ता)
शास्ता केरलदेशीया देवताऽस्ति तदात्मकः ॥ ३९२ ॥
You are of the nature of Śāstā, a deity of the Kerala region. Thus, He is Śāstā (The Ruler/Teacher).


Shloka 392: Śikhāgranilayaḥ (शिखाग्रनिलयः)
तस्याः शिखायामध्येयः परमात्मा व्यवस्थितः ॥ श्रुतिसिद्धोऽस्ति तद्रूपः शिखाग्रनिलयो भवान् ।
The Supreme Self is to be meditated upon at the tip of the crown (Śikhāgra). You exist in that very form revealed by the Śruti. Thus, You are Śikhāgranilayaḥ (The One Dwelling at the Crown's Tip).


Shloka 393: Śaraṇyaḥ (शरण्यः)
त्राता शरण्यः
You are the protector, the giver of refuge (Śaraṇyaḥ).


Shloka 393: Śikharīśvaraḥ (शिखरीश्वरः)
प्रालेयाचलात्मा शिखरीश्वरः ॥ ३९३ ॥
You are the snowy mountain (Śikhari) itself, or its lord (Īśvara). Thus, He is Śikharīśvaraḥ (The Lord of the Mountain Peak).


षड्ऋतुकुसुमस्रग्वी षडाधारः षडक्षरः ॥  
संसारवैद्यः सर्वज्ञः सर्वभेषजभेषजम् ॥ ११३ ॥


Shloka 394: Ṣaḍṛtukusumasragvī (षड्ऋतुकुसुमस्रग्वी)
जातीचम्पककुन्दादीन्येकै कर्तुभवान्यपि । षङ्गतुकुसुम-स्रग्वी सर्वदा युगपद्दधत् ॥ ३९४ ॥
He who wears a garland (Sragvī) of the flowers of all six seasons (Ṣaḍṛtu) – such as jasmine, champaka, kunda, and others – simultaneously and eternally, is Ṣaḍṛtukusumasragvī (The One with a Garland of Flowers of All Six Seasons).


Shloka 395: Ṣaḍādhāraḥ (षडाधारः)
मूलाधारे गणेशोऽस्ति चक्रषट्‌कं तदूर्ध्वतः । षण्णामाधारभूतोऽयं षडाधार इति स्मृतः ॥३९५॥
Gaṇeśa exists in the Mūlādhāra, and the six cakras are above that. He who is the support of these six is remembered as Ṣaḍādhāraḥ (The Support of the Six Cakras).
Shloka 395: Ṣaḍakṣaraḥ (षडक्षरः)
ङेवर्मयुग्वक्रतुण्डमत्ररूपः षडक्षरः ।
He who is of the nature of the six-syllabled Vakratuṇḍa mantra ("Gaṅ Gaṇapataye Namaḥ") is Ṣaḍakṣaraḥ (The Six-Syllabled One).
(Commentary: Previous explanations of these names are disregarded as unsupported by Tantra and Purāṇa.)


Shloka 396: Saṃsāravaidyaḥ (संसारवैद्यः)
संसारवैद्य इत्युक्तो भवरोगविनाशकः ॥३९६॥
He who is declared as Saṃsāravaidyaḥ (The Physician of the World) is the destroyer of the disease of worldly existence (Bhava).


Shloka 396: Sarvajñaḥ (सर्वज्ञः)
सर्वज्ञः सकलज्ञाता सुगतात्मा विनायकः ।
He is Sarvajñaḥ (The Omniscient) – the knower of all, the soul of the blessed, Vinaayaka.


Shloka 397: Sarvabheṣajabheṣajam (सर्वभेषजभेषजम्)
सर्वेषा-मपि रोगाणां दिव्यं पीयूषमौषधम् ॥ ३९७ ॥ तस्यापि नाशयन् दोषान् सर्वभेषजभेषजम् ॥
He is the divine nectar-like medicine for all diseases. And He destroys the defects of even that medicine. Therefore, He is Sarvabheṣajabheṣajam (The Medicine for All Medicines).


सृष्टिस्थितिलयक्रीडः सुरकुञ्जरभेदनः ॥ 
सिन्दूरितमहाकुम्भः सदसद्यक्तिदायकः ॥ ११४ ॥


Shloka 398: Sṛṣṭisthitilayakrīḍaḥ (सृष्टिस्थितिलयक्रीडः)
लीलया सर्वजगतां निर्मिति-स्थिति-संहृतीः ॥ ३९८ ॥ सृष्टि-स्थिति-लयक्रीडः कथ्यसे रचयन् क्षणात् ।
You create, maintain, and destroy the entire universe in a single moment, merely as play. Therefore, You are declared as Sṛṣṭisthitilayakrīḍaḥ (The One Whose Play is Creation, Preservation, and Dissolution).


Shloka 399: Surakuñjarabhedanaḥ (सुरकुञ्जरभेदनः)
दानवैरर्चि-तश्च त्वं सुरकुञ्जरभेदनः ॥ ३९९ ॥
You are worshipped by the demons (Dānavas), and you are the splitter of the divine elephant (of Indra). Thus, He is Surakuñjarabhedanaḥ (The Destroyer of the Divine Elephant).


Shloka 399: Sindūritamahākumbhaḥ (सिन्दूरितमहाकुम्भः)
सिन्दूरितमहाकुंभः सिन्दूरारुणमस्तकः ।
He whose great head (forehead) is adorned with red vermilion (Sindūra) is Sindūritamahākumbhaḥ (The One whose Great Forehead is Colored with Vermilion).


Shloka 400: Sadasadyaktidāyakaḥ (सदसद्यक्तिदायकः)
सद्ब्रह्मैव न सद्विश्वं तयोर्व्यक्तिः प्रकाश-नम् ॥४००॥ स्वभक्तेभ्यो ददासीति सदसयक्तिदायकः । साक्षी पश्यसि साक्षात्त्वं विश्वं चित्तानपेक्षया ॥ ४०१ ॥
You bestow upon Your devotees the faculty of discrimination between the Real (Sat – Brahman, which truly exists) and the Unreal (Asat – the universe, which does not ultimately exist). Thus, You are Sadasadyaktidāyakaḥ (The Bestower of the Knowledge of the Real and the Unreal). You are the witness who directly perceives the universe without depending on the mind.


साक्षी समुद्रमथनः स्वसंवेद्यः स्वदक्षिणः ॥ 
स्वतन्त्रः सत्यसङ्कल्पः सामगानरतः सुखी ॥ ११५ ॥


Shloka 402: Sākṣī (साक्षी) & Samudramathanaḥ (समुद्रमथनः)
समुद्रमथने देवैर्मन्थनारंभणेऽर्चितः । स्वसंवेद्यः स्वयं-ज्योतिः स्वयंशक्तः स्वदक्षिणः ॥४०२॥
He is the witness (Sākṣī) of everything. He was worshipped by the gods at the beginning of the churning of the ocean. Thus, He is Samudramathanaḥ (The Churner of the Ocean).


Shloka 402: Svasaṃvedyaḥ (स्वसंवेद्यः)
He is self-revealed (Svasaṃvedyaḥ), self-luminous (Svayaṃjyotiḥ).


Shloka 402: Svadakṣiṇaḥ (स्वदक्षिणः)
He is self-capable and also means "His own right" or "skilful" (Svadakṣiṇaḥ).


Shloka 403: Svatantraḥ (स्वतन्त्रः)
खतन्त्रः स्वयमेवासि नानातन्त्रात्मना यतः ।
You are indeed independent (Svatantraḥ), assuming the form of many Tantras.


Shloka 403: Satyasaṅkalpaḥ (सत्यसङ्कल्पः)
अमोघकल्पनात् सत्यसंकल्प इति गीयसे ॥४०३॥
Because your resolve never fails, you are praised as Satyasaṅkalpaḥ (The One of True Resolve).
Shloka 403: Sāmagānarataḥ (सामगानरतः)
सामप्रीतेः सदानंदात् सामगानरतः सुखी ।
He delights in the chanting of the Sāma Veda (Sāmagāna). Thus, He is Sāmagānarataḥ (The One Devoted to Chanting the Sāma Veda).


Shloka 403: Sukhī (सुखी)
He is ever-blissful (Sukhī).


हंसो हस्तिपिशाचीशो हवनं हव्यकव्यभुक् ॥ 
हव्यो हुतप्रियो हर्षो हृलेखामन्त्रमध्यगः ॥ ११६ ॥


Shloka 404: Haṁsaḥ (हंसः)
हंसो यतिविशेषात्मा यद्वा भास्करमूर्तिकः ॥ ४०४ ॥
He is Haṁsaḥ (The Swan) – either as the embodied soul of a particular sage (Yati) or as the one who has the form of the sun (Bhāskara).


Shloka 404-405: Hastipiśācīśaḥ (हस्तिपिशाचीशः)
एतत्पञ्चाक्षरस्यान्ते लिखेच्छब्दाद्विठो मनुः । तत्प्रतीकमुपादाय तस्येशो देवतोदिता ॥ ४०५ ॥ सोऽयं हस्तिपिशाचीशो नवा-र्णमनुदेवता।
He is the lord (Īśa) of the Hastipiśācī. This deity is the presiding deity of the nine-syllabled mantra, being the lord of that symbol.
(Commentary: Previous interpretations reading "Hastī" as a separate name are disregarded as ignorance of special Ganesha mantras.)


Shloka 406: Havanaṁ (हवनम्)
यागः प्रक्षेपयुग्हो-मस्तद्रूपो हवनं भवान् ॥४०६॥
The sacrifice (Yāga) endowed with offerings is of the nature of Homa. You, being that very form, are Havanaṁ (The Oblation/Sacrifice).


Shloka 406: Havyakavyabhuk (हव्यकव्यभुक्)
देवताः पितरश्चेति द्विरूपो हव्यकव्यभुक् ।
He who enjoys (Bhuk) both the offerings to the gods (Havya) and the offerings to the ancestors (Kavya) is Havyakavyabhuk (The Partaker of Both Divine and Ancestral Offerings).


Shloka 407: Havyaḥ (हव्यः)
हव्यो हविःस्वरूपत्वाद्धविर्ब्रह्मेति हि स्मृतेः ॥ ४०७ ॥
He is Havyaḥ (The Worthy Oblation) because He is of the nature of the oblation itself, as it is remembered: "The oblation is Brahman."


Shloka 408: Hutapriyaḥ (हुतप्रियः)
हुतं द्रव्यं प्रियं यस्या देवतायाः सवैभवान् । हवि-र्भक्षणजो मोदो हर्षः सोऽपि त्वदात्मकः ॥ ४०८ ॥
The offered material (Huta) is dear to the deity. The delight arising from consuming the oblation is joy (Harṣa), and that too is of your nature. Thus, He is Hutapriyaḥ (The One Fond of Offerings).


Shloka 408: Harṣaḥ (हर्षः)
He is Harṣaḥ (Joy) itself.


Shloka 410: Hṛllekhāmantramadhyagaḥ (हृलेखामन्त्रमध्यगः)
हृल्लेखार्थ-स्तन्त्रराजे वर्णितोव्याकुलाक्षरैः । व्योम्ना प्रकाशमानस्त्वं ग्रसमानस्त्वमग्निना ॥ ४०९ ॥ तयोर्विमर्श ईकारो बिन्दुना तन्निफालनम् । इति ह्रींकारवाच्योऽसि हृल्लेखामन्त्र-मध्यगः ॥ ४१० ॥
He is described in the Tantrarāja by the letters that are the meaning of Hṛllekhā. You shine with the sky (the vowel 'a') and consume with the fire (the vowel 'i'), their union is the 'Ī' vowel, and the Bindu (dot) is the removal of that. Thus, you are signified by the syllable 'Hrīṁ'. Therefore, He is Hṛllekhāmantramadhyagaḥ (The One Abiding within the Hṛllekhā Mantra).


क्षेत्राधिपः क्षमाभर्ता क्षमापरपरायणः ॥ 
क्षिप्रक्षेमकरः क्षेमानन्दः क्षोणीसुरद्रुमः ॥११७॥


Shloka 411: Kṣetrādhipaḥ (क्षेत्राधिपः)
प्रयागादेः शरीरादेर्वेशः क्षेत्राधिपो मतः ॥ ४११ ॥
He who is the lord of sacred places (Kṣetra) such as Prayāga, and also of the physical body, is considered Kṣetrādhipaḥ (The Lord of the Field).


Shloka 411: Kṣamābhartā (क्षमाभर्ता)
क्षमाभर्ता क्षितिं क्षान्तिमपि वा यो बिभर्ति सः ॥
He who supports (Bhartā) the earth (Kṣamā) or who embodies forbearance (Kṣamā) is Kṣamābhartā (The Supporter of the Earth / The Lord of Forbearance).


Shloka 411: Kṣamāparaparāyaṇaḥ (क्षमापरपरायणः)
क्षान्तिशील-मुनिप्राप्यः क्षमापरपरायणः ।
He who is devoted (Parāyaṇa) to forbearance (Kṣamā) and is attainable by sages of patient disposition is Kṣamāparaparāyaṇaḥ (The One Utterly Devoted to Forbearance).


Shloka 412: Kṣiprakṣemakaraḥ (क्षिप्रक्षेमकरः)
शीघ्रं सिद्धिं ददासीति क्षिप्रक्षेमकरो भवान् ॥ ४१२ ॥
You grant success quickly; therefore, You are Kṣiprakṣemakaraḥ (The One Who Swiftly Bestows Well-being).


Shloka 413: Kṣemānandaḥ (क्षेमानन्दः)
क्षेमं सांसारिकं सौख्य-मानन्दः पारमार्थिकः । उभयात्मा त्वमेवेति क्षेमानन्द इती-र्यसे ॥ ४१३ ॥
Kṣema is worldly happiness, and Ānanda is transcendental bliss. You possess both natures; therefore, You are proclaimed as Kṣemānandaḥ (The One Who is Both Worldly Well-being and Supreme Bliss).


Shloka 414: Kṣoṇīsuradrumaḥ (क्षोणीसुरद्रुमः)
कल्पवृक्ष इव क्षोण्यामिष्टान्सर्वान्प्रयच्छसि । धर्मादिदुःखभोगान्तानतः क्षोणीसुरद्रुमः ॥ ४१४ ॥
Like a wish-fulfilling tree (Kalpavṛkṣa) on earth (Kṣoṇī), you bestow all desirable things – from virtue (Dharma) to the end of suffering and enjoyment. Therefore, He is Kṣoṇīsuradrumaḥ (The Divine Tree on Earth).


धर्मप्रदोऽर्थदः कामदाता सौभाग्यवर्धनः ॥ 
विद्याप्रदो विभवदो भुक्तिमुक्तिफलप्रदः ॥११८॥


Shloka 415: Dharmapradaḥ (धर्मप्रदः), Arthadaḥ (अर्थदः) & Kāmadātā (कामदाता)
कल्पद्रुमत्वं विविनक्त्येकविंशतिनामभिः । धर्मप्रदोऽर्थदः कामदातेत्युक्तस्त्रिवर्गदः ॥४१५॥
The aspect of being a wish-fulfilling tree (Kalpadruma) is elaborately described through twenty-one names. He is called Dharmapradaḥ (The Bestower of Righteousness), Arthadaḥ (The Bestower of Wealth), and Kāmadātā (The Giver of Desires). Thus, He is the giver of the three goals of life (Trivarga – Dharma, Artha, Kāma).








Shloka 415: Saubhāgyavardhanaḥ (सौभाग्यवर्धनः)
स्त्रीणां जीवत्पतित्वादि दद-त्सौभाग्यवर्धनः ॥
He who bestows upon women the state of having a living husband, etc., and increases good fortune (Saubhāgya) is Saubhāgyavardhanaḥ (The Increaser of Good Fortune).


Shloka 416: Vidyāpradaḥ (विद्याप्रदः) & Vibhavadaḥ (विभवदः)
विद्याप्रदो विभवदो ज्ञानसंपत्तिदा-यकः ॥४१६॥
He is Vidyāpradaḥ (The Bestower of Knowledge) and Vibhavadaḥ (The Bestower of Prosperity/Opulence) – the giver of wisdom and wealth.


Shloka 416: Bhuktimuktiphala-pradaḥ (भुक्तिमुक्तिफलप्रदः)
भोगजीवन्मुक्तिदानाद्भुक्तिमुक्तिफलप्रदः ॥
He who grants enjoyment (Bhukti - worldly pleasure) and liberation (Mukti) gives the fruits of both. Thus, He is Bhuktimuktiphala-pradaḥ (The Bestower of the Fruits of both Enjoyment and Liberation).


अभिरूप्यकरो वीरश्रीप्रदो विजयप्रदः ॥ 
सर्ववश्यकरो गर्भदोषहा पुत्रपौत्रदः ॥ ११९ ॥


Shloka 417: Abhirūpyakaraḥ (अभिरूप्यकरः)
आढचैः सह दरिद्राणां मूर्खाणां पण्डितैः सह । साम्यं प्रदर्शयन् सभ्येष्वाभिरूप्यकरो मतः ॥ ४१७॥
He who brings about equality between the rich and the poor, and between the foolish and the wise, in the assemblies of the learned, is considered Abhirūpyakaraḥ (The One Who Bestows Elegance / Equality of Presence).


Shloka 418: Vīraśrīpradaḥ (वीरश्रीप्रदः)
समरे कान्दिशीकानां अपि वीरश्रियं ददत् । नामस्मृतवतां बीर-श्रीप्रदः कीर्त्यसे बुधैः ॥ ४१८ ॥
Even to those who are fleeing in battle, He bestows the glory of valor (Vīraśrī). Therefore, He is praised by the wise as Vīraśrīpradaḥ (The Bestower of the Glory of Valor). (Commentary: An alternative reading as separate name "Vīra" is disregarded as inconsistent with the context.)


Shloka 419: Vijayapradaḥ (विजयप्रदः)
वीर-श्रियं जयफलां ददानो विजयप्रदः ।
He who bestows the glory of valor, which is the fruit of victory, is Vijayapradaḥ (The Bestower of Victory).
Shloka 419: Sarvavaśyakaraḥ (सर्ववश्यकरः)
सर्व भक्तवशे कुर्वन् सर्ववश्यकरो भवान् ॥ ४१९ ॥
He who brings everything under the control of His devotees is Sarvavaśyakaraḥ (The One Who Brings Everything Under Control).


Shloka 419: Garbhadoṣahā (गर्भदोषहा)
बीजदोषान् स्रावपातौ नाशयन् गर्भदोषहा ॥
He who destroys defects of the seed (semen/ovum) and the miscarriage of the fetus is Garbhadoṣahā (The Remover of Womb Defects).


Shloka 420: Putrapautradaḥ (पुत्रपौत्रदः)
पुत्रः सूनुश्च दुहितातत्पौत्रान् दुहितुः सुतान् ॥ ४२० ॥ नप्तृन्प्रणप्तृन् दौहित्रान् ददानः पुत्रपौत्रदः ॥
He who bestows sons, grandsons (by sons), nephews (sons of daughter), great-grandsons, and further descendants is Putrapautradaḥ (The Bestower of Sons and Grandsons).


मेधादः कीर्तिदः शोकहारी दौर्भाग्यनाशनः ॥ 
प्रतिवादिमुखस्तम्भो रुष्टचित्तप्रसादनः ॥ १२० ॥


Shloka 421: Medhādaḥ (मेधादः)
धीर्धारणावती मेधा मेधादस्तत्प्रदायकः ॥ ४२१ ॥
The power of retention is Medhā (retentive memory). Medhādaḥ (The Bestower of Retentive Memory) is He who grants that.


Shloka 421: Kīrtidaḥ (कीर्तिदः)
लोके या सगुणख्यातिस्तत्प्रदानेन कीर्तिदः ।
Whatever reputation (Kīrti) or fame based on virtues exists in the world, He bestows it. Thus, He is Kīrtidaḥ (The Bestower of Fame).


Shloka 422: Śokahārī (शोकहारी)
शोकहारी ज्ञान-दानात्तरति शोकमात्मवत् ॥ ४२२ ॥
He is Śokahārī (The Remover of Sorrow) because through the gift of knowledge, one crosses beyond sorrow like the Self.




Shloka 422: Daurbhāgyanāśanaḥ (दौर्भाग्यनाशनः)
दुर्भगत्वापहारेण स्त्रीणां दौर्भाग्यनाशनः ।
By removing the state of misfortune (Durbhagatva), He is Daurbhāgyanāśanaḥ (The Destroyer of Ill-Fortune).


Shloka 423: Prativādimukhastambhaḥ (प्रतिवादिमुखस्तम्भः)
वाचं स्तभ्नासि दुष्टानां प्रतिकूलं प्रजल्प-ताम् ॥४२३॥ प्रतिवादिमुखस्तम्भः कथ्यसे स्मृतिमात्रतः ।
You paralyze the speech of the wicked who speak against You. He is called Prativādimukhastambhaḥ (The One Who Silences the Mouths of Opponents) simply by being remembered.


Shloka 424: Ruṣṭacittaprasādanaḥ (रुष्टचित्तप्रसादनः)
सेवकेषु क्रोधजुषां राज्ञां चित्तानि शोधयेत् ॥ ४२४ ॥ स्नेह-शालीनि कुर्वाणो रुष्टचित्तप्रसादनः ॥
He purifies the minds of angry kings towards their servants, making them affectionate. Thus, He is Ruṣṭacittaprasādanaḥ (The One Who Calms the Angry Mind).


पराभिचारशमनो दुःखभञ्जनकारकः ॥ 
लवस्तुटिः कला काष्ठा निमेषस्तत्परः क्षणः ॥ १२१ ॥


Shloka 425: Parābhicāraśamanaḥ (पराभिचारशमनः)
पराभिचारशमनो मारणाख्यस्य कर्मणः ॥ ४२५ ॥ स्वशत्रुभिः प्रणीतस्य निष्फलीकरणान्मतः ।
He is Parābhicāraśamanaḥ (The Appeaser of Enemy Sorcery) because He renders fruitless the killing rites performed by one's own enemies.


Shloka 426: Duḥkhabhañjanakārakaḥ (दुःखभञ्जनकारकः)
भञ्जयन् सर्व-दुःखानि दुःखभञ्जनकारकः ॥ ४२६ ॥
He who shatters (Bhañjan) all sorrows (Duḥkha) is Duḥkhabhañjanakārakaḥ (The Shatterer of Sorrows).


Shloka 427-429: Lavaḥ (लवः), Truṭiḥ (त्रुटिः), Kalā (कला), Kāṣṭhā (काष्ठा), Nimeṣaḥ (निमेषः), Tatparaḥ (तत्परः), Kṣaṇaḥ (क्षणः)
अथ कालस्वरूप-त्वमुक्तं विंशतिनामभिः । पद्मपत्रसहस्रस्य सूक्ष्मसूच्या भिवेधने ॥४२७॥ दले दले लवः कालसहस्रेण लवैस्रुटिः ॥४२८॥ त्रुटेः शतं तत्परस्तैर्निमेषस्त्रिशता भवेत् । अष्टादशनिमेषैः स्यात्काष्ठा तत्रिंशता कला ॥ ४२९ ॥
Now, the nature of Time is described through these names. When a fine needle pierces the thousand leaves of a lotus, the time taken to pierce each leaf is one Lava. One thousand Lavas make one Truṭi. One hundred Truṭis make one Tatpara. Thirty Tatparas make one Nimeṣa (blink of an eye). Eighteen Nimeṣas make one Kāṣṭhā. Thirty Kāṣṭhās make one Kalā.
Thus, He is Lavaḥ (The Instant), Truṭiḥ (The Fragment), Kalā (The Small Unit of Time), Kāṣṭhā (The Division of Time), Nimeṣaḥ (The Blink), Tatparaḥ (That Which is Beyond), and Kṣaṇaḥ (The Moment) – as the embodiment of these subtle units of time, or as their controller.


घटी मुहूर्त प्रहरो दिवानक्तमहर्निशम् ॥ 
पक्षो मासोऽयनं वर्ष युगं कल्पो महालयः ॥ १२२ ॥


Shloka 430: Ghaṭī (घटी), Muhūrtaḥ (मुहूर्तः), Praharaḥ (प्रहरः), Divā (दिवा), Nakta (नक्तम्), Ahar (अहः), Niśa (निशा), Ahar-niśam (अहर्निशम्)
तत्रिंशता क्षणस्ते षडू घटी ताभ्यां मुहूर्तकम् । प्रहर-स्तच्चतुष्कं तच्चतुष्कं नक्तकं दिवा ॥ ४३० ॥ अहर्निशं त्वहोरात्रः प्रहरैरष्टभिर्भवेत् ।
One Kṣaṇa (moment) consists of as many (atomic instants)… Thirty Kṣaṇas make one Ghaṭī. Two Ghaṭīs make one Muhūrta. Four Muhūrtas make one Prahara. Four Praharas make the night (Nakta) and four make the day (Divā). Eight Praharas make the full day-night cycle called Ahorātra (Ahar-niśam). Thus, He is Ghaṭī (The Time-Measure), Muhūrtaḥ (The Hour), Praharaḥ (The Watch), Divā (The Day), Nakta (The Night), Ahar (The Daytime), Niśa (The Nighttime), and Ahar-niśam (The Full Day).
