ॐ गणेश्वरो गणक्रीडो गणनाथो गणाधिपः ॥
एकदंष्ट्रो वक्रतुण्डो गजवक्त्रो महोदरः ॥ ६ ॥


Shloka 1: Gaṇeśvaraḥ (गणेश्वरः)
ॐवियदादिप्रपञ्चस्य समूहोगण उच्यते ।
तदात्मकस्तदी-शश्च तेन देवोगणेश्वरः ॥ १ ॥
Om! The collection of the entire universe, beginning from space (Vyoma/Akasha), is called a "Gaṇa" (host/group). He whose very nature is that (Gaṇa) and who is its lord (Īśa)—by that (definition), the Lord is called Gaṇeśvara (The Lord of Hosts).


Names 2-3: The Guru Lineage as Forms of Ganesha
साक्षाच्छिष्योगणेशस्य गणक्रीडाभिधो गुरुः ।
तच्छिष्योविकटस्तस्य शिष्यो वै विघ्न-नायकः ॥ २ ॥
The direct disciple of Ganesha is the Guru namedGaṇakrīḍa. His disciple is Vikaṭa, and his disciple, indeed, is Vighna-nāyaka (The Leader of Obstacles).


इत्यादयोऽप्यभेदेन गणेशाएव देशिकाः ।
मंत्रारंभेगुरुं स्मृत्वा वश्यकत्वेन कीर्तिताः ॥ ३ ॥
These and others(in the Guru lineage) are, without difference, themselves Ganesha in the form of spiritual teachers (Deśikāḥ). They are mentioned at the beginning of the mantra (in the Nyasa rituals) to be remembered as the Guru, for the purpose of bringing the mantra under one's control (Vashyakaraṇa).


Shloka 4: Gaṇakrīḍa (गणक्रीड)
वियदादि-गणस्यान्तःप्रविश्य क्रीडनेन वा ।
गणक्रीड इतिप्रोक्तस्तं-त्सृष्ट्वेत्यादिविश्श्रुतेः ॥ ४ ॥
He is called Gaṇakrīḍa because he enters into and "plays" (Krīḍa) within the host of elements beginning with space (Vyoma), or because he creates that very host and then sports within it, as stated in the Vedic revelation (Śruti).




Shloka 5: Gaṇanātha (गणनाथ)
गणनंगुणसंख्यानामथशब्दात्तु मंगलम् ।
कृतेतयोर्बहुव्रीहौ गणनाथ इति स्मृतः ॥ ५ ॥
"Gaṇa"means the counting (or collection) of the primary qualities (Sattva, Rajas, Tamas), and "Nātha" (from the word "Nātha") signifies auspiciousness. When a compound (Bahuvrihi Samasa) is formed from these two (words), he is remembered as Gaṇanātha (The Lord of the Qualities and the Auspicious Lord).


Shloka 6: Gaṇādhipa (गणाधिप)
आदित्यविश्ववस्वाद्यारुद्रान्ता गणदेवताः ।
तदाधिपत्यशालि-त्वान्मम देवोगणाधिपः ॥ ६ ॥
The groups of deities(Gaṇa-devatās), beginning with the Ādityas and Viśvadevas and ending with the Rudras, (are presided over by him). Because he holds lordship over them, my Lord is Gaṇādhipa (The Overlord of the Hosts of Deities).


Shloka 7: Vikaṭa / Ekadanta (विकट / एकदन्त)
एकामुख्या केवला वा दंष्ट्रा यस्य गणेशितुः ।
भूम्युद्धारेजगन्नाशे वैकदंष्ट्रः स कीर्त्यते ॥ ७ ॥
He who has one(Eka), prominent or single, tusk (Damshtra), the ruler of the Ganas (Gaṇeśituḥ), is celebrated as Vikaṭa (The Formidable One) and Ekadanta (The Single-Tusked One). (The story is that he broke it off) for lifting the earth (as an instrument) and for the destruction of the universe (at the end of time).


Shloka 8: Vakratuṇḍa (वक्रतुण्ड)
शुण्डादण्डस्य वक्रत्वाद्वक्रतुण्ड इतीर्यते ।
श्रियंतनोति रम्याणां विकारोऽपीति लोकवाकू ॥ ८ ॥
Because his trunk(Śuṇḍā) is curved (Vakra), he is declared as Vakratuṇḍa (The Curved-Trunked One). A popular saying (Lokavāk) also states that "even a curved (or unique) form bestows (Sri) prosperity and beauty upon the lovely."


Shloka 9: Gajavaktra / Mahodara (गजवक्त्र / महोदर)
गजस्येव मुखंयस्य गजवक्त्रः स उच्यते ।
अनंतकोटि-ब्रह्माण्डपूर्णकुक्षिर्महोदरः॥ ९ ॥
He who has a face(Vaktra) like an elephant's (Gaja's) is called Gajavaktra (The Elephant-Faced One). He whose belly (Udara) is vast (Maha) and filled with countless crores of universes (Brahmāṇḍas) is called Mahodara (The Great-Bellied One).


लंबोदरो धूम्रवर्णो विकटो विघ्ननायकः ॥ 
सुमुखो दुर्मुखो बुद्धो विघ्नराजो गजाननः ॥ ७॥


Shloka 10: Lambodara and Dhūmravarṇa (लम्बोदर / धूम्रवर्ण)
ब्रह्माण्डालंबनंयस्य कुक्षिर्लम्बोदरस्तु सः ।
वायोबींजेधूम्रवर्णं तद्रूपत्वादसावपि ॥ १० ॥
He whose belly(Kukshi) is the support of the universe (Brahmāṇḍa) is indeed Lambodara (The Pot-Bellied One). The seed syllable (Bija) of Vayu (the wind god) is of a smoky/gray color (Dhūmravarṇa); because he is of that form, he is also (called) Dhūmravarṇa (The Smoke-Colored One).


Shloka 11: Vikaṭa (विकट)
'कटेवर्षावरणयो' रिति धातोरनावृतः ।
विभुत्वाद्विकटः प्रोक्तः स यस्य विगतः कटः ॥ ११ ॥
From the verbal root'Kaṭ' (meaning 'to cover' or 'to surround'), he is called Vikaṭa (The Formidable One) because he is uncovered (Anāvṛtaḥ) and all-pervading (Vibhutvāt). Or (it can mean) he from whom all coverings (Kaṭa) have vanished (Vigataḥ).


Shloka 12: Vighnanāyaka (विघ्ननायक)
विघ्न्नान्नयत्यभक्तौघान्विघ्नानामधिपोऽथ वा ।
यद्वाविहन्ति नयति प्राणिनो विघ्ननायकः ॥ १२॥
He is Vighnanāyaka because he leads away (Nayati) hosts of non-devotees through obstacles (Vighnān), or because he is the lord (Adhipa) of obstacles. Alternatively, because he destroys (Vihanti) obstacles and leads (Nayati) beings to liberation.


Shloka 13: Sumukha (सुमुख)
आरंभाःशोभना येन यस्य शोभनमाननम् ।
स एव सुमुखस्तस्मैसुमुखाय नमो नमः ॥ १३॥
He by whom all undertakings become auspicious(Śobhanā), and whose face (Ānanam) is beautiful (Śobhanam), he alone is Sumukha (The Auspicious-Faced One). Salutations again and again to that Sumukha.








Shloka 14: Durmukha (दुर्मुख)
दुःस्पर्श वासुदुर्दर्शमग्नेः सूर्यस्य वा मुखम् ।
तद्रूपत्वादभक्तेषुतथात्वाच्चैष दुर्मुखः ॥ १४ ॥
The face of Agni(fire) or Surya (sun) is painful to touch or very difficult to look at. Because he assumes that form for non-devotees, and because of that nature, he is (also) Durmukha (The Fearsome-Faced One).


Shloka 15: Buddha (बुद्ध)
नित्यबुद्धस्वरूपत्वात्अविद्यावृत्तिनाशनः ।
यद्वाजिना-वतारत्वाद् बुद्ध इत्यभिधीयते ॥ १५ ॥
Because his essential nature is eternally enlightened(Nitya-Buddha) and he is the destroyer of the modifications of ignorance (Avidyā), or because he is an incarnation of a Jina (a conqueror, like the Buddha), he is described as Buddha (The Enlightened One).


Shloka 16: Vighnarāja (विघ्नराज)
विन्नैर्विराजतेतेषां राजा विघ्नस्तु विघ्नकः ।
भक्ताधीनश्च राजाच विघ्नराज-स्ततो मतः ॥ १६ ॥
He shines(Virajate) with obstacles (Vighnaiḥ) for (non-devotees); he is the king (Rājā) who creates obstacles (Vighnakṛt). And for devotees, he is a king who is under their control (Bhakta-adhīna). Therefore, he is considered Vighnarāja (The King of Obstacles).


Shloka 17: Gajānana (गजानन)
'अन प्राणन'इत्यस्माद्धातोर्णिचि ततो ल्युटि ।
गजाननयतीत्यर्थेसाधुरेष गजाननः ॥ १७॥
From the verbal root'An' (meaning 'to breathe' or 'to live'), in its causal form (Nici), and then with the suffix 'Lyut', the word is formed with the meaning "he who causes (elephants) to breathe/live" or "he who leads/moves elephants." Thus, this (name) Gajānana (Elephant-Faced) is grammatically correct.


Philosophical Defense Against Repetition


यत्तु-प्राचा गजवक्त्र-गजाननपदयोरवयवार्थाभेदे पौनरुक्त्या सहस्र-नामस्तुतिबाध एव...
Now, if some (critics) say:"Since the words Gajavaktra and Gajānana have the same meaning in their components ('Gaja' meaning elephant, and 'Vaktra/Anana' meaning face), their use constitutes repetition (Punrukti), which invalidates the very purpose of a hymn of a thousand names...


...न ह्येकमेव नाम सहस्रवारमावर्तितंस्तुतये पर्याप्तं भवतिः...
...for a eulogy is not accomplished by repeating the same name a thousand times...


ततश्च नाम्नांसहस्रेण स्तुतिर्न कृता भवतिः अतः सर्वाणि नामानि प्रत्येकं 
परस्परभिन्नार्थप्रकाशकान्येवेत्युक्तम्, तत् प्रतिज्ञा-मात्रम् ;
...and therefore the eulogy with a thousand names would not have been made.Hence, the claim that all names individually reveal mutually distinct meanings is merely an assertion (Pratijñāmātram).


The Commentator's Rebuttal


नामशब्दस्य प्रातिपदिकवाचकत्वेनाथैक्येऽपिशब्द-भेदमात्रेण नामसहस्रकरणकस्तुतिबाधाभावात् ।
Our Refutation:Even if the meaning (of two names) is the same, the word 'Nāma' (name) refers to a specific word-form (Prātipadika). Therefore, merely by the difference in the words (Śabda-bheda), there is no invalidation of the eulogy composed of a thousand names.


एतेनैकस्यैव नाम्न आवृत्तौतदापत्तिर्निरस्ता।
By this reasoning,the problem (you raised) concerning the repetition of a single name is refuted.


किंबहुना, अर्थभेदाच्छब्द‌भेदं गौणमप्यंगीकृत्याचार्य भगवत्पादैर्विष्णुसहस्रनामस्तुति निर्वाह-करणात्...
Moreover,even accepting a secondary meaning based on a difference in words, the revered Acharya Shankara Bhagavatpada (Adi Shankara) also maintained the validity of the Vishnu Sahasranama in this way...


...शब्दभेदेनामभेदात् कैमुतिकन्यायेनापि तदबाधः ।
...since a difference in words constitutes a difference in names,by 
the principle of "how much more so" (Kaimutika Nyāya), there is no invalidation.




The Final Verdict on Interpretation


अतोनिगमनिरुक्तादिप्रसिद्ध्यनुरोधादक्लिष्टोऽर्थो यथालाभं वर्ण्यतां नाम । न पुनरर्थभेद एवापेक्षित इति निर्बन्धो युक्तः।
Therefore,the meaning of a name should be explained as one finds it, in accordance with the well-known (etymological) principles of Nirukta, striving for a straightforward (Aklishta) interpretation. It is not justified to insist that a difference in meaning is absolutely required in every case.


A Challenge to the Critic


एवंप्रौढिमतस्तव गस्थः खान्तान्तस्थ इति नाम्नोरेका-र्थत्वेन व्याचक्षाणस्य कथं न लज्जा...
O, one who is so learned!How is it that you feel no shame while explaining names like 'Gajastha' (seated on an elephant) and 'Khāntāntastha' (residing in the cavity of the heart) as having the same meaning (i.e., 'residing within')?...


...कथंवा किरीटी कुंडली हारी वनमालीति नाम्नां त्वदीयपाठरीत्या पुनरुक्तानां 
अर्जुन-शेषमनोहरबलरामपरत्वेन संभवदर्थातराणामप्येकविधानार्थक-त्वेन तावकं वर्णनं युज्यताम् ?
...Or,according to your method of interpretation, how can your own commentary justify names like 'Kirīṭī' (wearer of a crown), 'Kuṇḍalī' (wearer of earrings), 'Hārī' (wearer of a garland), and 'Vanamālī' (wearer of a forest garland)? Though they have potentially different meanings (by referring to different ornaments), you would have to consider them repetitive, as they all essentially mean 'one who wears something'. How is your description consistent?


Dismissal of Overly Complex Interpretations


यदपि-लंबोदरपदंविराडात्म-परं, विघ्न्नपदं वायुपरं, गजाननपदं सूर्यपरमित्यादिरीत्या सां-प्रतिकलक्षणानेयार्थलक्षणादिभिर्जघन्यवृत्तिभिर्व्याख्यातम्,-तन्मुखे संभवतीत्यादिबहुतरन्यायविरुद्धं क्लिष्टतरं कुसृष्टिरूपं चेति न तादृशार्थज्ञानमदृष्टं जनयितुं अलमिति प्रामाणिकैरु-पेक्ष्यमिति दिक् ।
And as for that (other type of interpretation)which explains 'Lambodara' as referring to the Virat (cosmic) form, 'Vighna' as referring to Vayu (the wind), 'Gajānana' as referring to Surya (the sun), etc., using forced, secondary, and implied meanings (Lakshana) like Sampratikalaksana—such interpretation is contradicted by many logical principles, is extremely convoluted (Klishtatara), and is a product of poor scholarship (Kusrishti). Such interpretation cannot generate the spiritual merit (Adrishta) that comes from true knowledge. Therefore, it should be disregarded by authoritative scholars. This is the direction (of our conclusion).


भीमः प्रमोद आमोदः सुरानन्दो मदोत्कटः ।
हेरम्बः शम्बरः शम्भुर्लम्बकर्णो महाबलः ॥ ८ ॥


Shloka 18: Bhīma (भीम) & Pramoda (प्रमोद)
दुष्टानां भयकारित्वाद् भीम इत्युच्यते बुधैः ।
इष्टलाभा-त्सुखं यत्तु स प्रमोद इति स्मृतः ॥१८॥
Because he causes fear in the wicked, he is called Bhīma (The Terrifying) by the wise. And the happiness that arises from the attainment of a desired object is called Pramoda (Joy), and he is that.


Shloka 19: Āmoda (आमोद)
ततः प्राक् सुखमामो-ददृष्टार्थप्राप्तिनिश्चयात् ।
इष्टार्थभोगजनितं सुखमानन्द उच्यते ॥ १९ ॥
The happiness that arises prior to that (Pramoda), from the certainty of attaining a seen object, is called Āmoda (Delight). The happiness generated by the enjoyment of a desired object is called Ānanda.


Shloka 20: Surānanda (सुरानन्द)
स सुरोत्थः सुरथ्यो वा सुरानन्दस्तदात्मना ।
अत एवान्यविषयमोषादात्मैकभावतः ॥ २० ॥
That bliss (Ānanda) which arises from the gods (Sura) or which exists in heaven (Surathī), is Surānanda (Bliss of the Gods). His very nature is that. Therefore, he steals away the mind from other sense objects, leading to a state of oneness with the Self.


Shloka 21: Madotkaṭa (मदोत्कट) & Heraṃba (हेरंब)
मदेनावरणोत्क्रांत्या मदोत्कट इति स्मृतः ।
हः शंकरे रविः शब्दे शैवतंत्रप्रवर्तनात् ॥ २१ ॥
Because he has transcended (Uttkrānti) the veil of spiritual intoxication (Mada), he is remembered as Madotkaṭa (Supremely Intoxicated). The syllable "Ha" refers to Shiva (Shankara), "Ra" to fire (Pavaka), and "Mba" to sound (Shabda). Because he propounds the Shaiva Tantras, he is called Heraṃba.


Shloka 22: Śaṃbara (शंबर)
उद्दामशौर्यवत्त्वाद्वा हेरंब इति कथ्यते ।
शं सुखं तद्वरं श्रेष्ठं यस्मिन्नस्ति स शंबरः ॥ २२ ॥
Alternatively, due to his immense valor, he is called Heraṃba. He in whom exists supreme (Vara), excellent (Shreṣṭha) bliss (Śhaṃ) is Śaṃbara.
Shloka 23: Śaṃbhu (शंभु)
शंबं वा कुलिशं राति यद्वा सलिलविग्रहः ।
शंभुस्तु शं भवत्यस्माच्छिवाभेदेन वोदितः ॥ २३ ॥
Or, he who bestows (Rāti) the weapon (Kuliśa, i.e., the goad) of bliss (Śhaṃ). Or, he whose form is water (Salila, i.e., cool and soothing). But Śaṃbhu is so called because from him comes welfare (Śhaṃ - auspiciousness). He is declared to be non-different from Shiva.


Shloka 24: Lambakarṇa (लम्बकर्ण)
यत्र कापि कृतं भक्तैराह्वानस्तवनादिकम् ।
नातिदूर इवाकर्ण्य लंबकर्ण इति स्मृतः ॥ २४ ॥
Wherever the invocation, praise, etc., is made by devotees, he hears it as if it is not very far away. Thus, he is remembered as Lambakarṇa (The Long-Eared One).


नन्दनोऽलम्पटोऽभीरूर्मेघनादो गणञ्जयः ।
विनायको विरूपाक्षो वीरः शूरवरप्रदः ॥ ९॥


Shloka 25: Mahābala (महाबल) & Nandana (नंदन)
महान् बला-सुरो येन बलित्वाद्वा महाबलः ।
नंदिः समृद्धिवाचीति तद्धेतौ ल्युटि नंदनः ॥ २५ ॥
He by whom the great demon Bala was (destroyed), or due to his great strength (Bali), he is Mahābala (Of Great Strength). "Nandi" means prosperity. With the suffix 'Lyut' indicating the reason, he is Nandana (The Prosperous One) because he is the cause of prosperity.


Shloka 26: Alampaṭa (अलम्पट) & Abhīru (अभीरु)
अलं-पटसमृद्धत्वादलंकारः पटोऽस्य वा ।
अभीरुर्भयशून्यत्वादं-गनारहितोऽथ वा ॥२६॥
Because he is abundantly (Alaṃ) adorned with silk garments (Paṭa), he is Alampaṭa (The One Abundantly Clad in Silk). He is Abhīru (The Fearless) because he is devoid of fear, or because he is without (a) body (i.e., he is formless).


Shloka 27: Meghanāda (मेघनाद)
मेघनादः प्रसिद्धार्थो मेघान् नाश-यतीति वा ।
एकैकं यत्नतः शत्रु जयति प्राकृतो जनः ॥ २७ ॥
Meghanāda (Cloud-Roarer) has the well-known meaning (of thunder). Or, it means he who destroys (Nāśayati) the clouds (Megha) (of ignorance). An ordinary man conquers one enemy at a time with great effort...


Shloka 28: Gaṇañjaya (गणंजय) & Vināyaka (विनायक)
अनायासादयं व्यूहान् जयतीति गणंजयः ।
विः पक्षिरूपो जीवौघस्तन्ने तृत्वाद्विनायकः ॥ २८ ॥
...but this one conquers (Jayati) entire armies (Vyūhān) without effort, hence he is Gaṇañjaya (Conqueror of Hosts). "Vi" can mean a bird (in the form of Garuda) or the host of individual souls (Jīvaugha). Because he is the leader (Netṛtva) of them, he is Vināyaka (The Supreme Leader).


Shloka 29: Virūpākṣa (विरूपाक्ष)
धीरशूरो धैर्यशौर्यसामानाधिकरण्यतः ॥ २९ ॥
He is Virūpākṣa (The Odd-Eyed One) because his eyes are dissimilar—one is the sun and the other is the moon (or fire). (The name Dhīraśūra is mentioned separately in the commentary).


महागणपतिर्बुद्धिप्रियः क्षिप्रप्रसादनः ।
रुद्रप्रियो गणाध्यक्ष उमापुत्रोऽघनाशनः ॥ १० ॥


Shloka 30: Varaprada (वरप्रद) & Mahāgaṇapati (महागणपति)
वरान् स्वपादसेविभ्यो ददातीति वरप्रदः ।
गुणगुल्मादयः सेनाभेदास्तेषु य उत्तमः ॥३०॥
He is Varaprada (The Boon-Giver) because he gives (Dadāti) boons (Varān) to those who serve his feet. The different armies (like Guṇa, Gulma, etc.) are various types of hosts (Gaṇa)...


स्थूलास्तानपि पातीति महागणपतिर्मतः ।
...and he who protects (Pātī) even those gross ones (Sthūlāḥ) is considered Mahāgaṇapati (The Great Lord of Hosts).


Shloka 31: Buddhipriya (बुद्धिप्रिय) & Kṣipraprasādana (क्षिप्रप्रसादन)
बुद्धिप्रियः संशयप्न्नो बुद्धिः स्यान्निश्चयात्मिका ॥ ३१ ॥
क्षिप्रप्रसादनः क्षिप्रं भक्तैर्ध्यातः प्रसीदति ।
He is Buddhipriya (Dear to Intellect) because he is the beloved of Buddhi (the goddess of intellect), whose nature is decisiveness, which destroys doubt. He is Kṣipraprasādana (The Quickly Appeased One) because he becomes pleased (Prasīdati) quickly (Kṣipram) when meditated upon by devotees.


Shloka 32: Rudrapriya (रुद्रप्रिय)
रुद्रप्रिय इति प्रोक्तो रुट्रैकादशिनीप्रियः ॥ ३२ ॥
He is proclaimed as Rudrapriya (Dear to Rudra) because he is dear to the group of eleven Rudras.




Shloka 33: Gaṇādhyakṣa (गणाध्यक्ष) & Umāputra (उमापुत्र)
गणाध्यक्षस्तु षटूत्रिंशत्तत्त्वसंदोहपालकः ।
उमापुत्रस्तु पॅल्लोकात्पार्वत्या अपि तारकः ॥३३॥
He is Gaṇādhyakṣa (The Superintendent of Hosts) as he is the protector of the collection of thirty-six cosmic principles (Tattvas). He is Umāputra (The Son of Uma) as he is the son of Pārvatī. He is also the savior (Tāraka) of even her (i.e., he saved Parvati from grief).


Shloka 34: Mahodara (महोदर) & Aghanaśana (अघनाशन)
महोदरोऽप्यसावल्पनैवेद्येनैव तृष्यति।
अशनं न घनं दुःखहरणाद्वा घनाशनः ॥३४॥
Although he is Mahodara (The Great-Bellied One), he is satisfied with even a small offering of food. He is Aghanaśana (The One whose Food is Not Abundant / The Destroyer of Sorrows) because his food (Aśana) is not abundant (Ghana), or because he destroys (Aśana) dense masses (Ghana) of sorrow.


कुमारगुरुरीशानपुत्रो मूषकवाहनः ।
सिद्धिप्रियः सिद्धिपतिः सिद्धः सिद्धिविनायकः ॥ ११ ॥


Shloka 35: Kumāraguru (कुमारगुरु)
सनत्कुमाररूपोऽपि विद्यामुपदिशन् गुरुः ।
स्कन्दपूर्वभव-त्वाद्वा कुमारगुरुरीरितः ॥ ३५॥
Although he is in the form of Sanatkumāra (the eternal youth), he is the Guru who instructs knowledge. Or, because he existed even before Skanda (Kartikeya), he is declared as Kumāraguru (The Preceptor of the Young Gods/The Preceptor who is ever-youthful).


Shloka 36: Īśānaputra (ईशानपुत्र) & Mūṣakavāhana (मूषकवाहन)
ईशानपुत्र इत्युक्तः शिति-कण्ठात्मजत्वतः ।
उन्दुरुं वाहनीकृत्य ख्यातो मूषकवाहनः ॥३६॥
He is called Īśānaputra (The Son of Īśāna/Shiva) because he is the son of Shiti-kaṇṭha (the blue-throated one, Shiva). He is famous as Mūṣakavāhana (The One whose Vehicle is a Mouse) because he has made a mouse (Ūnduru) his vehicle (Vāhana).


Shloka 37: Siddhipriya (सिद्धिप्रिय) & Siddhipati (सिद्धिपति)
सिद्धिप्रियः प्रिया अस्येत्यणिमाद्यष्टसिद्धयः ।
अणि-माद्यष्टसिद्धीनां पाता सिद्धिपतिस्ततः ॥३७॥
He is Siddhipriya (The Lover of Siddhis) because the eight supernatural powers (Siddhis) starting with Aṇimā (the power to become minute) are his beloveds (Priyāḥ). Thereafter, he is Siddhipati (The Lord of Siddhis) because he is the protector (Pātā) of the eight Siddhis.


Shloka 38: Siddha (सिद्ध) & Siddhivināyaka (सिद्धिविनायक)
गोरक्षादिमहा-सिद्धरूपत्वात् सिद्ध उच्यते ।
भक्ते सिद्धिर्विशेषेण नयन् सिद्धिविनायकः ॥ ३८ ॥
He is called Siddha (The Perfected One) because he assumes the form of great perfected beings like Gorakṣa. He is Siddhivināyaka (The Vināyaka who Bestows Accomplishment) because he specially bestows perfection (Siddhi) upon his devotee.


अविघ्नस्तुम्बुरुः सिंहवाहनो मोहिनीप्रियः ।
कटङ्कटो राजपुत्रः शाकलः संमितोऽमितः ॥ १२॥


Shloka 39: Avighna (अविघ्न)
भावप्रधाननिर्देशादवित्वं पशुतां हरन् ।
विन्नैर्विरहितत्वाद्वाऽप्यविघ्न इति कथ्यते ॥ ३९ ॥
Because the primary intent (in worship) is to indicate his state of being without (obstacles), and because he removes the beast-like nature (Paśutā, i.e., spiritual ignorance) from beings, or simply because he is devoid of obstacles (Vighna), he is called Avighna (The Non-Obstacle).


Shloka 40: Tumburu (तुम्बुरु)
रोरूयमाणस्तुंवेन वैणि कैरिति तुंबुरुः ।
इमे गायंति वीणायां ऐतमेवेति हि श्रुतिः ॥ ४० ॥
He is called Tumburu (named after a celestial Gandharva musician) because he is praised (Rorūyamāṇaḥ) by the Tumburu Gandharvas playing the Vīṇā. Indeed, the Vedic scripture (Śruti) says, "These (Gandharvas) sing of him alone to the accompaniment of the Vīṇā."


Shloka 41: Siṃhavāhana (सिंहवाहन)
मयूरमूषकौ यद्वत्तथा सिंहोऽपि वाहनम् ।
गौर्या वा सिंहवाहाया अभेदात्सिंहवाहनः ॥४१॥
Just as (he has) a peacock and a mouse (as vehicles), similarly a lion (Siṃha) is also his vehicle (Vāhana). Or, due to his non-difference from Gaurī (Pārvatī), who has a lion as her vehicle, he is Siṃhavāhana (The Lion-Mounted).
Shloka 42: Mohinīpriya (मोहिनीप्रिय)
मोहिनीशः शिवस्तस्मादभिन्नो मोहिनीप्रियः ।
कटमावृत्ति-मज्ञानं नीहारेणेति हि श्रुतेः ॥ ४२ ॥
Mohinīśa means "The Lord of Mohinī" (Shiva). Therefore, being non-different from him (Shiva), Ganesha is Mohinīpriya (The Beloved of Mohinī). As the Śruti says, "(He) covers ignorance with a veil."


Shloka 43: Kaṭaṅkaṭa (कटंकट) & Rājaputra (राजपुत्र)
कटयत्वावृणोतीति ज्ञानदानात्कटंकटः ।
वरेण्याख्यस्य पृथिवीनेतुः पुत्रवदाचरन् ॥ ४३ ॥
चंद्रो वा पुत्रवद्यस्य राजपुत्रः स उच्यते ॥
He is Kaṭaṅkaṭa because he covers (Āvṛṇoti) with a veil (Kaṭa) and gives (Ka) knowledge (through his grace). Behaving like a son towards the ruler of the earth named Vareṇya, or because the moon (Candra) is like his son, he is called Rājaputra (The Prince).


Shloka 44: Śālaka (शालक) & Saṃmita (संमित)
शः परोक्षेऽलकः केशे यस्यैकांशोऽप्यचाक्षुषः ॥ ४४॥
शातींद्रियः शालतेऽसौ राजतेवेति शालकः ।
अंगुष्ठमात्रमित्यादि श्रुत्या व्याप्तोऽपि संमितः ॥ ४५ ॥
He whose smallest part (Ekāṃśa) is imperceptible to the senses (A-cākṣuṣaḥ)—where "Śa" means "subtle" and "Alaka" can mean "lock of hair" or "subtle"—is Śālaka. He shines (Śālate) and glows like a king, controlling the senses (Śatīndriya). Although he is all-pervading, as stated in Śruti ("of the size of a thumb"), he is also Saṃmita (Measured/Limited, i.e., he has a specific, knowable form).


Shloka 46: Amita (अमित)
मशकेनापि नागेन शम इत्यपि च श्रुतेः ।
परिमाणं त्वणु स्थूलं ह्रस्वं दीर्घ चतुर्विधम् ॥४६॥
(He can be perceived as being as small as) a gnat or (as large as) a great serpent, as stated in the Śruti. Measurement is of four kinds: minute (Aṇu), gross (Sthūla), short (Hrasva), and long (Dīrgha)...


तन्नास्तीत्य मितोऽस्थूलमनण्वित्यादितः श्रुतेः ।
...Because, as the Śruti says ("not gross, not minute..."), He is beyond these very measurements, He is Amita (The Immeasurable).


कूष्माण्डसामसम्भूतिर्दुर्जयो धूर्जयो जयः ।
भूपतिर्भुवनपतिर्भूतानां पतिरव्ययः ॥ १३॥


Shloka 47: Kūṣmāṇḍa-sāma-sambhūti (कूष्माण्डसामसम्भूति)
कूष्माण्डसामसंभूतिः कूष्माण्डैर्जुहुयादिति ॥ ४७ ॥
विधौ प्रसिद्धा मंत्राश्च सामान्यस्य विभूतयः ।
He is Kūṣmāṇḍa-sāma-sambhūti (The One Born from the Kūṣmāṇḍa Sāman) because he is born from the Kūṣmāṇḍa Sāman (a Vedic chant), or because one offers oblations with pumpkins (Kūṣmāṇḍa) as prescribed in ritual codes. The mantras (associated with him) are well-known in the injunctions, and they are the manifestations of the universal (principle).


Shloka 48: Durjaya (दुर्जय)
अजय्यो बलिभि-दैत्यैर्मनसापीति दुर्जयः ॥४८॥
He is Durjaya (The Difficult to Conquer) because he cannot be conquered even in mind by demons like Bali.


Shloka 49: Dhūrjaya (धूर्जय) & Jaya (जय)
धुरं वहत्यनायासाज्जगतामिति धूर्जयः ।
जयो जयस्वरूपत्वाद्भारताद्यात्मकत्वतः ॥ ४९ ॥
He is Dhūrjaya (The Bearer of the Burden) because he effortlessly bears the burden (Dhura) of the worlds. He is Jaya (Victory) because his very nature is victory, and because he is the essence of (epics like) the Mahābhārata, etc., which culminate in victory.


Shloka 50: Bhūpati (भूपति), Bhuvanapati (भुवनपति), Bhūtānāmpati (भूतानांपति)
भूपतिर्भुवनपतिर्भूतानां पतिरित्यमी ।
भ्रातरोऽग्नेस्तदात्म-त्वाद्भूपत्यादिः प्रकीर्तितः ॥ ५० ॥
These—Bhūpati (Lord of the Earth), Bhuvanapati (Lord of the World), and Bhūtānāmpati (Lord of Beings)—are the brothers of Agni (the fire god). Because Ganesha has their nature (i.e., he is the overlord they serve), he is celebrated by these names beginning with Bhūpati.


विश्वकर्ता विश्वमुखो विश्वरूपो निधिर्गुणः ।
कविः कवीनामृषभो ब्रह्मण्यो ब्रह्मवित्प्रियः ॥ १४॥


Shloka 51: Avyaya (अव्यय) & Viśvakartā (विश्वकर्ता)
अव्ययो नाशराहित्याद् विश्वकर्ता जगत्कृतेः ।
विश्वस्य मुखमारंभो यस्माद्विश्वं मुखेऽस्य वा ॥५१॥
He is Avyaya (The Imperishable) because he is devoid of destruction. He is Viśvakartā (The Creator of the Universe) because he is the creator (Kartā) of the world (Jagat). He is the source/origin (Mukha) of the universe (Viśva), or the universe is within his mouth.


Shloka 52: Viśvamukha (विश्वमुख) & Viśvarūpa (विश्वरूप)
विश्वस्य मुखवत्तृप्तिहेतुर्विश्वमुखस्ततः ।
सर्वप्रपंचरूपत्वाद् विश्वरूप इति स्मृतिः ॥ ५२ ॥
Therefore, he is Viśvamukha (The One whose Face is the Universe) because he is the cause of satisfaction, like food (which enters through the mouth). Because his form is the entire phenomenal creation, he is remembered as Viśvarūpa (The One of Universal Form).


Shloka 53: Viśvarūpa (विश्वरूप) - Alternate Meaning
अथवा विश्वरूपोऽसौ त्वष्ट्रा दैवपुरोहितः ।
वियदादिजगज्जातं नित-रां यत्र धीयते ॥ ५३ ॥
Alternatively, he is Viśvarūpa (here, referring to the sage of that name) who was the priest of the gods. (The name is apt for Ganesha because) the entire universe, from space (Vyoma) onwards, is meditated upon within him most intensely.


Shloka 54: Nidhi (निधि) & Ghṛṇi (घृणि)
महापद्मादिनवकरूपत्वाद्वा निधिः स्मृतः ।
घृणिरादित्यरूपत्वाद् घृणिः सूर्य इति श्रुतेः ॥५४॥
He is remembered as Nidhi (The Treasure) because he is the nine treasures (Nidhis) like Mahāpadma. He is Ghṛṇi (The Radiant One) because of his solar nature; as the Śruti says, "Ghṛṇi is the sun."


Shloka 55: Kavi (कवि) & Kavīnāmṛṣabha (कवीनामृषभ)
कार्यत्वात्काव्यकर्तृत्वात् कविरेष तथा कविं ।
कवीनामुप-मश्रुत्या कवीनामृषभोऽप्ययम् ॥ ५५ ॥
He is Kavi (The Wise Poet/Seer) because he is the object of poetic description and the composer of poetry. And he is the one who protects the wise. Through the Vedic analogy, he is also the Kavīnāmṛṣabha (The Foremost among all Poets).




Shloka 56: Brahmaṇya (ब्रह्मण्य) & Brahmanaspati (ब्रह्मणस्पति)
ब्रह्मण्यो ब्राह्मणे वेदे साधुस्तपसि धातरि ।
वाग्वै ब्रह्मपतिस्तस्या इत्येष ब्रह्म-णस्पतिः ॥ ५६ ॥
He is Brahmaṇya (The Upholder of Sacred Law) because he is virtuous (Sādhu) in relation to Brahmins, the Vedas, and penance. He is Brahmanaspati (The Lord of Sacred Speech) because, as the Śruti says, "Speech is indeed Brahman; he is its lord."


ज्येष्ठराजो निधिपतिर्निधिप्रियपतिप्रियः ।
हिरण्मयपुरान्तःस्थः सूर्यमण्डलमध्यगः ॥ १५ ॥


Shloka 57: Jyeṣṭharāja (ज्येष्ठराज) & Nidhipati (निधिपति)
ज्येष्ठराज इति ख्यातो ज्येष्ठाख्ये सान्नि राजनात् ।
एष नाम्ना निधिपतिर्निधीनां परिपालनात् ॥ ५७॥
He is famous as Jyeṣṭharāja (The King of the Eldest) because he reigns (Rājanāt) in the assembly (Sānni) of the deity Jyeṣṭhā. By name, he is Nidhipati (The Lord of Treasures) because he protects (Pari-pālanāt) the treasures (Nidhīs).


Shloka 58: Nidhipriyapati-priya (निधिप्रियपतिप्रिय)
निधीनां त्वा निधिपतिं हवामह इति श्रुतेः ।
निधिप्रिया ये पतयो राज-राजादयो नृपाः ॥ ५८ ॥
तैरप्युपास्य इत्येष निधिप्रियपतिप्रियः ।
As the Śruti says, "We invoke you, O Lord of Treasures." The lords who are dear to the treasures, such as the king of kings and other rulers, also worship him. Therefore, he is Nidhipriyapati-priya (The Beloved of the Lords who are dear to the Treasures).


Shloka 59: Hiraṇmayapura-antaḥstha (हिरण्मयपुरान्तःस्थ)
हिरण्मय-पुरान्तःस्थो दहराकाशमध्यगः ॥ ५९ ॥
चिन्मयब्रह्मपूर्दे-हस्तदंत हृदये स्थितेः ।
He who resides within the city of gold (the heart) is Hiraṇmayapura-antaḥstha (The One who Dwells Inside the Golden City). He dwells in the subtle space within the heart. His body is the abode filled with the consciousness that is Brahman, and he is situated within the cavity of the heart.


Shloka 60: Sūryamaṇḍala-madhyaga (सूर्यमण्डलमध्यग)
ध्येयत्वादंतरादित्ये सूर्यमंडल-मध्यगः ॥ ६० ॥
He is to be meditated upon as the inner sun and as the one residing in the center of the solar orb; thus He is Sūryamaṇḍala-madhyaga (The One Situated in the Center of the Solar Orb).


कराहतिध्वस्तसिन्धुसलिलः पूषदन्तभित् ।
उमाङ्ककेलिकुतुकी मुक्तिदः कुलपावनः ॥ १६॥


Shloka 61: Karāhati-vidhvastasindhusalila (कराहतिविध्वस्तसिन्धुसलिल)
शुण्डादण्डाभिघातेन रिक्तमब्धि चकार यः ॥
कराहति-ध्वस्तसिंधुसलिलः स ततो मतः ॥ ६१ ॥
He who, with the blow of his trunk, emptied the ocean and destroyed its water is therefore considered Karāhati-vidhvastasindhusalila (The One who with a Blow of His Trunk Destroyed the Ocean's Water).


Shloka 62: Pūṣadantabhit (पूषदंतभित्)
वीरभद्रो दक्ष-मुखे पूष्णो दंतानपातयत् ।
तद्रूपत्वादसौ देवः कथ्यते पूषदंतभित् ॥ ६२ ॥
(Virabhadra, a form of Shiva,) knocked out the teeth of the god Pūṣan in the assembly of Dakṣa. Because he (Ganesha) is of that same form (as the supreme Shiva), this god is declared as Pūṣadantabhit (The Smasher of Pūṣan's Teeth).


Shloka 63: Umāṅkakelikutukī (उमाङ्ककेलिकुतुकी)
गौर्युत्संगे कृताक्रीडो न बाल्यात्किंतु कौतुकात् ।
अत एवोमाङ्ककेलिकुतुकी विबुधैः स्मृतः ॥६३॥
He who played in Gauri's lap, not out of childishness but out of divine delight (Kautuka). For this very reason, the wise remember him as Umāṅkakelikutukī (The One who takes Delight in Playing on Uma's Lap).


Shloka 64: Muktida (मुक्तिद) & Kulapālana (कुलपालन)
निगडो मोचनान्मोक्षदानाद्वा मुक्तिदो मतः ।
वंशस्य कौल-तंत्रस्याप्यवनात् कुलपालनः ॥ ६४ ॥
He is considered Muktida (The Giver of Liberation) because he releases from fetters or bestows liberation (Mokṣa). He is Kulapālana (The Protector of the Family Lineage) because he protects (Avana) the lineage (Vaṃśa) and the Kaula Tantra tradition.


किरीटी कुण्डली हारी वनमाली मनोमयः ।
वैमुख्यहतदैत्यश्रीः पादाहतिजितक्षितिः ॥ १७॥


Shloka 65: Kirīṭī (किरीटी) & Kuṇḍalī (कुंडली)
( यदाभिमुख्यराहित्यान्नष्टा संपत्सुरद्विषाम्) ।
किरीटी मौलिभूषावानथवाऽर्जुनरूपधृक् ।
कुंडली कर्णभूषावान् अथवा शेषरूपधृक् ॥ ६५ ॥
(He is the one from whose lack of favor the prosperity of the enemies of the gods perishes). 
He is Kirīṭī (The Wearer of the Crown) as he is adorned with a crown, or because he assumed the form of Arjuna. He is Kuṇḍalī (The Wearer of Earrings) as he wears earrings, or because he assumed the form of Śeṣa (the serpent).


Shloka 66: Hārī (हारी) & Vanamālī (वनमाली)
हारी मुक्तादिमाला धृगथवाऽ-त्यंतसुंदरः।
वनमाली दधात्येष मालामापादलंबिनीम् ॥६६॥
He is Hārī (The Wearer of Garlands) as he wears a garland of pearls, etc., or because he is extremely beautiful. He is Vanamālī (The Wearer of the Forest Garland) as he wears a garland that hangs down to his feet.


Shloka 67: Manomaya (मनोमय)
मनोमयः स्वसंकल्पकल्पितैककलेवरः ।
यदाभिमुख्यराहि-त्यान्नष्टा संपत्सुरद्विषाम् ॥ ६७ ॥
He is Manomaya (Made of Mind) because his entire body is fashioned by his own will. (It is repeated that) from the lack of his favor, the prosperity of the enemies of the gods perishes.


Shloka 68: Vaimukhya-hata-daitya-śrīḥ (वैमुख्यहतदैत्यश्रीः) & Pādāhati-jita-kṣiti (पादाहतिजितक्षिति)
यत्पादाघातमात्रेण पृथ्वी नम्रा बभूव सः ।
वैमुख्यहतदैत्यश्रीः पादाहतिजित-क्षितिः ॥ ६८ ॥
He at whose mere stamp of the foot the earth became bowed down; he by whose disfavor the glory of the demons is destroyed is Vaimukhya-hata-daitya-śrīḥ (The One by whose Disfavor the Glory of Demons is Destroyed), and he whose kick of the foot conquers the earth is Pādāhati-jita-kṣiti (The One who Conquered the Earth with a Kick).




सद्योजातः स्वर्णमुञ्जमेखली दुर्निमित्तहृत् ।
दुःस्वप्नहृत्प्रसहनो गुणी नादप्रतिष्ठितः ॥ १८॥


Shloka 69: Sadyojāta-svarṇa-muñja-mekhalī (सद्योजातस्वर्णमुञ्जमेखली)
मुञ्जाख्यहैमतृणजां मौञ्जीं तात्कालिकीं दधत् ।
सद्यो-जातस्वर्णमुञ्जमेखलीति निगद्यते ॥ ६९ ॥
He who, immediately upon birth, wore the sacred girdle made of golden Muñja grass is proclaimed as Sadyojāta-svarṇa-muñja-mekhalī (The One who at Birth Wore the Girdle of Golden Muñja Grass).


Shloka 70: Durnimittahṛt (दुर्निमित्तहृत्)
मूर्तिस्फोटन-भूकम्पमहोल्कापतनादिभिः ।
संसूचितान्यरिष्टानि हन्त्यतो दुर्निमित्तहृत् ॥ ७० ॥
He destroys the calamities portended by evil omens such as the cracking of idols, earthquakes, and the falling of great meteors. Therefore, he is Durnimittahṛt (The Remover of Evil Omens).


Shloka 71: Duḥsvapnahṛt (दुःस्वप्नहृत्) & Prasahana (प्रसहन)
दुःस्वप्नमपि सुस्वप्नं कुर्वन् दुःस्वप्न-हृन्मतः ।
भक्तापराधान् क्षमते तेन प्रसहनः स्मृतः ॥ ७१ ॥
He is considered Duḥsvapnahṛt (The Remover of Bad Dreams) because he turns even a bad dream into a good dream. He is remembered as Prasahana (The Forgiver) because he forgives the offenses of his devotees.


Shloka 72: Guṇī (गुणी) & Nādapratiṣṭhita (नादप्रतिष्ठित)
विशोकविजिघत्सत्वप्रमुख्यैः स्यात् गुणैर्गुणी ।
अस्ति प्रणव-बिन्द्वन्तेऽर्धचन्द्राद्यक्षराष्टकम् ॥ ७२ ॥
तत्र नादस्तृतीयस्त-द्वाच्यो नादप्रतिष्ठितः ।
He is Guṇī (The Embodiment of Qualities) because he possesses qualities such as freedom from sorrow and an indomitable spirit. There exists the group of eight letters, beginning with 'Ardhacandra', at the end of the Praṇava (Oṁ) followed by the Bindu. Among them, the third is Nāda. He, who is denoted by that, is Nādapratiṣṭhita (Established in the Primordial Sound).


सुरूपः सर्वनेत्राधिवासो वीरासनाश्रयः ।
पीताम्बरः खण्डरदः खण्डवैशाखसंस्थितः ॥ १९॥
Shloka 73: Surūpa (सुरूप)
सुरूपो भूरिलावण्याद्यद्वा तत्त्वनिरूपणात् ॥ ७३ ॥
He is Surūpa (The Beautiful-One) because of his abundant loveliness, 
or because he is ascertained (Nirūpaṇa) as the ultimate reality (Tattva).