वसुधारामदोन्नादो महाशङ्खनिधिप्रियः ।
नमद्वसुमतीमाली महापद्मनिधिः प्रभुः ॥५७॥


Shloka 193: Kāminīkāntavaktraśriyaḥ (कामिनीकान्तवक्त्रश्रियः), Adhiṣṭhitavāsundharā (अधिष्ठितवासुन्धरा), Vasundharāmadonnamahāśaṅkhanidhiprabhave (वसुन्धरामदोन्नमहाशङ्खनिधिप्रभवे) & Namadvasumatīmaulimahāpadmanidhiprabhuḥ (नमद्वसुमतीमौलिमहापद्मनिधिप्रभुः)
कामिन्याः शोभने वक्रे या शोभातत्स्वरूपकः ।
वसुंधरा-भिधा देवी जाता त्वत्तः प्रतिष्ठिता ॥ १९३ ॥
अथ द्वे नामनी प्राह मिथुनद्वयबोधिके ।
महाशंखमहा-पद्माभिधे द्वे निधिदेवते ॥ १९४ ॥
वसुंधरा वसुमतीत्येते द्वे तत्तदंगने ।
He is the very form of the beauty which is in the lovely face of Kāminī; thus He is Kāminīkāntavaktraśriyaḥ (The One who is the Splendor of Kāminī's Lovely Face). The goddess named Vasundharā (The Earth) is born from you and is established (by you); thus She is Adhiṣṭhitavāsundharā (The Established Earth). He from whom the great treasure (Nidhi) named Mahāśaṅkha, belonging to the earth (Vasundharā), arises is Vasundharāmadonnamahāśaṅkhanidhiprabhave (The Source of the Great Śaṅkha Treasure of the Earth). He who is the lord (Prabhu) of the great treasure (Nidhi) named Mahāpadma, to which the bowing earth (Vasumatī) is the crest-jewel, is Namadvasumatīmaulimahāpadmanidhiprabhuḥ (The Lord of the Great Padma Treasure, the Crest-Jewel of the Bowing Earth).


सर्वसद्गुरुसंसेव्यः शोचिष्केशहृदाश्रयः ।
ईशानमूर्धा देवेन्द्रशिखः पवननन्दनः ॥५८॥


Shloka 195: Sarvasadgurusaṃsevya (सर्वसद्गुरुसंसेव्य)
गणेशादिस्वनाथान्तैः सम्यगाराधितो यतः ॥ १९५ ॥
सर्वसद्गुरुसंसेव्य इति तेन निगद्यसे ।
"Vasundharā" and "Vasumatī" are the two (consorts) in their respective courts. Because he is properly worshipped by (all teachers) from Gaṇeśa to one's own Guru (Svanātha), he is called Sarvasadgurusaṃsevya (The One Served by All True Gurus).

Shloka 196: Śociṣkeśa-hṛdāśraya (शोचिष्केशहृदाश्रय)
गार्हपत्यादयः पंच शोचिष्केशास्तदीयहृत् ।
आश्रयो यस्य तद्ध्येयः शोचिष्केशहृदाश्रयः ॥ १९६॥
The five fires beginning with the Gārhapatya are the "Śociṣkeśa" (Fire-haired ones). He who is the abode of their hearts (i.e., their inner essence) is to be meditated upon as Śociṣkeśa-hṛdāśraya (The Abode in the Heart of the Fires).


Shloka 197: Īśānamūrdhā (ईशानमूर्धा) & Devendraśikhaḥ (देवेन्द्रशिखः)
ईशानस्यापि मूर्धा त्वं देवेन्द्र-स्यापि वै शिखा ॥ १९७ ॥
शक्रशंकरयोर्मान्य इति नाम-द्वयाशयः ।
"You are the head of Īśāna (Śiva) and the crest-jewel of Devendra (Indra)." This is the intent of the two names. Thus, He is Īśānamūrdhā (The Head of Īśāna) and Devendraśikhaḥ (The Crest-Jewel of Indra).


Shloka 198: Pavananandanaḥ (पवननन्दनः)
जीवनान्नान्य आनंदस्तत्प्राणपवनात्मकः ॥१९८॥
प्राणस्यापि च यः प्राणः स स्यात्पवननंदनः ।
The bliss of life is none other than the vital air (Prāṇa). He whose nature is that vital air and breath, and he who is the very life of the life-force, is Pavananandanaḥ (The Son of the Wind).


अग्रप्रत्यग्रनयनो दिव्यास्त्राणां प्रयोगवित् । 
ऐरावतादिसर्वाशावारणावरणप्रियः ॥५९॥


Shloka 199: Agrapratyagranayana (अग्रप्रत्यग्रनयन)
अग्रं सूक्ष्मं चोत्तमं वा प्रत्यग्रं जीर्णतोज्झितम् ॥ १९९ ॥
तादृग्लोचनवानग्रप्रत्यग्रनयनो मतः ।
"Agra" means subtle or supreme; "Pratyagra" means fresh, cast off from decay. He who possesses such a vision is considered Agrapratyagranayana (The One with Fresh and Supreme Vision).


Shloka 200: Divyāstrāṇāṃ Prayogavit (दिव्यास्त्राणां प्रयोगवित्)
Sanskrit:
अस्त्रविद्याप्रवर्तृत्वा-द्दिव्यास्त्राणां प्रयोगवित् ॥ २०० ॥
Because he is the propounder of the science of weapons, 
he is Divyāstrāṇāṃ Prayogavit (The Knower of the Use of Divine Weapons).


Shloka 201: Airāvatādi-sarvāśā-vāraṇāvaraṇa-priya (ऐरावतादिसर्वाशावारणावरणप्रिय)
क्रीडयैवावृणोत्येष युगपद्दिग्गजानपि ।
ऐरावतादिसर्वाशावारणावरण-प्रियः ॥ २०१ ॥
Merely through play, he encompasses even the Diggajas (the elephants of the directions) simultaneously. He who takes delight in the enclosure formed by all the directional elephants like Airāvata is Airāvatādi-sarvāśā-vāraṇāvaraṇa-priya (The One who Delights in the Enclosure of All Directional Elephants like Airāvata).


वज्राद्यस्त्रपरीवारो गणचण्डसमाश्रयः ।
जयाजयापरिवार: विजयाविजयावहः ॥ ६०॥


Shloka 202: Vajrādyastra-parivāra (वज्राद्यस्त्रपरीवार)
वज्रादीनि यदस्त्राणि तैरिंद्रादिभिरावृतः ।
वज्राद्यस्त्र-परीवार आयुधावरणोऽपि वा ॥ २०२ ॥
He is surrounded by Indra and other deities who hold weapons (astras) starting with the Vajra. He whose entourage consists of weapons like the Vajra is Vajrādyastra-parivāra (The One whose Entourage Consists of Weapons like the Vajra).


Shloka 203: Gaṇacaṇḍa-samāśraya (गणचण्डसमाश्रय)
गणाश्चंडादयो यद्वा ये प्रचंडा गणेष्वपि ।
तेषां बलप्रदातृत्वाद्गणचंडसमाश्रयः ॥ २०३॥
Alternatively, the groups (Gaṇas) like Caṇḍa and others, or those who are the most fierce (Pracaṇḍa) even among the groups—because He is the bestower of strength to them, He is Gaṇacaṇḍa-samāśraya (The One who is the Refuge of Fierce Attendants like Caṇḍa).


अजयार्चितपादाब्जो नित्यानन्दवनस्थितः ।
विलासिनीकृतोल्लासः शौण्डीसौन्दर्यमण्डितः ॥ ६१॥
अनन्तानन्तसुखदः सुमङ्गलसुमङ्गलः ।
इच्छाशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिक्रियाशक्तिनिषेवितः ॥ ६२॥


Shloka 204-206: Jayājayāparivāraḥ (जयाजयापरिवारः), Vijayāvijayāvahaḥ (विजयाविजयावहः), Ajayārcitapādābjaḥ (अजयार्चितपादाब्जः), Nityānandavanasthitaḥ (नित्यानन्दवनस्थितः), Vilāsinīkṛtollāsaḥ (विलासिनीकृतोल्लासः) & Śauṇḍīsaundaryamaṇḍitaḥ (शौण्डीसौन्दर्यमण्डितः)
अथाष्टनामभिः प्राह प्राणशक्त्या अभिन्नतां ।
जया च विजया पश्चादजया चापराजिता ॥ २०४॥
नित्या विलासिनी शौंडी ततोऽनंताथ मंगला ।
प्राणशक्त्यादिदेवीनामेताः स्युः पीठशक्तयः ॥२०५॥
जया चाप्यजयेत्येतत्समाहारो जयाजयं ।
ते एवास्य परीवारो द्वितीयं नाम तु स्फुटं ॥ २०६ ॥
तृतीयनामन्यजितापदेनोक्ता पराजिता ।
Now, with eight names, He is declared to be non-different from His Prāṇa-Śakti. The combination of "Jayā" and "Ajayā" is "Jayājayam". They themselves are His attendants. Thus, He whose entourage consists of Jayā and Ajayā is Jayājayāparivāraḥ (The One Attended by Jayā and Ajayā). He who brings about both victory (Vijayā) and the absence of victory (Avijayā) is Vijayāvijayāvahaḥ (The Bringer of Victory and its Opposite). He whose lotus feet are worshipped by Ajayā is Ajayārcitapādābjaḥ (The One whose Lotus Feet are Worshipped by Ajayā). He who abides in the forest of eternal bliss is Nityānandavanasthitaḥ (The One Situated in the Forest of Eternal Bliss). He for whom Vilāsinī creates exuberance is Vilāsinīkṛtollāsaḥ (The One whose Exuberance is Caused by Vilāsinī). He who is adorned by the beauty of Śauṇḍī is Śauṇḍīsaundaryamaṇḍitaḥ (The One Adorned by Śauṇḍī's Beauty).




Shloka 207: Anantānantasukhadaḥ (अनन्तानन्तसुखदः)
सप्तमे नाम्यनंताया अनंतसुखदायकः ॥ २०७ ॥
In the seventh name, pertaining to Anantā (The Infinite One), He is the giver of infinite happiness. Thus, He is Anantānantasukhadaḥ (The Giver of Infinite Happiness to the Infinite One / The Infinite Giver of Happiness).


Shloka 208: Sumaṅgala-sumaṅgalaḥ (सुमङ्गलसुमङ्गलः)
शोभना मंगला यस्मिंस्तत्तु पीठं सुमंगलम् ।
तादृकू सुमंगलं यस्मात् सुमंगलसुमंगलः ॥ २०८ ॥
Because the auspicious Maṅgalā resides in Him, that seat (Pīṭha) is supremely auspicious (Sumaṅgala). Because He possesses such supreme auspiciousness, He is Sumaṅgala-sumaṅgalaḥ (The Supremely Auspicious One who is the very essence of Auspiciousness).


Commentary on the Names (209-210)
प्राचा त्वेतानि नामा-न्यन्यथा व्याख्यातानि ।
प्रथमनामनि जय इत्यस्य भिन्न-पदत्वं च स्वीकृतं, तदसांप्रदायिकत्वादुपेक्ष्यं ।
या ब्रह्मण्युगता वृत्तिः स्वर्गादावीक्षणात्मिका ।
ज्ञानेच्छाकृतिरूपा सेत्य-स्माभिः श्रुतियुक्तिभिः ॥ २०९ ॥
वामकेश्वरतंत्रस्य व्याख्यायां प्रतिपादितं ।
तादृवृत्तियुतं ब्रह्मनाम्नैकेनेह कथ्यते ॥ २१०॥
However, previous (commentators) have explained these names differently. In the first name, they have accepted "Jayā" and "Ajayā" as separate words. That is non-traditional and should be disregarded. As established by us through Vedic statements and reasoning, and as propounded in the commentary on the Vāmakeśvara-tantra, the disposition (Vṛtti) which is inherent in Brahman, which is of the nature of witnessing (enjoyment) in states like heaven, and which has the form of Knowledge, Will, and Action—He, who is endowed with such a disposition, is spoken of here by the single name "Brahma".


Shloka 211: Icchā-śakti-jñāna-śakti-kriyā-śakti-niṣevita (इच्छाशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिक्रियाशक्तिनिषेवित)
इच्छाशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिक्रियाशक्तिनिषेवितः ।
सैव वृत्तिर्भिद्यमाना तत्तद्धर्मैकयोगतः ॥ २११ ॥
He is constantly attended by the powers of Will (Icchā), Knowledge (Jñāna), and Action (Kriyā). That very (supreme) disposition (Vṛtti), when differentiated and connected with specific properties, becomes these (three) powers. He is Icchā-śakti-jñāna-śakti-kriyā-śakti-niṣevita (The One Served by the Powers of Will, Knowledge, and Action).


सुभगासंश्रितपदो ललिताललिताश्रयः ।
कामिनीपालनः कामकामिनीकेलिलालितः ॥ ६३॥


Shloka 212: Subhagā-saṃśrita-pada (सुभगासंश्रितपद)
सुभगा-दिकरौ ह्येते नामभागित्यपीरितं ।
तत्र या सुभगादेवी तया सेव्यांघ्रिरप्यसौ ॥ २१२॥
It is stated that these (names) are also parts of names like "Subhagādi-kara". He, whose feet are served by that very goddess Subhagā, is Subhagā-saṃśrita-pada (The One at whose Feet the Auspicious Goddess Subhagā Resides).


Shloka 213: Lalitā-lalitā-śrayaḥ, Kāminī-pālanaḥ, Kāma-kāminī-keli-lālitaḥ (ललिताललिताश्रयः, कामिनीपालनः, कामकामिनीकेलिलालितः)
गणेशसुंदरीमंत्राललिताललिता-श्रयः ।
कामिनी या कामकला कामेशी काममालिनी ॥ २१३ ॥
He is the abode of the goddesses Lalitā and Alalitā (Lalitā-lalitā-śrayaḥ). He is the protector of the goddesses Kāminī, Kāmakalā, Kāmeśī, and Kāmamālinī (Kāminī-pālanaḥ). He who is adorned by the playful sports with Kāma (desire) and the Kāminīs (desirous goddesses) is Kāma-kāminī-keli-lālitaḥ.


सरस्वत्याश्रयो गौरीनन्दनः श्रीनिकेतनः ।
गुरुगुप्तपदो वाचासिद्धो वागीश्वरीपतिः ॥ ६४ ॥


Shloka 214: Sarasvaty-āśrayaḥ, Gaurī-nandanaḥ, Śrī-niketanaḥ (सरस्वत्याश्रय:, गौरीनन्दनः, श्रीनिकेतनः)
सरस्वत्याश्रयादीनि त्रीणि स्पष्टार्थकान्यथ ।
गणक्रीडादिगुरुभिर्ग्रथादौ प्रतिपादितैः ॥ २१४ ॥
The next three names, starting with "Sarasvaty-āśraya", have clear meanings, as propounded by revered teachers like Gaṇakrīḍa. They are: Sarasvaty-āśrayaḥ (The Abode of Sarasvatī), Gaurī-nandanaḥ (The Son of Gaurī), and Śrī-niketanaḥ (The Abode of Śrī).


Shloka 215: Gurugupta-padaḥ, Vācā-siddha (गुरुगुप्तपद:, वाचासिद्ध)
गोपित-त्वात्पदस्यास्य गुरुगुप्तपदो मतः ।
वाचा सिद्ध्यति यद्भक्त्या स वाचासिद्ध इष्यते ॥ २१५ ॥
Because this word ("Vācāsiddha") is concealed (in meaning), He is known as Gurugupta-padaḥ (The One whose true nature is hidden even from the Guru). He who is attained (Siddha) through devotion accompanied by (recitation of) Vāk (speech/mantra) is Vācā-siddha.


नलिनीकामुको वामारामो ज्येष्ठामनोरमः ।
रौद्रीमुद्रितपादाब्जो हुम्बीजस्तुङ्गशक्तिकः ॥ ६५ ॥


Shloka 216: Vāgīśvarī-patiḥ, Nalinī-kāmukaḥ (वागीश्वरीपतिः, नलिनीकामुक:)
वागीश्वरी तु नकुली नलिनी तु सुरापगा ।
तयोः पतिः कामुकोऽथ वामा ज्येष्ठा च रौद्रिका ॥ २१६ ॥
Vāgīśvarī is (also called) Nakulī, and Nalinī is (another name for) Surāpagā (the celestial river, Gaṅgā). He is the master (Pati) of these two and the desirous lover (Kāmuka) of them. Thus, He is Vāgīśvarī-patiḥ (The Lord of Vāgīśvarī) and Nalinī-kāmukaḥ (The Lover of Nalinī/Gaṅgā).


Shloka 217: Vāmā-rāmaḥ, Jyeṣṭhā-manoramaḥ (वामारामः, ज्येष्ठामनोरमः)
ब्रह्मविष्णुहरा एव शक्तिरूपधरा यदि ।
वामैव यस्य रामा स ज्येष्ठा यस्य मनोरमा ॥ २१७॥
If Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Hara (Śiva) themselves assume the form of Śaktis, then He whose (Śakti) is Vāmā (who is also) Rāmā, is Vāmā-rāmaḥ (The One whose Vāmā is delightful). And He whose (Śakti) is Jyeṣṭhā (who is also) Manoramā, is Jyeṣṭhā-manoramaḥ (The One whose Jyeṣṭhā is enchanting).

Shloka 218: Raudrī-mudrita-pādābja (रौद्रीमुद्रितपादाब्ज)
रौद्रीमुद्रितपादाब्जस्तदंजलिधृतांत्रिकः ।
हुंकार एव चरमो वक्रतुंडषडक्षरे ॥ २१८ ॥
He whose lotus feet are sealed (worshipped) by Raudrī, and who holds the three (worlds) in his cupped hands. The final (syllable) is indeed the Huṃkāra in the Ṣaḍakṣara (six-syllabled) mantra of Vakratuṇḍa (Gaṇeśa). He is Raudrī-mudrita-pādābja (The One whose Lotus Feet are Sealed by Raudrī).


Shloka 219: Huṃ-bīja (हुंबीज)
बीजं सर्वपुमर्थानां हुंबीजस्तेन गीयसे ।
तत्रत्य एव तुंकारोऽष्टाविंशत्यर्णगं च कं ॥ २१९ ॥
The seed-syllable (Bīja) of all supreme goals is the Huṃ-bīja; thus, you are praised as Huṃ-bīja. The "Tuṃ" sound therein, and the "Ka" which resides in the twenty-eight letters (of the alphabet)... He is Huṃ-bīja (The Seed-Syllable 'Huṃ').
Shloka 220: Tuṅga-śaktika (तुङ्गशक्तिक)
शक्तीस्ताः सकलौन्नत्यशक्त्या वान् तुंगशक्तिकः ।
हिरण्यगर्भो विश्वादिस्तदुत्पादनपालने ॥ २२० ॥
He possesses (Vān) the power of complete elevation (Sakalaunnati-śakti) for those Śaktis; thus, He is Tuṅga-śaktika (The One with Lofty Powers). (He is) Hiraṇyagarbha (the cosmic womb), Viśva, etc., in the acts of their creation and preservation.


विश्वादिजननत्राणः स्वाहाशक्तिः सकीलकः ।
अमृताब्धिकृतावासो मदघूर्णितलोचनः ॥ ६६॥


Shloka 221: Viśvādi-janana-trāṇa (विश्वादिजननत्राण)
यस्मात् स्यातां स विश्वादिजननत्राण उच्यते ।
जननत्राणवच्छक्तो होमे कंबलने प्रियः ॥२२१॥
Because from Him, the creation and protection (Janana-trāṇa) of the universe, etc., occur, He is called Viśvādi-janana-trāṇa (The Source of Creation and Protection for the Universe, etc.). He is powerful, as implied by "Janana-trāṇa," and is fond of offerings in fire (Homa) and of blankets (Kambala).


Shloka 222: Svāhā-śakti (स्वाहाशक्ति)
स्वाहेति मंत्रशक्तिर्वा स स्वाहा-शक्तिरीरितः ।
मंत्रे मृत्युंजये सौरे स इत्यर्णः सकीलकः ॥ २२२ ॥
Or, the power of the mantra is "Svāhā"; thus, He is declared as Svāhā-śakti (The Power of Svāhā). In the Mṛtyuñjaya and Saura mantras, the letter "Sa" with its Kilaka (a grammatical marker) denotes Him.


Shloka 223: Sakīlaka (सकीलक), Amṛtābdhi-kṛtāvāsa (अमृताब्धिकृतावास) & Madaghūrṇita-locana (मदघूर्णितलोचन)
वाचको यस्य मंत्रांगसाहित्याद्वा सकीलकः ।
सुरासुधेक्षुसिंधुस्थो यस्तत्पानरतश्च सः ॥ २२३ ॥
अमृता-ब्धिकृतावासो मदघूर्णितलोचनः ।
He is called Sakīlaka either because His mantra includes the letter "Sa" with its Kilaka, or because He is situated in the nectar, sugarcane, and ocean (i.e., the essence of delights) and is devoted to drinking that (essence). He who has His abode in the ocean of nectar is Amṛtābdhi-kṛtāvāsa (The One who has Made the Ocean of Nectar His Abode). He whose eyes are rolling due to (divine) intoxication is Madaghūrṇita-locana (The One with Eyes Rolling in Divine Intoxication).


उच्छिष्टगण उच्छिष्टगणेशो गणनायकः । 
सार्वकालिकसंसिद्धिर्नित्यशैवो दिगंबरः ॥६७॥


Shloka 224: Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇa (उच्छिष्टगण)
उच्छिष्टगण उत्कृष्टा गणाः शिष्टाश्च यस्य सः ॥ २२४ ॥
He who has the Ucchiṣṭa Gaṇa (a group of beings associated with remnants) as well as the excellent and the righteous Gaṇas (hosts) as His own, is Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇa (The One with the Ucchiṣṭa Gaṇa as His Host).


Shloka 225: Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇeśa (उच्छिष्टगणेश)
उच्छिष्टं नामरूपं चेत्याद्युचः सप्तविंशतिः ।
आथर्वणो यं वदंति स गणेशो न चापरः ॥ २२५ ॥
मोदकं भक्षयन्देवो ध्येयो मंत्रो नवाक्षरैः ।
साधकेनेति वोच्छिष्टगणेश इति कथ्यसे ॥ २२६ ॥
The utterances beginning with "Ucchiṣṭa, Nāma, Rūpa, etc." are twenty-seven in number. The followers of the Atharva Veda proclaim Him (as the lord of these); He is that Gaṇeśa and no other. He is Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇeśa (The Lord of the Ucchiṣṭa Gaṇas).
The deity who is eating the Modaka sweet, who is to be meditated upon with a nine-syllabled mantra by the sādhaka—thus, you are called Ucchiṣṭa-gaṇeśa (The Lord of the Ucchiṣṭa Gaṇas).


Shloka 227: Gaṇanāyaka (गणनायक) and Sārvakālikasaṃsiddhi (सार्वकालिकसंसिद्धि)
गणनं गुणसंख्यानमयते गणनायकः ।
सार्वकालिकसंसिद्धिः शाश्वत्यो यस्य सिद्धयः ॥ २२७ ॥
He who seeks out (Ayate) the counting (Gaṇana) and enumeration of qualities is Gaṇanāyaka (The Lord of Reckoning). His perfections (Siddhis) are eternal and ever-accomplished.


Shloka 228: Nityaśaiva (नित्यशैव) and Digambara (दिगम्बर)
नित्यशैवः कदाप्यस्य शिवभावनया यतः ।
दिशमंबरयत्या-वृणोति स दिगंबरः कथितः ॥ २२८ ॥
He is eternally one with Śiva (Nityaśaiva); because His nature is always that of Śiva, and because He covers (Āvṛṇoti) the directions (Diś) as His garment (Ambara), He is declared as Digambara (The Sky-Clad One).




अनापायोऽनन्तदृष्टिरप्रमेयोऽजरामरः ।
अनाविलोऽप्रतिहतिरच्युतोऽमृतमक्षरः ॥ ६८॥
अप्रतर्क्योऽक्षयोऽजय्योऽनाधारोऽनामयोऽमलः ।
अमेयसिद्धिरद्वैतमघोरोऽग्निसमाननः ॥ ६९॥ 


Shloka 229: Anapāya (अनपाय) & Anantadṛṣṭi (अनन्तदृष्टि)
अनपगतशुभावहविधिरनपायो नाशविरहाद्वा ।
अगणित-चक्षुर्नाशविरहित ज्ञानोऽप्यनंतदृष्टिरिति ॥ २२९॥
His rule of bestowing auspiciousness never departs; He is without decline, hence He is Anapāya (The One Without Decline). His eyes are countless, and His knowledge is without destruction; thus, He is Anantadṛṣṭi (The One of Infinite Vision).


Shloka 230: Aprameya (अप्रमेय) & Ajara-amara (अजरामर)
ज्ञानेंद्रियवामनसावगम्यत्वादप्रमेय इति ।
विजेरो विमृत्युरित्याम्नानादजरामरो गदितः ॥ २३० ॥
Because He is beyond the grasp of the senses and the mind, He is Aprameya (The Immeasurable). Based on the scriptural declaration "Vijero Vimṛtyuḥ" (free from old age and death), He is proclaimed as Ajara-amara (The One Free from Old Age and Death).


Shloka 231: Anāvila (अनाविल) & Apratiratha (अप्रतिरथ)
अविघ्नकधर्मततिभिरकलुषि-तत्वादनाविलोऽपि भवान् ।
अप्रतिरथ इति गदितो नास्ति यतस्ते प्रतिद्वंद्वी ॥ २३१ ॥
O Lord, You are unstained by the multitude of obstructive qualities, and thus unpolluted; You are Anāvila (The Unpolluted One). You are called Apratiratha (The Unopposed Warrior) because You have no rival or opponent.


Shloka 233: Akṣara (अक्षर) & Apratarvya (अप्रतर्व्य)
अक्षरमश्नोतेर्व्याप्यर्थादथवा क्षयाभावात् ।
वेदाननुमततर्कागम्यत्वादप्रतर्व्यस्त्वम् ॥ २३३ ॥
You are Akṣara (The Imperishable) because You pervade all, or because You are without decay. You are Apratarvya (The Unassailable) because You are unattainable by logic that is not sanctioned by the Vedas.


Shloka 234: Akṣaya (अक्षय), Ajayya (अजय्य) & Anādhāra (अनाधार)
न क्षतिरपि न च वसतिर्जेतुमशक्योऽक्षयोऽजय्यः ।
जगदाधारस्य तवा-धारो नास्तीत्यनाधारः ॥ २३४ ॥
You are without loss and without a fixed abode; unable to be conquered, You are Akṣaya (The Indestructible) and Ajayya (The Unconquerable). For You, the support of the universe, there is no support; thus, You are Anādhāra (The Supportless One).


Shloka 235: Anāmaya (अनामय), Amala (अमल), Amoghasiddhi (अमोघसिद्धि) & Advaitam (अद्वैतम्)
आमयमालिन्याभ्यामगृहीतत्वादनामयोऽस्यमलः ।
सिद्धिर्भवत्यर्थवती नामोघा भक्तस्य तेन त्वममोघसिद्धिः ।
द्वैतप्रपञ्श्चोपशमाच्चतुर्थमद्वैतमित्युच्यस ईशरूपः ॥ २३५ ॥
You are untouched by disease and impurity, hence You are Anāmaya (The Diseaseless) and Amala (The Stainless). The fulfillment of Your devotee is meaningful and unfailing; therefore, You are Amoghasiddhi (The One of Unfailing Fulfillment). Duality is a mere expansion, and with its cessation, the fourth state is called Non-duality; You are that Advaitam (The Non-dual) form of the Lord.


Shloka 236: Aghora & Apramitānana (अघोर & अप्रमितानन)
अघोरमूर्तिः शिव इत्यघोरो न मज्जनानामभयंकरो वा ।
असंख्यवक्रोऽस्यमितानि यस्मात् संजीवनान्यप्रमिताननस्त्वम् ॥ २३६ ॥
Your form is non-terrifying (Aghora) and auspicious (Śiva), hence You are Aghora. You are not fearsome to those who take refuge in You. Because Your faces are innumerable and Your life-giving powers are immeasurable, You are Apramitānana (The One with Immeasurable Faces).


अनाकारोऽब्धिभूम्यग्निबलघ्नोऽव्यक्तलक्षणः ।
आधारपीठमाधार आधाराधेयवर्जितः ॥ ७०॥


Shloka 237: Anākāra (अनाकार)
भक्ततोषार्थमाकाराः सगुणाः संति यद्यपि ।
तथापि त्वमनाकारः परमार्थदृशा विभो ॥ २३७॥
O Lord, although You assume forms with qualities to please Your devotees, in reality, from the absolute point of view, You are Anākāra (The Formless One).






Shloka 238: Andhibhūmyagnibalamna (अन्धिभूम्यग्निबलम्न)
भूवारितेजोमरुतां बलानि संस्तंभनक्लेदनदाहशोषाः ।
त्वयि क्षमास्ते न भवंति तेन त्वमन्धिभूम्यग्निबलम्न उक्तः ॥ २३८ ॥
The powers of earth, water, fire, air, and ether—solidifying, liquefying, burning, and drying—do not exist in You as limitations. Therefore, You are called Andhibhūmyagnibalamna (The One Unaffected by the Powers of the Elements).


Shloka 239: Avyaktalakṣaṇa (अव्यक्तलक्षण)
सच्चित्सुखैकमयता तु तव स्वरूपलक्ष्मप्रपंचकलना तु तटस्थलक्ष्म ।
न व्यज्यते तदु-भयं हि बहिर्मुखानां अव्यक्तलक्षण इति प्रथितोऽसि तेन ॥ २३९ ॥
Your true nature is an indivisible mass of Existence, Consciousness, and Bliss. The manifestation of the universe is a mere external attribute. Both of these are not revealed to those whose minds are turned outward. Therefore, You are renowned as Avyaktalakṣaṇa (The One with an Unmanifest Nature).


Shloka 240: Ādhārapīṭha (आधारपीठ)
आङ् व्यापनं वक्ति धरैव धारं शिवावधि क्ष्माव-धितत्त्वपंक्तेः ।
षट्त्रिंशतः पीठ इवासनं त्वमाधारपीठोऽसि ततो नमस्ते ॥ २४० ॥
The prefix "Ā" indicates pervasion; "Dhāra" means support. You are the support (Ādhāra) for the entire series of principles, from earth (Pṛthvī) up to Śiva, numbering thirty-six. Like a base (Pīṭha) for them, You are the seat. Therefore, You are the Ādhārapīṭha (The Foundational Seat). Obeisance to You!


Shloka 241: Ādhāra (आधार)
अकारो वासुदेवः स्यादाकारस्तु पिता-महः ।
तावुभौ यो धारयति स आधारो गणाधिपः ॥ २४१ ॥
The letter "A" is Vāsudeva, and the letter "Ā" is the Grandfather (Brahmā). He who sustains both of them is the Ādhāra (The Support), the Lord of the Gaṇas.


Shloka 242: Ādhārādheya-varjita (आधाराधेयवर्जित)
सर्वाधारस्याधारांतरविरहादतात्त्विकत्वाच्च ।
एषामाधेयाना-माधाराधेयवर्जितोऽसि ततः ॥ २४२ ॥
Because You are the support of all, yet are without any other support for Yourself, and because You are not a material substance, You are therefore free from the relationship of being a support (Ādhāra) and that which is supported (Ādheya). Thus, You are Ādhārādheya-varjita (The One Devoid of the Support-Supported Duality).


आखुकेतन आशापूरक आखुमहारथः ।


Shloka 243: Ākhu-ketana, Āśāpūraka, Ākhu-mahāratha (आखुकेतन, आशापूरक, आखुमहारथ)
आखुवाहं ध्वजीकुर्वन् दिशस्तृष्णां च पूरयन् ।
आखु-केतन आशापूरक आखुमहारथः ॥ २४३ ॥
He who has the mouse as His banner, who fulfills the desires (thirst) of the directions, is Ākhu-ketana (The One with the Mouse as His Emblem), Āśāpūraka (The Fulfiller of Hopes), and Ākhu-mahāratha (The Great Charioteer with the Mouse).


इक्षुसागरमध्यस्थ इक्षुभक्षणलालसः ॥ ७१॥
इक्षुचापातिरेकश्रीरिक्षुचापनिषेवितः ।
इन्द्रगोपसमानश्रीरिन्द्रनीलसमद्युतिः ॥ ७२॥


Shloka 244 - 245: Ikṣusāgara-madhyastha (इक्षुसागरमध्यस्थ), Ikṣubhakṣaṇa-lālasaḥ (इक्षुभक्षणलालसः), Ikṣucāpātirekaśrī (इक्षुचापातिरेकश्री) & Ikṣucāpa-niṣevita (इक्षुचापनिषेवितः)
इक्षुशब्दा-दिमं नामयुगलं प्रकटार्थकं ।
इक्षुचापातिरेकश्रीर्मदनाधिककांतिमान् ॥२४४॥
चाप-देवतया मूर्तिमत्या पंचशरेण वा ।
नित्यं यः सेव्यते सोऽय-मिक्षुचापनिषेवितः ॥ २४५ ॥
एतस्यैवारक्तरूपं भास्वरा-भास्वरासिते ।
This pair of names, beginning with the word "Ikṣu" (sugarcane), has a clear meaning. He who is situated in the ocean of sugarcane is Ikṣusāgara-madhyastha (The One Standing in the Ocean of Sugarcane). He who is eager to eat sugarcane is Ikṣubhakṣaṇa-lālasaḥ (The One Eager to Eat Sugarcane). He whose sugarcane-bow is exceptionally splendid is Ikṣucāpātirekaśrī (The One with the Superbly Splendid Sugarcane Bow). He who is constantly attended by the deity of the bow or by Cupid is Ikṣucāpa-niṣevita (The One Served by the Sugarcane Bow). His form is red, brilliantly white, black...


इन्दीवरदलश्याम  इन्दुमण्डलनिर्मलः ।
इध्मप्रिय इडाभाग इडावानिन्दिराप्रियः ॥ ७३॥


Shloka 246-247: Indragopa-samāna-śrī (इन्द्रगोपसमानश्री), Indranīla-sama-dyuti (इन्द्रनीलसमद्युति), Indīvara-dala-śyāma (इन्दीवरदलश्याम) & Indumaṇḍala-nirmala (इन्दुमण्डलनिर्मल)
शुक्लं च भास्वरं ध्येयं कामनाभेदतो जनैः ॥ २४६ ॥
युगभेदेन भेदस्तत्पुराणेऽपि निरूपितः ।
इति ध्वनयितुं नाम-चतुष्कं प्रकटार्थकं ॥ २४७ ॥
His form is to be meditated upon by people according to their desires. This distinction based on the different Ages has also been described in the Purāṇas. To suggest this, the following four names are given: He who has the lustre of the Indragopa insect is Indragopa-samāna-śrī (The One with the Splendour of an Indragopa). He who has the radiance of a blue sapphire is Indranīla-sama-dyuti (The One with the Radiance of a Sapphire). He who is dark blue like an Indīvara (blue lotus) petal is Indīvara-dala-śyāma (The One Dark as a Blue Lotus Petal). He who is as pure as the orb of the moon is Indumaṇḍala-nirmala (The One as Spotless as the Moon's Disc).


Shloka 248: Idhma-priya (इध्मप्रिय)
श्रौतस्मार्ताग्निरूपत्वाद्भवा-निध्मप्रियो मतः।
इडा मही हविः शेषो गौश्च भागस्तवैव यत् ॥ २४८ ॥
Because You are of the nature of the Vedic (Śrauta) and traditional (Smārta) fires, You are considered Idhma-priya (The One Fond of Sacrificial Fuel). This is because the offering (Ilā), the clarified butter (Haviḥ), the oblation (Idhma), and the cow (Go) are all portions of You.


Shloka 249: Iḍā-bhāga (इडाभाग)
ऋत्विग्याज्यादिरूपत्वादिडाभाग इतीर्यसे ॥
इरेति पृथ्वी तद्धामा तदंतर्यमवस्थितः ॥२४९॥
Because You exist in the forms of the priest, the sacrificer, etc., You are proclaimed as Iḍā-bhāga (The Portion of the Oblation). "Ilā" means the Earth; You are its abode and the Inner Controller residing within it.


Shloka 250: Īradhāma (ईरधाम) & Indirā-priya (इन्दिराप्रिय)
यः पृथिव्यां तिष्ठतीति बृहदारण्यकश्श्रुतेः ।
लक्ष्मीपूज्योऽथवा विष्णुरूप-त्वादिंदिराप्रियः ॥ २५० ॥
According to the Śruti (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad), "He who dwells in the earth..." (from the root √īr, to possess), thus He is Īradhāma (The One whose Abode is the Earth). Alternatively, because You are worthy of being worshipped by Lakṣmī or because of Your form as Viṣṇu, You are Indirā-priya (The Beloved of Indirā/Lakṣmī).




इक्ष्वाकुविघ्नविध्वंसी इतिकर्तव्यतेप्सितः ।
ईशानमौलिरीशान ईशानसुत ईतिहा ॥ ७४॥


Shloka 251: Ikṣvāku-vighna-vidhvaṃsī (इक्ष्वाकुविघ्नविध्वंसी)
इक्ष्वाकुः कटुतुंबी तत्तुल्यप्रत्यूहनाशनात् ।
इक्ष्वाकुविघ्न-विध्वंसी राज्ञो वा विघ्ननाशनात् ॥ २५१॥
"Ikṣvāku" is the bitter Tumbī gourd; because He destroys obstacles just like it (i.e., effectively), He is Ikṣvāku-vighna-vidhvaṃsī (The Destroyer of Obstacles like the Ikṣvāku [gourd]). Alternatively, because He destroys the obstacles of a king (Ikṣvāku), He is so called.


Shloka 252: Itikartavyata-epṣita (इतिकर्तव्यतेप्सित)
इतिकर्तव्यताशब्दः क्रत्वंगस्तोमवाचकः ।
तामपेक्ष्य ददत्कामानितिकर्तव्यते-प्सितः ॥ २५२ ॥
The word "Itikartavyatā" refers to the parts (Aṅga) and praises (Stoma) of a ritual (Kratu). He who, being depended upon (for the ritual's success), grants desires, is Itikartavyata-epṣita (The One Sought After for the Performance of Duties/Rituals).


Shloka 253: Īśāna-mauli (ईशानमौलि)
नरभूतसुरेशाद्या ईशाना वहवोऽमिताः ।
तेषामेषोऽधिको मौलिरमितैश्वर्ययोगतः ॥ २५३॥
The lords (Īśāna) such as Nara, Bhūta, and Sureśa are many and boundless. He is the foremost (Mūli) among them, being endowed with immeasurable lordship. Thus, He is Īśāna-mauli (The Crest-Jewel among all Lords).


Shloka 254: Īśāna (ईशान) & Īśāna-suta (ईशानसुत)
अनयन् जीवयन्नीशानीशान इति कीर्त्यसे ।
ईशानेन सुतः सोमरूप-स्तस्य सुतोऽथवा ॥ २५४ ॥
You are called Īśāna (The Supreme Ruler) because You lead (beings in) and enliven (the universe). Alternatively, because You are the son of Īśāna (Śiva), You are Īśāna-suta (The Son of Īśāna).


Shloka 255: Ītihā (ईतिहा)
अतिवृष्टिमनावृष्टिं मूषकान् शल-भान् शुकान् ।
स्वचक्रं परचक्रं च विनिघ्नन्नीतिहा मतः ॥२५५॥
He who destroys calamities (Īti) such as excessive rain, drought, mice, locusts, parrots, internal revolt (one's own circle), and external invasion (enemy's circle) is considered Ītihā (The Destroyer of Calamities).


ईषणात्रयकल्पान्त ईहामात्रविवर्जितः । 
उपेन्द्र उडुभृन्मौलिरुडुनाथकरप्रियः ॥ ७५॥


Shloka 256: Īṣaṇātraya-kalpānta (ईषणात्रयकल्पान्त) & Īhāmātra-vivarjitaḥ (ईहामात्रविवर्जितः)
लोकपुत्रधनेच्छानां तिसृणां प्रलयात्मकः ।
ईषणात्रय-कल्पांतो नृणां वैराग्यदायकः ॥ २५६ ॥
निश्चेष्टचित्स्वरूपत्वादीहामात्रविवर्जितः ।
He who is the great dissolution (Pralaya) for the threefold desires (Īṣaṇā) for worldly pleasure, progeny, and wealth, and who is the final conflagration (Kalpānta) for this triad of desires, bestowing dispassion upon men, is Īṣaṇātraya-kalpānta (The Destructive End for the Triad of Desires). Because His essential nature is Consciousness without activity, He is devoid of even the slightest effort (Īhā); thus He is Īhāmātra-vivarjitaḥ (The One Devoid of Mere Effort).


Shloka 257: Upendra (उपेन्द्र)
वामनेन सहाभेदादुपेंद्र इति कीर्तितः ॥ २५७ ॥
Due to His non-difference from Vāmana (the dwarf incarnation), He is proclaimed as Upendra (The Younger Brother of Indra).