Concluding Verses (607-609)
आदौ गणेश्वरः पश्चात्सर्वनेत्राधिवासकः । तेजोवती-शिरोरलं भोगदाकांतिमंडितः ॥ ६०७ ॥ उडुभृन्मौलिरथ च प्रोक्तो ढुंढिविनायकः । रसप्रियोऽहर्निशं च मोक्षोऽष्टैश्वर्य-दायकः ॥ ६०८ ॥ इमानि शतकादीनि नामानि क्रमतो दश । संख्याक्रमनिरासाय न विस्मर्याणि सूरिभिः ॥ ६०९॥
Thus, in the Ganesha Sahasranama, the names are arranged in groups of hundreds. The wise should not forget these ten groups (of one hundred names each), from the beginning with Gaṇeśvara to the end, in order to avoid confusion in the numerical sequence.

अथ ग्रन्थफलश्रुतिः
ॐ इति वैनायकं नाम्नां सहस्रमिदमीरितम् ॥ १७२ ॥
इदं ब्राह्मे मुहूर्ते वै यः पठेत् प्रत्यहं नरः । 
करस्थं तस्य सकलमैहिकामुष्मिकं सुखम् ॥ १७३ ॥ 
आयुरारोग्यमैश्वर्यं धैर्यं शौर्यं बलं यशः । 
मेधा प्रज्ञा धृतिः कान्तिः सौभाग्यमतिरूपता ॥ १७४ ॥
This text, containing a thousand names of Vinayaka (Ganapati), is recited as "Om." A person who recites this daily during the Brahma muhurta (the auspicious hour before dawn) will have all worldly and otherworldly happiness in their hands. They attain long life, health, prosperity, courage, valor, strength, fame, intellect, wisdom, patience, beauty, good fortune, and exceptional charm.


Commentary
इतीति । अनेन प्रकारेणेत्यर्थः, इदमित्यङ्गुल्या निर्देशः; पदद्वयेन सहस्रसंख्याया अन्यूनानधिकता ध्वनिता; तेनाष्टौ नामानीहाधिकृत्य पदानि च्छिन्दंतो वचनाभावान्निरस्ताः । यत्तु-अष्टसंख्याधिक्यं विनाऽस्य फलप्रदत्वं नास्तीत्युक्त्वा सोमक्रय प्रकरणस्याष्ट संख्यार्थवादं लिखंति, तत्पामरप्रतारण-मात्रम्; विष्णुललितादिसहस्रनामसु क्वापि फलासिद्ध्यनापत्तेः, तस्मात्स्वस्य नामपदच्छेदासामर्थ्यमपह्रोतुं तद्वचनमिति दिक् ॥ १७१ ॥ 
"Thus" (Iti) means "in this manner." The indication "this" (Idam) is a gesture with the finger. The use of the two terms together implies that there are neither fewer nor more than a thousand names. Therefore, those who, by taking eight names as a single phrase, break the words (padas) differently are refuted due to the absence of scriptural support. As for those who, stating that "without the addition of the number eight, this (hymn) does not bestow fruit," then cite the eulogy of the number eight from the Soma-Kraya section (of the Vedas) — that is merely the deception of the ignorant. Otherwise, there would be the non-attainment of fruit in the Vishnu Sahasranama, Lalita Sahasranama, etc., as well. Therefore, that statement is merely an attempt to hide their own inability to properly divide the names. This much is sufficient.


अस्य स्तोत्रस्य जप ऐहिककामस्यामुष्मिककामस्य निष्कामस्य चेति त्रिविधः । 
तत्र प्रथममाह साधैः षोडशभिः आयुरित्यादिभिः ॥ 
The recitation (Japa) of this hymn is of three types: for worldly desires (Aihika Kāma), for other-worldly desires (Āmuṣmika Kāma), and for those without desire (Niṣkāma). Among these, the first is described with sixteen phrases beginning with "Āyuḥ" (longevity).
प्रज्ञा ग्राहिणी बुद्धिः, मेधा धारणावती बुद्धिः ॥ १७३ ॥ 
Prajñā (प्रज्ञा) means receptive intellect. Medhā (मेधा) means retentive 
intellect (the ability to retain what is learned).
क्षमा परापकारप्रतीकारक्रियाभावः, क्षांतिः परकृतापकारप्रयुक्तक्रोधस्याप्यभावः ॥ १७४-१७५ ॥ 
ज्ञानं मोक्षजनकचरमवृत्ति, विज्ञानं शास्त्रशिल्पविषयकं शास्त्रम् ॥ १७६ ॥ 
Kṣamā (क्षमा) is the absence of action to retaliate against an injury caused by another. Kṣānti (क्षान्ति) is the absence of anger even produced by an injury caused by another. Jñāna (ज्ञान) is the ultimate mental state leading to liberation. Vijñāna (विज्ञान) is knowledge of the scriptures and arts/science (Śāstra).


सत्यं दया क्षमा शान्तिर्दाक्षिण्यं धर्मशीलता । 
जगत्संयमनं विश्वसंवादो वादपाटवम् ॥ १७५ ॥ 
सभापाण्डित्यमौदार्यं गाम्भीर्यं ब्रह्मवर्चसम्। 
औन्नत्यं च कुलं शीलं प्रतापो वीर्यमार्यता ॥ १७६ ॥ 
ज्ञानं विज्ञानमास्तिक्यं स्थैर्यं विश्वातिशायिता ।
धनधान्याभिवृद्धिश्च सकृदस्य जपाद्भवेत् ॥ १७७ ॥ 
ये वश्यं चतुर्विधं नृणां जपादस्य प्रजायते । 
राज्ञो राजकलत्रस्य राजपुत्रस्य मन्त्रिणः ॥ १७८ ॥ 
जप्यते यस्य वश्यार्थं स दासस्तस्य जायते । 
धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणामनायासेन साधनम् ॥ १७९ ॥ 
शाकिनीडाकिनीरक्षोयक्षोरगभयापहम् । 
साम्राज्यसुखदं चैव समस्तरिपुमर्दनम् ॥ १८० ॥ 
समस्त कलहध्वंसि दग्धबीजप्ररोहणम् । 
दुःस्वप्नशमनं क्रुद्धस्वामिचित्तप्रसादनम् ॥ १८१ ॥ 
षट्कर्माष्टमहासिद्धित्रिकालज्ञानसाधनम् । 
परकृत्याप्रशमनं परचक्रविमर्दनम् ॥ १८२ ॥ 
संग्रामरङ्गे सर्वेषामिदमेकं जयावहम् । 
सर्ववन्ध्यात्वदोषघ्नं गर्भरक्षैककारणम् ॥ १८३ ॥ 
पठ्यते प्रत्यहं यत्र स्तोत्रं गणपतेरिदम् । 
देशे तत्र न दुर्भिक्षमीतयो दुरितानि च ॥ १८४ ॥
न तद्गृहं जहाति श्रीर्यत्रायं जप्यते स्तवः । 
क्षयकुष्ठप्रमेहाश भगंदरविषूचिकाः ॥ १८५ ॥
Truthfulness, compassion, forgiveness, peace, courtesy, righteousness and virtuous conduct, control over the world, universal harmony, eloquence in debate, scholarly wisdom in assemblies, generosity, depth of character, divine radiance (brahmavarcas), nobility, good lineage, character, valor, heroism, and nobility of spirit—by reciting this hymn just once, one attains knowledge, wisdom, faith, steadfastness, excellence over the entire world, and increase of wealth and grain. 


Through its recitation, the four kinds of people (kings, their queens, princes, and ministers) become submissive. Whoever is sought to be controlled by reciting this hymn becomes a servant to the reciter. It effortlessly accomplishes righteousness (dharma), wealth (artha), desire (kāma), and liberation (mokṣa). It dispels fears from śākinīs, ḍākinīs, demons (rakṣasas), yakṣas, and serpents (uraga), grants the happiness of universal sovereignty (sāmrājya), and crushes all enemies. It destroys all quarrels and causes the sprouting of burned seeds (i.e., restores ruined prospects). 


It removes bad dreams and pacifies the mind of an angry master. It serves as the means for the six rituals (ṣaṭkarma) and the eight great perfections (aṣṭamahāsiddhi), as well as knowledge of the three times (past, present, and future). It quells hostile actions and devastates opposing armies. In the midst of battle, this alone brings victory to all. It destroys all defects of barrenness and is the sole cause for the protection of the womb (i.e., safe pregnancy). Wherever this hymn of Gaṇapati is recited daily, in that land there is no famine, epidemic, or sins. Prosperity (śrī) never abandons that house where this hymn is recited. (It also destroys) consumption (tuberculosis), leprosy, diabetes, fistulas (bhagandara), and cholera (viṣūcikā).


Commentary
चतुर्विधासुरनरतिर्यक्स्थावरवश्यभेदात् नरवश्यविशेष-माह-राज्ञ इति ॥ १७७-१७९ ॥ 
The four types of beings—gods (Asura here means divine beings or demons in context), humans, animals, and immovable beings—can be controlled. Among these, explaining specifically the control over humans, (the text says) "for kings" (Rājñaḥ).


दग्धस्य रोगाग्निष्ठष्टस्य बीजस्य रेतसः प्ररोहणं प्रजोत्पादनसामर्थ्यप्रदम् ॥ १८०-१८१ ॥ 
It bestows the power of procreation—the germination of the seed (semen) 
that has been burnt or afflicted by the fire of disease.

षट्कर्माणि-मोहनमाकर्षणं स्तंभनं विद्वेषणमुच्चाटनं मारणं चेति भेदात् । शांतिवश्ययोस्तंत्रेषु षडूकर्ममध्ये परिगण-नेऽपि प्रकृते तयोः पार्थक्येन निर्देशान्मोहनाकर्षणे मेलिते । परकृत्या शत्रुभिः स्वमारणोद्देशेन निर्मिता राक्षसी ॥ १८२-१८३॥ 
The six ritual actions (Ṣaṭkarmāṇi) are: Mohana (enchantment), Ākarṣaṇa (attraction), Stambhana (paralysis), Vidveṣaṇa (creating enmity/discord), Uccāṭana (uprooting/banishment), and Māraṇa (killing). Although Śānti (pacification) and Vaśya (subjugation) are also counted among the six actions in some Tantras, in the present text they are mentioned separately, while Mohana and Ākarṣaṇa are combined. (The commentary also mentions) a demoness (Rākṣasī) created by enemies for the purpose of killing oneself through black magic (Parakṛtyā).
शांतिकर्माह-क्षयेत्यादिना ॥ १८४ ॥
Explaining the Śānti (pacification) rite, (the text says) 
"for destruction of pestilence, etc." (Kṣayetyādinā).


गुल्मं प्लीहानमश्मानमतिसारं महोदरम् । 
कासं श्वासमुदावर्तं शूलं शोफादिसम्भवम् ॥ १८६ ॥ 
शिरोरोगं वमिं हिक्कां गण्डमालामरोचकम्। 
वातपित्तकफद्वन्द्वत्रिदोषजनितज्वरम् ॥ १८७॥ 
आगन्तुं विषमं शीतमुष्णं चैकाहिकादिकम्। 
इत्याद्युक्तमनुक्तं वा रोगं दोषादिसम्भवम् ॥ १८८ ॥ 
सर्वं प्रशमयत्याशु स्तोत्रस्यास्य सकृज्जपः । 
सकृत्पाठेन संसिद्धः स्त्रीशूद्रपतितैरपि ॥ १८९ ॥ 
सहस्त्रनाममन्त्रोऽयं जपितव्यः शुभाप्तये ।
Tumors (gulma), splenic disorders (plīha), kidney stones (aśmā), diarrhea (atisāra), ascites (mahodara), cough (kāsa), asthma (śvāsa), urinary retention (udāvarta), colic pain (śūla), swelling (śopha) and other similar conditions, headaches (śiroroga), vomiting (vami), hiccups (hikkā), goiter or cervical lymphadenopathy (gaṇḍamālā), loss of appetite (arocaka), disorders of vāta, pitta, and kapha, fevers arising from the imbalance of all three doṣas (tridoṣajanyajvara), external or traumatic fevers (āgantu), intermittent fevers (viṣama), cold fevers (śīta), hot fevers (uṣṇa), quotidian and other types of fevers (aikāhikādikam)—in short, all diseases arising from doṣas or other causes, whether mentioned here or not, are quickly pacified by just a single recitation (sakṛjjapa) of this hymn. Even women, Śūdras, and the fallen (patita) attain perfection (samsiddhi) through reciting it once. This thousand-name mantra of Vināyaka should be chanted for the attainment of all forms of auspiciousness (śubhāptaye).


Commentary
अश्मानं अश्मरीरोगम् । अश्लीलमिति पाठे विशेषणं ॥१८५॥ 
"Aśmānam" (अश्मानम्) means the disease of urinary stones (Aśmarī). If the reading is "Aślīlam" (अश्लीलम्), it is an adjective (meaning "improper" or "obscene").
द्वंद्वाः वातादिषु युग्मानि त्रीणि ॥ १८६ ॥ 
"Dvandvāḥ" (द्वंद्वाः) refers to the three pairs (Yugmāni) among the Vāta (humors) and others (i.e., the three dualities: pleasure-pain, hot-cold, etc.).
अनुक्तं वातव्या-धिव्रणादिदोषादीत्यादिना दुष्कर्मग्रहणं ॥ १८७- १८९ ॥
By the expression "unmentioned" (Anuktam) and terms like "defects of Vāta, diseases, ulcers, etc." (Vātavyādhi-vraṇādi-doṣādītyādinā), the inclusion of evil actions (Duṣkarma) is to be understood.


महागणपतेः स्तोत्रं सकामः प्रजपन्निदम् ॥ १९० ॥ 
इच्छितान् सकलान् भोगानुपभुज्येह पार्थिवान् । 
मनोरथफलैर्दिव्यैर्व्योमयानैर्मनोरमैः ॥ १९१ ॥ 
चन्द्रेन्द्रभास्करोपेन्द्रब्रह्मशर्वादिसद्मसु । 
कामरूपः कामगतिः कामतो विचरन्निह ॥ १९२ ॥ 
भुक्त्वा यथेप्सितान् भोगानभीष्टान् सह बन्धुभिः । 
गणेशानुचरो भूत्वा महागणपतेः प्रियः ॥ १९३ ॥ 
नन्दीश्वरादिसानन्दी नन्दितः सकलैर्गणैः । 
शिवाभ्यां कृपया पुत्रनिर्विशेषं च लालितः ॥ १९४ ॥ 
शिवभक्तः पूर्णकामो गणेश्वरवरात् पुनः । 
जातिस्मरो धर्मपरः सार्वभौमोऽभिजायते ॥ १९५ ॥
A person who recites this hymn of Mahāgaṇapati with specific desires (sakāmaḥ) enjoys all the desired worldly pleasures here on earth. Then, through the fruits of his cherished wishes, he attains divine, delightful celestial vehicles (vyomayānas) and roams freely at will in the abodes of Chandra, Indra, Bhāskara (Sūrya), Upendra (Viṣṇu), Brahmā, Śarva (Śiva), and others—assuming any form he desires (kāmarūpa), moving anywhere he wishes (kāmagati), and acting according to his will (kāmataḥ). After enjoying all wished-for pleasures along with his beloved relatives, he becomes a follower of Gaṇeśa, dear to Mahāgaṇapati. Delighted along with Nandīśvara and others, and honored by all the gaṇas, he is lovingly cared for by Śiva and Pārvatī as if he were their own son. Having become a devotee of Śiva, with all his desires fulfilled, by the boon of Gaṇeśvara (Gaṇapati) he is born again as a great emperor (sārvabhauma) who remembers his past lives (jātismara) and is devoted to righteousness (dharmapara).


Commentary
द्वितीयमाह साथैः पंचभिर्महागणपतेरित्यादिभिः व्यो-मयानैः विमानैः ॥ १९०॥ 
The second (type of fruit, i.e., for other-worldly desires) is described with five phrases beginning with "Mahāgaṇapateḥ" (of the great Lord of Gaṇas). "Vyomayānaiḥ" (व्योमयानैः) means by celestial chariots or aircraft (Vimānaiḥ).
नंदीश्वरादिसानंदी नंदिकेश्वरादि-समाना नंदशाली, शिवाभ्यां 
गौरीहराभ्यां पुत्रनिर्विशेषं पुत्रतुल्यं यथा तथा ॥ १९१-१९३ ॥ 
"Sānandī" (सानंदी) means along with Nandīśvara and others. "Nandaśālī" (नंदशाली) means equal to Nandikeśvara and others. "Putranirviśeṣam" (पुत्रनिर्विशेषं) means equal to a son, just as with Śivābhyām (Gaurī and Hara, i.e., Pārvatī and Śiva).
शिवभक्तः ईश्वरभक्तः जीवः शिवश्वेति चिद्विभागांतर्गतोऽत्र शिवो विवक्षितः, 
न तु कैलासवासित्वादिगुणविशेषविशिष्टो गाणपत इति यावत्; जातिस्मरः पूर्वजन्मस्मरणवान् ॥ १९४-१९५ ॥
Here, "Śivabhaktaḥ" (शिवभक्तः) means a devotee of Īśvara (God). "Śivaḥ" (शिवः), which is included within the category of consciousness (Cidvibhāga), is intended here to mean the Gāṇapata (devotee of Gaṇapati), not one distinguished by qualities such as residing in Kailāsa, etc. "Jātismaraḥ" (जातिस्मरः) means one who remembers his previous births.


निष्कामस्तु जपन्नित्यं भक्त्या विघ्नेशतत्परः । 
योगसिद्धिं परां प्राप्य ज्ञानवैराग्यसंस्थितः ॥ १९६ ॥ 
निरन्तरोदितानन्दे परमानन्दसंविदि । 
विश्वोत्तीर्णे परे पारे पुनरावृत्तिवर्जिते ॥ १९७ ॥ 
लीनो वैनायके धाम्नि रमते नित्यनिर्वृतः । 
यो नामभिर्हुतेदेतैरर्चयेत् पूजयेन्नरः ॥ १९८ ॥ 
राजानो वश्यतां यान्ति रिपवो यान्ति दासताम् । 
मन्त्राः सिध्यन्ति सर्वेऽपि सुलभास्तस्य सिद्धयः ॥ १९९ ॥ 
मूलमन्त्रादपि स्तोत्रमिदं प्रियतरं मम । 
नभस्ये मासि शुक्लायां चतुर्थ्यां मम जन्मनि ॥ २०० ॥
On the other hand, a person who recites this hymn selflessly (niṣkāmaḥ), with devotion and constant focus on Vighneśa (Gaṇapati), attains the supreme perfection of yoga (yogasiddhi), established in knowledge (jñāna) and renunciation (vairāgya). Merged in the ever-manifest bliss, the supreme consciousness of bliss (paramānandasamvidi), beyond the universe, on the other shore devoid of all return (punarāvṛttivarjite), absorbed in the radiant abode of Vināyaka, he rejoices in eternal contentment. Any person who honors and worships (Lord Gaṇapati) with these sacred names, offering oblations, gains kings under his control, enemies become his servants, all mantras become perfected (sidhyanti), and all accomplishments (siddhayaḥ) are easily accessible to him. This hymn (stotra) is dearer to me (Lord Gaṇapati speaking) than even the root mantra (mūlamantra). It was revealed on my birth day, the fourth day of the bright fortnight (śuklāyāṃ caturthyām) in the month of Nabhasya (Bhādrapada).


Commentary
तृतीयमाह साधद्वयेन निष्काम इत्यादिना ॥ १९६ ॥ 
The third (type of fruit, i.e., for the desireless) is described with 
two phrases beginning with "Niṣkāma" (without desire).
लीनः जीवोपाधिलयात् । हुनेत् जुहुयात्, आर्ष रूपं ॥१९७-१९८ ॥ 
"Līnaḥ" (लीनः) means dissolved, due to the dissolution of the limiting adjuncts of the individual soul (Jīvopādhi-layāt). "Hunet" (हुनेत्) means "should offer oblations" (in the fire); 
this is an archaic (Ārṣa) grammatical form.
मूलमंत्रादष्टाविंशत्यक्षर महागणपतिमंत्रात्, नभस्ये भाद्रपदे ॥ १९९ - २००॥
"Mūlamantrāt" (मूलमन्त्रात्) refers to the twenty-eight-syllabled Mahāgaṇapati mantra. "Nabhasye" (नभस्ये) means in the month of Bhādrapada.


दूर्वाभिर्नामभिः पूजां तर्पणं विधिवच्चरेत् । 
अष्टद्रव्यैर्विशेषेण जुहुयाद्भक्तिसंयुतः ॥ २०१ ॥ 
तस्येप्सितानि सर्वाणि सिद्ध्यन्त्यत्र न संशयः । 
इदं प्रजप्तं पठितं पाठितं श्रावितं श्रुतम् ॥ २०२ ॥ 
व्याकृतं चर्चितं ध्यातं विमृष्टमभिनन्दितम् । 
इहामुत्र च सर्वेषां विश्वैश्वर्यप्रदायकम् ॥ २०३ ॥ 
स्वच्छन्दचारिणाप्येष येनायं धार्यते स्तवः । 
स रक्ष्यते शिवोद्भूतैर्गणैरध्युष्टकोटिभिः ॥ २०४ ॥ 
पुस्तके लिखितं यत्र गृहे स्तोत्रं प्रपूजयेत् । 
तत्र सर्वोत्तमा लक्ष्मीः संनिधत्ते निरन्तरम् ॥ २०५ ॥ 
दानैरशेषैरखिलैर्व्रतैश्च तीर्थैरशेषैः सकलैर्मखैश्च । 
न तत्फलं विन्दति यद्गणेश-सहस्रनाम्नां स्मरणेन सद्यः ॥ २०६ ॥ 
एतन्नाम्नां सहस्त्रं पठति दिनमणौ प्रत्यहं प्रोज्जिहाने 
सायं मध्यंदिने वा त्रिषवणमथवा संततं वा जनो यः । 


स स्यादैश्वर्यधुर्यः प्रभवति च सतां कीर्तिमुच्चैस्तनोति 
प्रत्यूहं हन्ति विश्वं वशयति सुचिरं वर्धते पुत्रपौत्रैः ॥ २०७ ॥
One should perform the worship (pūjā) and libations (tarpaṇa) with durvā grass along with these names, according to prescribed rules. Especially with eight offerings (aṣṭadravyaiḥ), one should perform oblations (homa) with devotion. All his desired things become accomplished without doubt. This hymn—whether recited, read, taught, heard, listened to, expounded upon, contemplated, meditated upon, reflected upon, or praised—confers universal sovereignty (viśvaiśvaryapradāyakam) both here and hereafter. Even a free-spirited wanderer (svacchandacāriṇā) who bears this hymn is protected by crores of hosts (gaṇas) born of Śiva, who reside everywhere around him. 


Wherever the hymn is written in a manuscript and worshipped in a house, the highest form of prosperity (laksmī) dwells there continuously. Even by all kinds of gifts (dānaiḥ), all vows (vrataiḥ), all pilgrimages (tīrthaiḥ), and all sacrifices (makhaiḥ), one does not attain that fruit which is obtained immediately by remembrance of the thousand names of Gaṇeśa. Whoever recites this thousand names daily at sunrise, in the evening, at noon, at the three junctures (triṣavaṇa), or continuously—he becomes capable of bearing great lordship (aiśvaryadhuryaḥ), increases the fame of the virtuous, destroys every obstacle, brings the whole world under his sway, and is long-enduringly blessed with sons and grandsons.


Commentary
नामभिः पूजायां चतुर्थीनमोन्तैः, तर्पणे द्वितीया, तर्पया-म्यंतैः होमे चतुर्थीस्वाहांतैरित्यर्थः ॥ २०१ ॥ 
For worship (Pūjā) with the names, (the endings should be) "Caturthī" (dative case) and "Namaḥ" (salutation). For libation (Tarpaṇa), (the ending should be) "Dvitīyā" (accusative case) with "Tarpayāmi" (I satisfy). For offering in fire (Homa), (the ending should be) "Caturthī" with "Svāhā". This is the meaning.


प्रजप्तं उपांशू-च्चरितं पठितं उच्चैर्व्यक्तमुच्चरितम् ॥ २०२ ॥ 
"Japaptam" (जप्रप्तं) means recited quietly (Upāṃśu). 
"Paṭhitam" (पठितं) means recited aloud clearly (Uccair-vyaktam).
व्याकृतं व्याख्यातं, चर्चितं ऊहापोहविषयीकृतं, 
ध्यातं मनसा विचा-रितं, विमृष्टं शोधितं, 
लेखकदोषनिरासेनेति यावत्; अभि-नंदितमनुमतम् ॥ २०३ ॥ 
"Vyākṛtam" (व्याकृतं) means explained. "Carcitam" (चर्चितं) means made an object of reasoning (Uhāpoha-viṣayīkṛtam). "Dhyātam" (ध्यातं) means contemplated mentally. "Vimṛṣṭam" (विमृष्टं) means purified, i.e., by removing scribal errors. "Abhinanditam" (अभिनंदितम्) means approved or welcomed.


शिवोद्भूतैः शिवेन शिवया च जनितैः अध्युष्टकोटिभिः प्रत्येकं सार्धकोटित्रयसंख्याकैः ॥२०४-२०५॥ 
"Śivodbhūtaiḥ" (शिवोद्भूतैः) means produced by Śiva (the Lord) and Śivā (Pārvatī). "Adhyuṣṭa-koṭibhiḥ" (अध्युष्टकोटिभिः) refers to the groups numbering three and a half crores (Sārdha-koṭi-traya) for each.
प्रोज्जिहाने उदयमाने 'ओहाङ् गतौ' इत्यस्य रूपम्, त्रिषवणं त्रिसंध्यं 
संततं वेति प्रयासाधिक्यात्फला-धिक्यं न्यायसिद्धं प्रभवति, 
देशप्रभुत्वं च लभते, प्रत्यूहं विघ्नम् ॥ २०६-२०७ ॥
"Projjihāne" (प्रोज्जिहाने) means "rising" – it is a form derived from the root "Uhāṅ" meaning "to go". "Triṣavaṇam" (त्रिषवणम्) means three times daily (for each Sandhyā). Or "trisaṃdhyam" (त्रिसंध्यम्) means continuously (through the three junctions of the day). Through greater effort, greater fruit is logically attained. He also obtains lordship over the country. "Pratyūham" (प्रत्यूहम्) means obstacle.


अकिंचनोऽपि मत्प्राप्तिचिन्तको नियताशनः । 
जपेत्तु चतुरो मासान् गणेशार्चनतत्परः ॥ २०८ ॥ 
दरिद्रतां समुन्मूल्य सप्तजन्मानुगामपि । 
लभते महतीं लक्ष्मीमित्याज्ञा पारमेश्वरी ॥ २०९ ॥ 
आयुष्यं वीतरोगं कुलमतिविमलं सम्पदश्चार्तदानाः । 
कीर्तिर्नित्यावदाता भणितिरभिनवा कान्तिरव्याधिभव्या । 
पुत्राः सन्तः कलत्रं गुणवदभिमतं यद्यदेतच्च सत्यं 
नित्यं यः स्तोत्रमेतत् पठति गणपतेस्तस्य हस्ते समस्तम् ॥ २१० ॥
Even a destitute person (akiñcano'pi) who thinks of attaining Me (Gaṇapati), controls his diet, and remains devoted to the worship of Gaṇeśa, reciting this hymn for four months—destroys poverty that follows him even for seven births and attains great prosperity. 


This is the command of the Supreme Lord (Pārameśvarī ājñā). Long life, freedom from disease, a most pure family, charitable giving of wealth, ever-pure fame, fresh and inspired speech, radiant health, virtuous sons, a good and devoted wife with excellent qualities—whatever is desired, all this is true. All these things rest in the hand of that person who recites this hymn of Gaṇapati daily.


Commentary
अकिंचनो दरिद्रः, सप्तजन्मानुगां भाविसप्तजन्मपर्यंत-मनुवर्तिष्यमाणामपि ॥ २०८ ॥ 
"Akiñcano" (अकिंचनः) means one who is poor (Daridraḥ). "Saptajanmānugām" (सप्तजन्मानुगाम्) means that which follows (one) up to seven future births.
आयुष्यादीनां नवानां तदु-त्तराणि नवपदानि विशेषणानि, 
आर्तेभ्यो दानं यासां ता आर्तदानाः, 
नित्यावदाता चिरस्थायित्वे सति शुद्धा अभिनवाः 
परैरकल्पिता अभिमतं मनसा चिंतितं यद्यत्तदेतत्सर्वं सत्यं, 
सत्यसंकल्पतेति यावत् ॥ २०९-२१० ॥
Among the nine (qualities) beginning with Āyuṣya (longevity), the nine subsequent phrases are their modifiers. "Ārtadānāḥ" (आर्तदानाः) are those which have giving (Dāna) to the distressed (Ārta) as their defining characteristic. "Nityāvadātāḥ" (नित्यावदाताः) means eternally pure, of long duration, new, and not fashioned by others. Whatever is desired (Abhimatam) in the mind – all that becomes true (Satya). This means: He is of true resolve (Satyasaṅkalpa).

गणेशस्यैकविंशतिनामपाठः 
(The Recitation of the Twenty-One Names of Gaṇeśa)


ॐ गणञ्जयो गणपतिर्हेरम्बो धरणीधरः । 
महागणपतिर्लक्षप्रदः क्षिप्रप्रसादनः ॥ २११ ॥ 
अमोघसिद्धिरमितो मन्त्रश्चिन्तामणिर्निधिः । 
सुमङ्गलो बीजमाशापूरको वरदः शिवः ॥ २१२ ॥
Om, Gaṇajaya, Gaṇapati, Heramba, Dharaṇīdhara, Mahāgaṇapati, Lakṣaprada, Kṣipraprasādana, Amoghasiddhi, Amita, Mantra, Cintāmaṇi, Nidhi, Sumaṅgala, Bīja, Āśāpūraka, Varada, Śiva,


Commentary
अथ सहस्रनामपठनासमर्थस्यैकविंशतिनामपाठं प्रतिनिधि-त्वेन विदधाति - गणंजय इत्यादिना ॥ एतेष्वष्टादशनामानि पूर्व व्याख्यातान्येवः तत्र गणपतिरिति गणेश्वरगणाधि-पादिनाम समानार्थकं, अमित इत्यत्रामृत इति वा पाठः, उभयथापि व्याख्यातमेव ॥ २११ ॥ 
Now, for one who is unable to recite the thousand names, the text prescribes a substitute recitation of twenty-one names, beginning with "Gaṇam jaya..." (Gaṇaṃ jaya, etc.). Among these (twenty-one names), eighteen have already been explained previously. Among them, "Gaṇapati" is synonymous with "Gaṇeśvara," "Gaṇādhipa," and other names. In the name "Amita" (अमित), some read "Amṛta" (अमृत). Both readings have already been explained.


सुमंगलसुमंगल इति नाम्ना सुमंगलनामचरितार्थम्, वरप्रद इत्यनेन वरदनामचिंतामणिः शिवो बीजमिति नामत्रयं त्विहापूर्व तत्र क्षेत्र-विशेषाधिष्ठातृगणपते श्चिंतामणिरिति संज्ञा चिंतितार्थप्रदत्वा-त्स्वर्गस्थचिंतामणिवत् तदैवत्यमंत्रविशेषस्याप्येषा संज्ञा तद्रूप-त्वाद्देवोऽपि चिंतामणिः । शिवपस्य तु वश कांतौ शिवः स्मृत्या इति जगदुत्पादनेच्छाशक्तिमत्त्वादयो बहवोऽर्थाः शिवाष्टोत्तरशतनामसु प्रथमनामव्याख्याने शिवा स्वाधीन-बल्लभेति ललितासहस्रनामव्याख्यानेऽतिविस्तरेणास्माभिर्वर्णिताः । बीजं सर्वजगत्कारणं ॥ २१२ ॥
The name "Sumaṅgala-sumaṅgala" (सुमंगलसुमंगल) elucidates the nature of the word "Sumaṅgala" (supreme auspiciousness). With the name "Varaprada" (bestower of boons), the significance of "Varada" (boon-giver) is covered. The three names – "Cintāmaṇi" (wish-fulfilling gem), "Śiva" (the auspicious one), and "Bījam" (the seed) – are new here (i.e., not previously explained). Among these, the name "Cintāmaṇi" is given to the Gaṇapati who presides over a particular sacred region (Kṣetra). Because he bestows whatever is desired, he is like the celestial Cintāmaṇi. This is also the designation for a specific mantra sacred to him, and since the deity is of that nature (wish-fulfilling), the Lord himself is Cintāmaṇi. The name "Śiva" has many meanings – he who has the power to create the universe, he who is remembered as "Śiva" meaning "to be gracious," etc. 
We have described these extensively in the commentary on the first name of the Śivāṣṭottaraśatanāma and in the commentary on the name "Śivā Svādhīna-Vallabhā" in the Lalitā Sahasranāma. "Bīja" (बीजम्) means the seed, the cause of the entire universe.


काश्यपो नन्दनो वाचासिद्धो ढुण्ढिविनायकः । 
मोदकैरेभिरत्रैकविंशत्या नामभिः पुमान् ॥ २१३ ॥ 
यः स्तौति मद्गतमना मदाराधनतत्परः । 
स्तुतो नाम्नां सहस्रेण तेनाहं नात्र संशयः ॥ २१४ ॥
नमो नमः सुरवरपूजिताये 
नमो नमो निरुपममङ्गलात्मने । 
नमो नमो विपुलपदैकसिद्धये 
नमो नमः करिकलभाननाय ते ॥ २१५ ॥
Kāśyapa, Nandana, Vācāsiddha, Ḍhuṇḍhivināyaka—
A person who, with his mind fixed on me (Gaṇapati) and devoted to my worship, 
praises me using these twenty-one names along with modakas, 
is indeed being praised by me through the thousand names; there is no doubt in this.


Salutations, salutations to you who are worshipped by the best of gods.
Salutations, salutations to you who are the embodiment of incomparable auspiciousness.
Salutations, salutations to you who are the single perfection of abundant states.
Salutations, salutations to you who have the face of a young elephant.

॥ इति श्रीगणेशपुराणे उपासनाखण्डे ईश्वरमहागणपतिसंवादे 
श्रीमद्गणेशदिव्यसहस्रनामामृतस्तोत्रकथनन्नाम षट्चत्वारिंशोऽध्यायः ॥ ४६ ॥
Thus concludes the forty-sixth chapter (adhyāya) entitled "The Narration of the Nectar-like Hymn of 
the Divine Thousand Names of Śrīmad Gaṇeśa," in the dialogue between Īśvara (Śiva) and Mahāgaṇapati, within the Upāsanākhaṇḍa (Section on Worship) of the Śrī Gaṇeśa Purāṇa.
Commentary
काश्यपः कश्यपपुत्रः, शिवाद्या गणाः । 
इयं च कथा गणेशपुराणे उत्तरखंडे प्रसिद्धा, धरणीधर 
आशापुरक इत्यादिनाममूलभूताः कथा अपि तत्रैवानुसंधेयाः; 
विस्तर-भयान्नेह प्रदर्यन्ते ॥ २१४-२१५ ॥ 
"Kāśyapaḥ" (काश्यपः) means the son of Kaśyapa. "Śivādyāḥ gaṇāḥ" (शिवाद्या गणाः) means the groups (of attendants) beginning with Śiva. This narrative is well-known in the Uttarakhaṇḍa of the Gaṇeśa Purāṇa. The stories that are the basis for names such as "Dharaṇīdhara" (the supporter of the earth), "Āśāpūraka" (the fulfiller of hopes), etc., are also to be sought there. Out of fear of prolixity, they are not elaborated here.


ग्रन्थान्ते मङ्गलमा-चरति - नमो नम इति । विपुलपदं परंधाम तस्य मुख्या सिद्धिर्यस्मात्सः, स्पष्टमन्यदिति सर्व शिवम् ॥
At the end of the text, he performs the auspicious benediction: "Namo namaḥ" (Salutations, salutations). He whose supreme abode (Paraṁ Dhāma) is vast (Vipula) and from whom the principal perfection (Mukhyā Siddhi) arises – the rest is clear. All is Śiva (Auspiciousness).

भाष्यकृत्प्रशस्तिः
Eulogy of the Commentator


गभीरबुधयज्वनस्तनुभुवोऽधिवाराणसि-त्रिलोचनपदानुगः कृतमखोऽग्निचिद्भास्करः ।।
Gabhīra-budha-yajvanas tanubhuvo 'dhi Vārāṇasi-trilocana-padānugaḥ kṛta-makho 'gnicid bhāskaraḥ |
The son of the profound wise sacrificer, residing in Varanasi, follower of the three-eyed Lord (Śiva), performer of sacrifices, the fire-kindler, Bhāskara (the sun) —


महागणपतेर्महान्त्यपि सहस्रनामानि तदयाजनितया धिया सुजनतुष्टये व्याकरोत् ॥ १ ॥
Mahā-gaṇapater mahānty api sahasra-nāmāni tad-ayā-janitayā dhiyā sujana-tuṣṭaye vyākarot || 1 ||
Has explained even the great thousand names of Mahāgaṇapati, with intelligence born from his compassion, for the satisfaction of the virtuous.


संप्रदायजुषामेष खद्योतो लोकबान्धवः ॥
Sampradāyajuṣām eṣa khadyoto lokabāndhavaḥ ||
This Khadyota (The Firefly) is a friend to the world for those who follow the tradition.


ग्रंथविस्तरलुब्धानां खद्योतो ज्योतिरिंगणः ॥ २ ॥
Grantha-vistara-lubdhānāṃ khadyoto jyotiriṅgaṇaḥ ||
For those greedy for voluminous texts, this Khadyota is like a firefly (a small light) in a cluster of luminaries.


श्लोकाः षट् ६ प्रथमे त्रयस्तु ३ चरमे नाम्नां शतां तेषु तु श्वास ७४ श्चित्त ६६ वणि ५४ क्सुता ६७ गति ६३ गुणा ५३ धर्मः ५९ सखे २७ त्यष्टसु ॥
Ślokāḥ ṣaṭ (6) prathame trayastu (3) carame nāmnāṃ śatāṃ teṣu tu śvāsa 74 citta 66 vaṇi 54 ksutā 67 gati 63 guṇā 53 dharmaḥ 59 sakhe 27 tyaṣṭasu ||
There are 6 verses in the beginning and 3 at the end. Among the hundreds of names, the letters count: śvāsa (74), citta (66), vaṇi (54), ksutā (67), gati (63), guṇā (53), dharmaḥ (59), sakhe (27) – thus in the eight (hundreds) —

स्तोता ६६ धीद ८९ इति द्वयोः समुदिता पादाधिका षट्‌शती पादोना द्विशती परापि १७५ तदयं ग्रंथोऽष्टशत्यात्मकः ॥
Stotā 66 dhīda 89 iti dvayoḥ samuditā pādādhikā ṣaṭśatī pādonā dviśatī parāpi 175 tad-ayaṃ grantho 'ṣṭaśatyātmakaḥ ||
Stotā (66) and dhīda (89) – these two together make 155. Thus, six hundred and a quarter (625?) and two hundred minus a quarter (175?) – this text is comprised of eight hundred (verses? or something else? The math is cryptic, but the total is 800).


इति श्रीमत्पदवाक्यप्रमाणपारावारपारीणभारत्युपनामकगंभीर-रायदीक्षित सूरिसूनु भास्कररायदीक्षिताग्निचिता रचितो गणपति सहस्रनामार्थप्रकाशकः खद्योतः संपूर्णः ॥
Iti śrīmat-pada-vākya-pramāṇa-pārāvāra-pārīṇa-bhāraty-upanāmaka-gambhīra-rāya-dīkṣita sūri-sūnu bhāskararāya-dīkṣitāgnicitā racito gaṇapati-sahasra-nāmārtha-prakāśakaḥ khadyotaḥ saṃpūrṇaḥ ||
Thus, the "Khadyota" which illuminates the meaning of the thousand names of Gaṇapati, composed by Bhāskararāya Dīkṣita Agnicit, the son of Śrīmat Gambhīrarāya Dīkṣita, who is called Bhāratī and who has crossed the ocean of words, sentences, and means of proof, is complete.


श्रीगणेशार्पणमस्तु ॥
Śrī-gaṇeśārpaṇam astu ||
May this be offered to Śrī Gaṇeśa.


श्रीरस्तु ॥
Śrīr astu ||
May there be prosperity.


संपूर्णोऽयं ग्रन्थः ।
Saṃpūrṇo 'yaṃ granthaḥ ||
This text is complete.