Ganesha Sahasranama
Composed by Bhaskararaya Dikshita, along with his commentary


· Invocation by the Commentator -




गणेशोवः पायात् प्रणमत गणेशं जगदिदं
गणेशेन त्रातंनम इह गणेशाय महते ॥
गणेशान्नास्त्यन्यत्रिजगतिगणेशस्य महिमा
गणेशेमच्चित्तं निवसतु गणेश ! त्वमव माम् ॥
May Ganesha protect you. Bow down to Ganesha; 
this entire world is sustained by Ganesha. 
Salutations to that great Ganesha here. 
There is none other than Ganesha in the three worlds; 
Such is the glory of Ganesha. May my mind dwell upon Ganesha. 
O Ganesha! Please protect me.










गुरुरेव गतिर्गुरुमेव भजेगुरुणैव सहास्मि नमो गुरवे ॥
न गुरोःपरमं शिशुरस्मि गुरोर्मतिरस्ति गुरौ मम पाहि गुरो !॥
The Guru alone is the ultimate goal, I worship the Guru alone, 
I exist because of the Guru alone, salutations to the Guru. 
I know nothing higher than the Guru, I am but a child; 
my intellect is fixed upon the Guru. O Guru! Please protect me.






· The Commentator's Pledge -


प्राचांकुसृष्टिरचनैकमयस्वभावामज्ञातगाणपततन्त्रपुराणभावाम्॥
व्याख्यामुदस्य सुविभाव्यगणेशनामान्यर्थापयामितदुपासकतोषहेतोः ॥
The compositions of the ancients, whose nature is imbued with the essence of the Vedas, whose true nature regarding the Ganapatya Tantra and Puranas is not understood... Setting aside (other interpretations), I will elucidate the meanings of the thousand names of Ganesha, for the satisfaction of his devotees.


नन्वर्धानाझ्यनंताः फणिपतिधिषणा शक्यकृत्स्नप्रकाशा
मन्दस्तत्र प्रवृत्तोऽप्युपहसितपदंस्याज्जनस्येति चेन्न ॥
यत्तार्थ्यद्योमणिभ्यामपिदुरधिगमं कृत्स्नशो दुष्प्रकाशं
तत्खद्योतःपतन् खं किमपि विशदयत्येव नेहास्त्यवद्यं
If it is said: "The names are infinite, profound, and as vast as the serpent-king Shesha; how can one of dull intellect, attempting to explain them fully, avoid becoming an object of ridicule?" Then, no! That which is difficult to grasp even for the sun and the moon, which is entirely hard to illuminate... even a firefly, falling in the sky, clarifies it to some extent. Here, there is no fault.


नाम्नामर्थश्चिदाकाशस्तंद्योतयितुमुद्यतः ।
ग्रन्थःखद्योतनामाऽस्तु ब्रह्म खं गगनं च खम् ॥
The meaning of the names is the Consciousness-Space (Chidakasha). This text, which endeavors to illuminate it, may be called "Khadyota" (The Firefly). (For) Brahman is Space, and Space is the sky (Akasha).


केषांन दुष्करं नाम्नां साकल्येनार्थवर्णनम् ।
अतःसंक्षिप्य वक्तव्ये श्लोकैरेव स वर्ण्यते ॥
For whom is it not difficult to describe the meaning of all the names in their entirety? 
Therefore, that (meaning) which needs to be stated is described concisely, in verses alone.














• Examination of Other Viewpoints •


त्रिविधभेदमवाङ्मनसगोचरंस्वप्रकाशं मुक्तोपसृष्यं परं ब्रह्म ।
The Supreme Brahman is beyond the reach of speech and mind,self-luminous, and is served by the liberated. It is considered to have a threefold distinction.


तन्निर्विकल्पेन तद्विषयकसविलासाज्ञाननिवृत्त्याकण्ठचामी-
करन्यायेन तदात्मतावाप्तिरूपो मोक्ष इत्यविवादम् ।
It is undisputed that liberation(Moksha) is the attainment of identity with that (Brahman), through the cessation of the ignorance pertaining to it, by means of Nirvikalpa (non-dual) knowledge, just as a necklace is realized to be nothing but gold.


स च निर्विकल्पःशुद्धचित्तानामेव न मलिनाशयानाम्; चित्तशुद्धौ 
तु श्रौतस्मार्तकर्माणि तत्तद्वर्णाश्रमोचितानि वेदे कर्मकांडसम -धिगम्यानि बहिरङ्गोपायाः।
And that Nirvikalpa(state) is only for those with pure minds, not for those with impure inner dispositions. For the purification of the mind, the Vedic and scriptural duties (Shrauta and Smarta Karmas) prescribed for the various castes and stages of life, as obtained from the Karma Kanda section of the Vedas, are the external means.


तस्यैव ब्रह्मणःसगुण-निर्गुणभेदेन द्विविधस्योपासनानि वेदे रहस्यतरोपनिषत्कांडसमधिगम्यानि अन्तरङ्गोपायाः ।
For that very Brahman,which is of two kinds—Saguna (with attributes) and Nirguna (without attributes)—the modes of worship, as obtained from the more secret Upanishad section of the Vedas, are the internal means.


बहिरङ्गानुष्ठानशीलानामेव त्वन्तरङ्गानुष्ठा-नेऽधिकारः,सगुणं तु 
रूपमुपासकानुग्रहार्थं कल्पितमेवेत्युपा-सकरुचिवैचित्र्येण नानाविधम् ।
However,only those who are diligent in the external practices are entitled to the internal practices. The Saguna (form with qualities) is indeed imagined for the grace of the worshipper, and is of various kinds due to the diversity of tastes among devotees.












तेषु'आदित्यमंबिकां विष्णुं गणनाथं महेश्वरम्' इति स्मृत्युक्तरूपाणि 
तत्तदवांतरमूर्ति-भेदाश्च तत्तज्जन्मायातत्संस्कारानुगुण्येनोपास्यानीति सर्वेऽपी-श्वरा एव ।
Among these,the forms mentioned in the Smritis—such as Aditya, Ambika, Vishnu, Ganapati (Gananatha), and Maheshvara—and their various sub-forms are to be worshipped according to the inherent predispositions (Samskaras) brought from previous births. Thus, all of them are indeed (different forms of) the same Ishvara (Lord).


अत एव पुराणान्यपितत्तदुपासकानुजिघृक्षया प्रवृत्तानि तस्य तस्यैव सर्वोत्तमत्वम्; अन्येषां ततोऽपकर्ष च नहिनिंदान्यायेन प्रतिपादयंति कल्पभेदेनैकस्मादन्येषामु-त्पत्तिः संभवतीत्यादिकमाकरेषु स्पष्टम्ः
For this reason alone,the Puranas also, composed with the desire to protect their respective worshippers, proclaim the supreme excellence of that particular (deity) and the inferiority of others, following the maxim of "praising by not praising" (Nahi Ninda Nyaya). It is clear in the source texts that, through different narrations, the origin of one from another is possible, and so on.


तत्र गणपतिविषयेहेरंबोपनिषद्भणेशोपनिषदाद्याः श्रुतय ऐदंपर्येण गाणपत-तन्त्राणि 
गणेशोपपुराणं पुराणान्तरेष्वपि तत्र तत्र सर्वोत्तम-त्वनिरूपणभागाश्चेति शतशः प्रमाणानि तत्तद्विदां स्पष्टानि ।
Regarding Ganapati,the Upanishads like the Heramba Upanishad and the Ganapati Upanishad, the Ganapatya Tantras which have this intent, the Ganesha Purana, and the sections in other Puranas that establish his supreme status—these hundreds of evidences are clear to the experts in those fields.


एतेन निघण्टुग्रन्थेऽग्न्यादिदेवपत्यन्तदेवतानांमध्ये गणपतेरनिर्देशादसत्त्वमाशंक्य 
'मरुतो गणानामधिपतये' इत्यभ्यातानमंत्रे कथनात्सत्त्वसमर्थनं प्राचामपास्तम्;
Through this(reasoning), the refutation by the ancients is established: (they refute) the doubt about Ganesha's non-existence based on his not being mentioned in the Nighantu lexicon among the deities from Agni to the lord of the deities, and the subsequent effort to prove his existence by citing the Abhyatana mantra, "To Marut, the lord of the hosts (Ganas)".


कर्मकाण्डीयदेवतामध्येगणनाभावस्याप्रयोजकत्वात्, तत्रैकपंचाशदधिकशतदेवतानामेव 
गणनेन ततोऽधिकानां परःशतदेवतानां वेदे पुराणेषु च प्रसिध्दानामसिद्ध्यापत्तेः;
(Because)the non-inclusion in the list of Karma-kanda deities is inconclusive, for if only the 151 deities are counted, then the other hundreds of deities well-known in the Vedas and Puranas would have to be considered non-existent.






'वायु'पदस्य सूत्रात्मनि क्वचित्प्रयुक्तत्वेन तत्पर्याय-'मरुत्' शब्दस्य 
बहुवचनान्तस्यापि परमेश्वरपरत्वसमर्थनप्रयासस्य क्लिष्टतरत्वात् ।
And the effort to prove that the word 'Marut', which is in the plural and a synonym of Vayu (who is sometimes used to denote the Sutratman, the thread-soul), refers to the Supreme Lord, is far-fetched and overly complicated.


उपनिषदांप्रमाणमूर्धन्यानां सत्त्वेऽपि एवं प्रमाणगवेषणस्य करभमनुसरामः । 
'कामधेनौ स्थितायाम्' इति न्यायेन निरसनीयत्वात् ।
When the Upanishads,which are the foremost authority, exist, pursuing such (inferior) evidence is like (seeking) a donkey (when one has a wish-fulfilling cow). It is to be rejected by the maxim, "When the Kamadhenu (wish-fulfilling cow) is present" (why seek lesser things?).


'पुराणेष्वर्थवादत्वंये वदन्ति नराधमाः' इत्यादिबृहन्नारदीयादिवचनेनार्थवादशून्य 
पुराणानामर्थवादजटिलं कर्मकाण्डमपेक्ष्य तत्त्वनिर्णये प्रबलत्वात् ।
For,by statements like "Only the worst of men say that the Puranas are mere Arthavada (eulogistic explanations)" from the Brihan-Naradiya and other texts, the Puranas, which are not devoid of profound meaning, are stronger than the Karma-kanda (which is full of Arthavada) in determining the truth.


'श्रुतिस्मृतीहि नेत्रे द्वे पुराणं हृदयं मतम् । श्रुतिस्मृतिभ्यां हीनोऽन्धः काणः स्यादेकया विना । पुराणहीनाद्धृच्छून्यात्काणान्धावपि तौ वरौ' इत्यादिवचनैर्देवतातत्त्वनिर्णये कर्मकाण्डमपेक्ष्य 
पुराणानामेवाधिक्यस्य भक्तिमीमांसातंत्रे समर्थितत्वात् ।
And by statements such as"The Sruti and Smriti are the two eyes; the Purana is considered the heart. One without Sruti and Smriti is blind; without one of them, he is one-eyed. But one without the Purana is heartless; the blind and one-eyed are better than him," the superiority of the Puranas over the Karma-kanda in determining the true nature of the deities is established in the Bhakti Mimamsa texts.


शिवविष्णुदेवीविषयकाणामिव गणपतिविषयाणामुपनिषदामपि जागरूकत्वाच्च ।
And because the Upanishads pertaining to Ganapati are also well-known,just like those pertaining to Shiva, Vishnu, and the Goddess.


कर्मकाण्डेऽपिअभ्यातानामत्र कदर्थनमपेक्ष्य स्पष्टतरस्य 'गणानां त्वा' इति मंत्रस्य 
वेदत्रयेऽपि पठ्यमानस्य शरणीकर्तुं युक्तत्वाच्चेति दिक् ।
And even within the Karma-kanda,instead of misinterpreting the Abhyatana mantra, it is more appropriate to take refuge in the clearer mantra, "Gananam Tva" ("I invoke you, the leader of the Ganas"), which is recited in three Vedas. And so on (this is the direction of the argument).


तदुपासनंचैकाक्षरषडक्षराष्टाविंशत्यक्षरादिबहुविधगणपतिमंत्रजपादिरूपं बहुविधम् तदंगत्वेन क्रत्वर्थः । स्वतंत्रतया पुरुषार्थश्च सहस्रनामस्तवपाठोऽपि सहस्त्रनामस्तवस्यापि पुराणतंत्रभेदेन बहुविधस्य मध्येऽयमेव बहुभिरुपासकैः परिगृहीत इत्ययमेव व्याक्रियते ॥
The worship of him(Ganesha) is of many kinds, such as the repetition of various Ganesha mantras like the one-syllable (e.g., Gam), the six-syllable, and the twenty-eight-syllable mantras. It can be performed as an auxiliary part of a Vedic ritual (Kratvartha) or independently for one's spiritual goal (Purushartha). The recitation of the Thousand Name Hymn (Sahasranama Stotra) is also (a form of worship). Even among the many versions of the Sahasranama Stotra found in different Puranas and Tantras, this one alone is accepted by many devotees, and hence this one alone is being explained.


• Introduction to This Text •
अयंच स्तवः पद्मपुराणीय इति प्राचो व्याचक्षते । गणेशपुराणे तु बहुभिरवलोक्यते ।
The ancients declare that this hymn(stotra) is from the Padma Purana. 
However, it is widely found in the Ganesha Purana.


गणेशपुराणेतावदुपा-सनाखण्डे- 'अष्टादशपुराणानि विस्तराच्छ्रावितानि नः । 
अन्ये-षामपि शुश्रूषा वर्तते वह्निसंभवा' इति सूतं प्रत्यूषीणां प्रश्ने सूतवाक्यम्-'अन्यान्युपपुराणानि वर्ततेऽष्टादशैव तु । गाणेशं नारदीयं नारसिंहादिकान्यपि' इत्युक्त्वा पुनर्गणेश-पुराणे मूलप्रश्नस्योत्तरम्
Now,in the Upasana Kanda of the Ganesha Purana itself, in response to the sages' question to Suta, Suta's statement is: "You have narrated the eighteen major Puranas to us in detail. We are also curious about the others, O son of Fire (Suta)." Replying to this, Suta said, "There are other Upa-Puranas as well, indeed eighteen in number, such as the Ganesha, the Naradiya, the Narasimha, etc." Then, again in the Ganesha Purana, the answer to the original question [about its own origin] is given.


'ब्रह्मणाकथितं पूर्व व्यासायामित-तेजसे । भृगवे कथितं तेन सोमकान्ताय तेन च' इत्यादिना 
पुराणमवतार्य कतिचिदूव्याख्यानानि निर्वर्ण्य षटूत्रिंशम-ध्यायमारभ्य गृत्समदोपाख्यानं प्रवर्तितम् ।
With verses beginning with,"It was first narrated by Brahma to Vyasa of immeasurable splendor. By him, it was told to Bhrigu, and by him to Somakanta," the Purana is introduced. After describing a few commentaries, beginning from the thirty-sixth chapter, the story of Gritsamada is commenced.










तदीयक्षुतात्त्रिपुरासुरस्योत्पत्तिस्तस्य तपस्तस्मै वरदानं तस्य त्रैलोक्यजयः शिवेन सह युद्धं 
शिवपराजयो नारदं प्रति शिवकृतप्रश्ने-त्येतावदुत्क्रांते नारदवाक्ये- 'युद्धाय गन्तुकामेन 
नार्चितो गणपस्त्वया । अतः पराभवं प्राप्तोऽस्यग्निनेत्रपिधानधृक्' इत्यादि ।
From his(Gritsamada's) hunger, the origin of the demon Tripurasura, his penance, the boon granted to him, his conquest of the three worlds, his battle with Shiva, the defeat of Shiva—when this much had been narrated, in response to a question posed by Shiva to Narada, Narada said, "You, who wished to go to battle, did not worship Ganapa (Ganesha). Therefore, you have met with defeat, O one who holds the fire (of the third eye)."


ततःसोऽतप्यत तपोऽत्युग्रं दशवर्षाणि शंकरः । ततस्तस्य मुखांभोजान्निर्गतोऽभूत्पुमान् परः । 
पञ्चवक्रो दश-भुजो भालचन्द्रः शशिप्रभः । मुण्डमालः सर्पभूषो मुकुटाङ्ग-दभूषणः । 
अग्न्यर्कशशिनो भाभिस्तिरस्कुर्वन् दशायुधः ।' इत्यादिना गणेशाविर्भावतत्प्रसादवरदानादिकमुक्तत्वा,
Then,Lord Shankara (Shiva) performed an extremely severe penance for ten years. Then, from his lotus-like mouth emerged the Supreme Being. He had five faces, ten arms, a crescent moon on his forehead, and the radiance of the moon. He was adorned with a garland of skulls and serpent ornaments, and wore a crown and armlets. With his splendor, he eclipsed the light of Agni (Fire), Surya (Sun), and Shashi (Moon), and he held ten weapons. In this manner, the manifestation of Ganesha, his grace, the granting of boons, etc., are described.


'ततःस्वनाम्नामवदत् सहस्रं तस्मै गणेशः प्रणताय दिव्यम् । शिवस्य भक्त्या परितुष्टचित्तो 
जयप्रदं कामकरं जनानाम् ॥' इत्यादिना तपःसमाप्तिः पञ्चचत्वारिंशेऽध्याये वर्णिता ॥
Then,with verses like, "Then, Ganesha, whose heart was pleased with Shiva's devotion, recited the divine thousand of his own names to him (Shiva) who was bowing down. It bestows victory and fulfills the desires of the people," the completion of the penance is described in the forty-fifth chapter.


• The Structure and Ritual Details of the Hymn • 
तत उत्तरेऽध्यायेब्रह्माणं प्रति व्यासकृतप्रश्नः
व्यास उवाच॥
कथंनाम्नां सहस्रं स्वं गणेश उपदिष्टवान् ।
शिवायैतन्ममाचक्ष्व लोकानुग्रहतत्पर ! इति ॥
Then,in the subsequent chapter, there is a question posed by Vyasa to Brahma:
Vyasa said:
"O you who are intent on blessing the worlds!Please tell me how Ganesha instructed Shiva in his own thousand names."


ततः-ब्रह्मोवाच॥
'देव! एवं पुरारातिः' इत्यादिश्लोकचतुष्टयेन पूर्वोक्तविस्तृ-तकथायाः संक्षेपेणानुवादः ।
Then,Brahma replied:
With four verses beginning with'Deva! Evam Purarātih' ("O God! Thus, the enemy of the triple fortress [Shiva]..."), there is a concise recapitulation of the previously mentioned detailed story.


तदिदंस्तोत्रं गणेशपुराणे षट्चत्वा-रिंशत्तमाध्यायरूपम् । अत्र पूर्वपीठिकाभागः पंचश्लोकात्मकः । 
मध्ये नामभागः सार्धषट्षष्टट्युत्तरशतश्लोकात्मकः । अन्त्यः फलश्रुतिभागः सार्धत्रिचत्वारिंशच्लोकात्मकः ।
This very hymn,in the Ganesha Purana, constitutes the forty-sixth chapter. Here, the preliminary section (Peethika) consists of five verses. The middle section containing the names consists of 166 and a half verses. The final section, which describes the benefits (Phalashruti), consists of 43 and a half verses.


संहत्य पञ्च-दशोत्तरेद्वे शते श्लोकानामुक्त्वा सप्तचत्वारिंशेऽध्याये 
पुन-र्युद्धं त्रिपुरसंहारादिकं चोक्त्वा त्रिपुराख्यानमुपसंहृतमिति स्थितिः ।
In total,having stated 215 verses, the narrative of Tripura is concluded in the forty-seventh chapter by again describing the battle and the destruction of Tripurasura, etc.


पद्मपुराणीयेतु पाठे पूर्वपीठिकायां प्रथमश्लोको नास्ति । द्वितीयश्लोके 'देवः पूर्वम्' इति पाठः । 
फलश्रुतौ यो 'नामभिहुनेदेतैः' इत्याद्याश्चत्वारः श्लोका न सन्ति इति । दशोत्तरैव शतद्वयीति विशेषः ।
However,in the version from the Padma Purana, the first verse of the preliminary section is absent. In the second verse, the reading is 'Devah Pūrvam' ("The god, previously..."). In the Phalashruti section, the four verses beginning with 'Nāmabhir hunedetaih' ("One who performs a fire ritual with these names...") are not present. The special feature is that it consists of only 210 verses.


अस्य स्तोत्रस्य महागणपतिरेव मंत्रद्रष्टत्वादृषिः,प्रतिपाद्य-त्वाद्देवता च, अनुष्टुप् छंदः, 
गंबीजं, हुंशक्तिः, स्वाहा कीलकम्, चतुर्विधपुरुषार्थसिद्धयर्थे जपादौ विनियोगः ।
For this hymn,the sage (Rishi) is Mahaganapati himself, as he is the seer of the mantra. The deity (Devata) is also he, as he is the one being propounded. The meter (Chandas) is Anushtup. The seed (Bija) is 'Gam'. The power (Shakti) is 'Hum'. The pin (Kilaka) is 'Svaha'. Its application (Viniyoga) is in recitation, etc., for the attainment of the fourfold goals of human life (Purushartha: Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksha).


गांगींइति षट् दीर्धेः षडंगानि ।
The six limbs(Shadanga) for meditation are (to be visualized with) the six long vowels (in the mantra 'Gām', 'Gīm', etc.).


'पञ्चवक्त्रोदशभुजः' इत्यादि पूर्वोक्तं ध्यानमिति द्रष्टव्यम् ॥
The meditation(Dhyana) form is to be understood as the one stated before, beginning with "He who has five faces and ten arms..."


• Now, the Explanation of the Verses •
व्यासप्रश्नःस्पष्टार्थः ॥
The question posed by Vyasa is clear in meaning.


एवंव्यासेन पृष्टमर्थ दीनजनानुजिघृक्षयोपदिदिक्षुर्भगवान् ब्रह्मा 'सहस्रनाममंत्रोऽयं जपितव्यः शुभाप्तये' इति मंत्रजपं विधास्य गुरुसंप्रदायशुद्धिमन्तरेण लब्धस्य फलानावहत्वाद्गुरुपरंपरा ज्ञानावश्यकत्वं ध्वनयितु-माख्यायिकां पूर्व विस्तृत्य वर्णितानामपि पुनः संक्षिप्यानु-वदति-देव इत्यादिना ।
Having been asked this meaning by Vyasa,Lord Brahma, who wished to teach out of compassion for the distressed, and who was about to prescribe the recitation of the mantra with the words "This thousand-name mantra should be chanted for attaining auspiciousness," now reiterates the story concisely with the words beginning with "Deva..." He does this to imply the necessity of the Guru lineage (Guru Parampara), because knowledge obtained without the purity of an authentic tradition yields no fruit, even though it had been described in detail before.


॥ व्यास उवाच ॥
कथंनाम्नां सहस्रं स्वं गणेश उपदिष्टवान् ।
शिवायैतन्ममाचक्ष्व लोका-नुग्रहतत्पर ! ॥१॥
Vyasa said: O you who are intent on blessing the worlds!
Please tell me how Ganesha instructed his own thousand names to Shiva.


॥ ब्रह्मोवाच॥
देव एवंपुरा-रातिः पुरत्रयजयोद्यमे ।
अनर्चनाद्गणेशस्य जातोविघ्न्नाकुलः किल ॥ २ ॥
Brahma said: 
O God(Vyasa)! It is said that the enemy of the triple fortress (Shiva), while undertaking 
the campaign to conquer the three cities, became beset with obstacles due to not worshipping Ganesha.






मनसास विनिर्धाय ततस्तद्विघ्नकारणम् ।
महा-गणपतिंभक्त्या समभ्यर्च्य यथाविधि ॥ ३ ॥
Having mentally ascertained the cause of those obstacles,
that unconquered one (Shiva) devoutly and properly worshipped Mahaganapati.


विघ्नप्रशमनोपायमपृच्छदपराजितः।
संतुष्टःपूजया शंभोर्महागणपतिः स्वयम् ॥ ४ ॥
He,the undefeated one (Shiva), asked for the means to pacify the obstacles. 
Mahaganapati himself, pleased by Shambhu's (Shiva's) worship,


सर्वविघ्नैकहरणंसर्वकामफलप्रदम् ।
ततस्तस्मैसर्वनाम्नां सहस्रमिदमब्रवीत् ॥ ५ ॥
...then spoke to him this collection of all names,a thousand in number, 
which removes all obstacles and bestows the fruits of all desires.


Commentary on the Verses and the Importance of Guru Parampara
एवंपूर्वाध्यायैरुक्तरीत्या उक्तं च 'गुरुक्रममविज्ञायोपास्ते यः स्वेष्टदेवताम् । 
सोपास्तिर्निष्फला ज्ञेया भस्मन्यर्पितहव्यवत्। तस्माद्यत्नेन विज्ञेया मूलाद्गुरुपरंपरा' इति ।
As stated in the previous chapters in this manner,it is also said: "The worship performed by one who worships their chosen deity without knowing the Guru lineage is to be known as fruitless, like an oblation offered into ashes. Therefore, one must diligently know the Guru lineage from its origin."


Sanskrit then details a specific Guru lineage (Parampara) for Ganapatya mantras:
· Ādi-Guru (Primordial Guru): Ganapati himself.
· Kula-Gurus (9): Gana-krīḍa, Vikata, etc.
· Vidyā-Gurus (9): Surānanda, etc.
· Santāna-Gurus (20): Vināyaka, etc. (Each of these 38 are further divided into Divine, Siddha, and Human streams).
· Subsequent Gurus (21): From Kapila to Vyasa.
· Later Gurus (42): From Ganaka to Shankaracharya.
· Total: 101 Gurus, as established by Vidyaranya Shripada in the "Vidyarṇava."








प्रायेणास्मिंस्तोत्रेप्राथमिकनामशतद्वयमध्ये तानि सर्वाणि व्यक्तीभवन्तीति रहस्यम् ।
The secret is that almost all of these (Guru names) are manifested within 
the first two hundred names of this hymn.


शङ्करभगवत्पादेभ्योऽ-र्वाचीनातु स्वनाथपर्यंता गुरुपरंपरा स्वस्वदेशिकमुखा देवावगन्तव्या ॥
The Guru lineage after Shankaracharya up to one's own spiritual preceptor(Svanatha) 
should be learned from the mouth of one's own Guru.


Commentary on the Act of Receiving the Mantra
गुरोःप्रसादफलमाह-संतुष्ट इति । उपदेशक्रममाह-सर्वविघ्नेति । 
अखिलानिष्टबाधकेषूपायेष्वस्य मुख्यत्वकथ-नाय-एकेति । चतुर्वर्गसाधनत्वकथनाय-सर्वकामेति ।
The phrase"संतुष्टः" (pleased) indicates the fruit of the Guru's grace. The phrase "सर्वविघ्नैकहरणं" (removes all obstacles) explains the method of instruction. The word "एक" (the one) is used to state its primacy among all means that remove inauspiciousness. The phrase "सर्वकामफलप्रदम्" (bestows the fruits of all desires) states its power to accomplish the four goals of life (Purusharthas).


ईदृश-गुरुपरंपरामूलभूतोगणेश एव शिष्यभक्तिमाहात्म्यात् 
स्वमु-खेनैव स्वकीयं महामन्त्रं एनमुपादिक्षदित्याह-स्वकमब्रवी-दिति ।
It is said,"स्वकमब्रवीत्" (he spoke his own [mantra]), meaning that Ganesha himself, who is the root of such a Guru lineage, directly instructed this great mantra of his own through his own mouth, due to the greatness of the disciple's (Shiva's) devotion.


ततश्चान्यैरप्ययंमंत्रः प्रोक्तगुरुपरंपराश्चरमेष्वन्यतमं गुरुं भक्त्या संतोष्य 
तन्मुखादेव लब्ध्वा जपनीयः; न पुस्तक-मात्रेण गृहीत्वा जप्तव्य इति तात्पर्यार्थः ।
Therefore, the essential meaning is:This mantra should be received from the mouth of one's own Guru—who is one of the last in the proclaimed Guru lineage—by pleasing him with devotion, and then chanted. It should not be taken merely from a book and chanted.